     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: SSA III (P144447)



                                                                               Report Number : ICRR0021384

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P144447                                   IN: SSA III

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                     Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54470,IDA-54480                      30-Sep-2017                                        930,278,364.13

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 16-May-2014                              28-Feb-2018

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                       1,006,200,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                        1,006,200,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        930,278,364.13                                            0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Judyth L. Twigg             Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 4) and the Financing Agreement (page 6), the
   project objective was as follows:


     •   To improve education outcomes of elementary school children in India.



                                                                                                Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: SSA III (P144447)




   The "education outcomes" were to be measured in terms of attendance, retention and transition rates, as
   well as adequate monitoring of learning levels. The results framework did not include indicators to track
   improvements in learning levels, as there was no robust measurement system in place at the time of project
   appraisal and therefore no meaningful baseline could be established; also, given the expected influx of out-
   of-school children into the school system as a result of project interventions, setting a target for improved
   learning levels was also not tenable.


b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                          PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   (Note: Appraisal and actual amounts are for the Bank portion only).

   1. Improving Quality and Enhancing Learning Outcomes (Appraisal: US$549.0 million; Actual: US$ 549.2
   million): This component aimed to improve the quality of primary education, as measured by improved
   attendance, retention and transition rates. Activities included: development of specific grade-level learning
   standards and indicators; development of a school leadership program and a framework for assessment of
   school performance; and teacher training.

   2. Strengthening Monitoring and Evaluation for Improved Accountability (Appraisal: US$ 166.0 million;
   Actual: US$ 166.0 million): This component aimed to improve monitoring and evaluation systems in order
   to increase accountability for learning outcomes. Activities included: strengthening of the National
   Assessment System and school report cards; development of State Level Achievement Surveys;
   development of classroom assessment and teacher performance standards; capacity building for School
   Management Committees; and capacity building for Block Resource Centers and Cluster Resource
   Centers.

   3. Enhancing Access and Retention for Disadvantaged Children (Appraisal: US$ 291.0 million; Actual: US$
   291.0 million): This component aimed to improve access for marginalized groups, including girls,
   Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe, and Muslims. Activities included: mapping of habitations to identify
   unserved communities; provision of auxiliary infrastructure such as toilets; and provision of entitlements
   such as uniforms, textbooks, and aids for Children with Special Needs.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


                                                                                                              Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: SSA III (P144447)



   Project Cost

     •The appraised project cost was US$ 29,833.3 million. The actual project cost was US$ 31,891.0
     million.


   Financing

     • The project was financed by two International Development Association Credits totaling US$ 1,006.2
     million, of which US$ 930.3 million disbursed. However, the actual amounts disbursed per component,
     according to the ICR (Annex 3), add up to US$ 1,006.2 million.



   Borrower Contribution

     • The Borrower was expected to contribute US$ 28,827.1 million, and the actual amount contributed
     was US$ 30,960.7 million. The project was third in a series of Sector-Wide Approach
     (SWAp) operations, of which this project comprised 3.37% of planned government spending on the
     sector.


   Dates

     • August 2017: The project closing date was extended from September 2017 to February 2018 as part
     of a no-cost extension. The government was in the process of requesting additional Bank support in the
     form of a new elementary education project; however, in an effort to maintain momentum on innovations
     put in place after the Mid-Term Review, an extension with no financial implications was undertaken as
     per mutual agreement to ensure that the Bank could continue providing the necessary technical
     assistance until an additional Bank operation was approved.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  India has made significant development gains over the past few decades, including increasing its share of
  global gross domestic product from 1.8% to 2.7%, lifting 53 million people out of poverty, doubling life
  expectancy from 31 years in 1947 to 65 years in 2012, and quadrupling the adult literacy rate from 18% in
  1951 to 74% in 2011. However, challenges remain, including persisting poverty rates of 40% in certain
  states and inequalities vis-à-vis disadvantaged groups (females, Scheduled Caste and Schedule

                                                                                                 Page 3 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            IN: SSA III (P144447)



       Tribe). The government of India has adopted goals of universal access to elementary education (grades 1-
       8), particularly to improve attendance, retention, and learning outcomes, and has implemented legislation
       and national programs in strong support of such goals. However, in order to see improvements in these
       areas, the country must address issues related to low achievement scores on national assessments, drop
       outs in upper primary level, enrollment of children with special needs, and accountability systems for
       teachers and schools. The project objective directly supported such improvements and was strongly
       relevant to the government's education sector agenda, as encapsulated by the centrally sponsored scheme
       for universal elementary education, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), which has been in effect in multiple
       phases since 2001. The Bank's Country Partnership Framework for FY13-17 (at appraisal) identified
       improved access and quality of education as a key outcome, while the FY2018-22 Framework (at
       closing) also identified improving the quality of education in schools as a key focus area. Both CPFs, in the
       discussion of their education objectives refer to learning outcomes. For instance, the CPF 13-17 noted that
       “a final round of support to the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan program from the Bank and its development
       partners will help improve educational quality and student learning outcomes at the primary level” (page 38,
       paragraph 100). However, this project, according to the key project indicators, appears more focused on
       attendance, retention and transition, rather than on learning outcomes.



       Rating
       Substantial

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To improve education outcomes for elementary school children in India.

    Rationale

    The project supported a SWAp in the primary education sector through financing of the government of India's
    centrally sponsored scheme for universal elementary education, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA). This
    included some financing for states' annual work programs and various activities at the national level. Bank
    financing represented approximately 3.4% of total program costs and was the third in a series of SWAps
    supported by the Bank, the United Kingdom Department for International Development (DfID), and the
    European Union. Attribution to Bank support was unclear given the SWAp and the relatively small
    contribution of Bank funding.

    The theory of change for the project was overall sound, with interventions focused on improving quality (early
    grade learning focus, teacher training, administrative capacity building, and introduction of school
    performance standards) and improving monitoring capacity to track education outcomes (attendance,


                                                                                                        Page 4 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: SSA III (P144447)



retention, and transition rates for this project; learning outcomes were expected to be tracked upon
increased monitoring and assessment capacity) and target interventions accordingly. The project was
expected to benefit all 200 million children enrolled in elementary schools and 4.5 million teachers,
including specific interventions for vulnerable groups (girls, Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe, Muslims, and
Children with Special Needs).

Note: After project implementation had commenced, the government undertook a nationwide drive to assign
a Unique Identity (UID) number to each student. Assigning a UID was the recommendation of SSA Joint
Review Missions (JRMs) over the years, as this had a direct impact on the tracking of results against PDO
indicators and various interim outcome indicators. Once the UID assignment was completed, enrollment
records were cleaned up (accounting for students who had enrolled in multiple schools, dropped out, or were
overage/underage for their age-appropriate class, as age‐appropriate and grade‐appropriate enrollment
was strictly followed starting with the 2014‐15 school year). This affected the validity of the project's baseline
and original target figures, as there was no "back-cleaning" of enrollment data such that the baseline figures
were still based on the old data. Therefore, the ICR provided figures based on error correction, in addition to
the original figures (ICR, page 5). The error-corrected figures are reported below.

Outputs


  • Introduction of early grade learning program and grade‐specific learning standards for core subject areas
  in all 36 states (target: 36). (Note: The ICR (page 7) attributed improved transition rates to this
  intervention; however, given the project timeline such that the beneficiaries of the early grade learning
  program would not have reached upper primary level by project closing, these outcomes are not
  attributable to this project.)
  • Provision of teacher training, including in Continuous and Comprehensive Evaluation of students for
  more timely identification of academically struggling students. According to the project team, the number
  of trained teachers increased from a baseline of about 2.1 million to more than 4.1 million at project
  closing.
  • Introduction of State Level Learning Assessments in 27 states (target: 20), which provide feedback to
  teachers to enable them to identify weaker students and take remedial action.
  • Provision of leadership training for school administrators. According to the project team, 261,100
  headmasters received training.
  • Provision of training for School Management Committees to increase community engagement and thus
  contribute to improved student attendance and retention.
  • Development of school report cards to enable monitoring of school performance particularly in terms of
  adequacy of infrastructure and human resources. There was no information provided in the ICR on
  the increased number of schools that were utilizing report cards, but the project team reported that 49.2%
  of schools were utilizing them.




                                                                                                      Page 5 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: SSA III (P144447)



  • Establishment of Block Resource Centers and Cluster Resource Centers to support teachers to improve
  classroom teaching and learning. 99% of staff positions were filled at these Resource Centers
  (target: 70%). According to the project team, 53,188 such Centers received training in academic support.
  • Expansion of habitation coverage of public elementary schools, including building of separate toilet
  facilities for girls. No specific figures were reported in the ICR.
  • Provision of free uniforms and textbooks to marginalized groups. No specific figures were reported in the
  ICR.
  • Provision of special services for Children with Special Needs, including resource teachers for academic
  support, free aids and appliances, and home-based education. No specific figures were reported in the
  ICR.


Outcomes

Overall outcomes

  • The number of states/territories at the lower primary level that recorded attendance rates of more than
  80% (on the day the National Achievement Survey was conducted in 2017) increased from 12 to 23,
  surpassing the target of 20. The number of states/territories at the upper primary level that recorded
  attendance rates of more than 80% also increased from 15 to 25, achieving the target of 25.
  • The retention rate at the primary level (grade 5 enrollment, adjusted for repeaters, compared to grade 1
  enrollment four years prior) increased from 82.8% in 2012 to 88.8% in 2016, plausibly due to remedial
  support and outreach to marginalized groups. The original target was not applicable due to the data-
  cleaning exercise.
  • The transition rate from primary level to upper primary level (grade 6 enrollment compared to previous
  year's grade 5 enrollment) increased from 86.2% in 2012 to 90.4% in 2016, plausibly due to remedial
  support and outreach to marginalized groups. The original target was not applicable due to the data-
  cleaning exercise.
  • Enrollment at the upper primary level increased from 64.9 million in 2012 to 66.1 million in 2016. The
  original target was not applicable, due to the data cleaning exercise. This outcome is plausibly attributed
  to the improved retention and transition rates for upper primary, reported above.


Intermediate outcome: Improved quality

  • 88% of government school teachers received in-service training, achieving the target of 40%. The
  percentage of teachers with qualifications mandated by the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
  Education Act improved from 83.4% in 2011-12 to 87.9% in 2015-16.
  • Teacher attendance increased from a baseline of 81.7% in 2012 to 85.6% at the primary level and
  84.9% at the upper primary level. These fell short of the target of 90%.


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: SSA III (P144447)



  • 76% of school headmasters and 63% of educational administrators from State to Block level received
  training (cumulatively since 2012-13), achieving the targets of 50% and 25%, respectively.
  • The pupil:teacher ratio at the elementary level improved from 27:1 to 23:1 by project closing. (There
  was no target identified, as this was not an original project indicator).


Intermediate outcome: Improved monitoring and evaluation

  • A national system for learning assessment at the primary level was established. The National
  Achievement Survey for 2017 was completed in less than a year, compared to a turnaround time of three
  years for prior assessments, and was able to report on whether learning levels nationally and at the state
  level were improving, declining, or staying the same, in specific core subject areas.
  • 100% of states/territories had access to an online portal for reporting performance, according to national
  school performance standards developed by the central government. 94.2% of School Management
  Committees were playing a role in school supervision, as verified by sample checks of school
  development plans and meeting registers.
  • 31 states/territories were utilizing at least 80% of grant funds, surpassing the target of 12.




Intermediate outcome: Improved equitable access and retention

  • The share of schools with separate toilet facilities for girls increased from 72% in 2012 to 97.8% in 2016,
  surpassing the target of 74%.
  • The share of girls, Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe and Muslim children enrolled in elementary level
  in the 2016-17 school year was comparable to their representative share in the total population: girls -
  48.3% share of enrollment vs. 48.0% share of population; Scheduled Caste - 16.6% share of enrollment
  vs. 19.5% share of population; Scheduled Tribe - 8.6% share of enrollment vs. 10.3% share of population;
  Muslims - 13.4% share of enrollment vs. 13.8% share of population.
  • The proportion of Children with Special Needs enrolled in school and education programs increased
  from 77% in 2012 to 95.8% in 2016. There was no target provided.
  • According to additional data disaggregated for low-income states provided by the project team,
  improvements in attendance, retention, and transition rates were realized in parallel in those
  disadvantaged states.


The ICR (page 5) noted that the improvement in student attendance rate occurred in tandem with
improvements in the gross enrollment rate at both the primary level (stabilization from 98% to 95%) and the
upper primary level (increase from 85% to 91%). However, as the PAD (page 1) highlighted inequalities in
education outcomes across different states, particularly in "low-income and challenged states," there is no
information reported on in the ICR on whether the gains achieved above were realized in these
disadvantaged states, although the project team subsequently provided data to verify that achievements

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 15
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  IN: SSA III (P144447)



             included gains in low-income states. Also, although the project design did not intend to track learning
             outcomes due to the initial lack of capacity to monitor and assess learning, the ICR referred to national and
             state assessments (for example, page 8) that were able to report on learning levels; reporting these data in
             the ICR would have further strengthened the evidence of project impact.


             Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

Achievement of the objective to improve education outcomes for elementary school children is rated Substantial
due to evidence of increased attendance, retention and transition rates. However, achievement against target
figures could not verified due to the data cleaning exercise. There was also evidence of improved quality of
teaching, monitoring and evaluation, and equitable access. Attribution of the achievements observed to Bank
financing is not clear, as the Bank's financial contribution comprised approximately 3.4% of total program costs.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

     5. Efficiency


            The PAD (Annex 6) presented an economic analysis of the project using estimated costs and
            benefits. Estimated benefits were derived from the increased number of students completing primary and
            upper primary education (normalizing to 100% completion rate) and increased wage differentials due to the
            completion. Costs were the per-pupil cost of education in India, including private costs. The net present
            value of the program was estimated at US$ 12.4 billion, and the internal rate of return was estimated
            at 17.7%. However, it should be noted that the analysis covered the entire SWAp, not just the Bank financed
            portion.

            The updated economic analysis, as presented in the ICR (Annex 4), calculated an estimated internal rate of
            return of 19.2%, using the same benefit and cost assumptions. The ICR suggested that this rate was higher
            than the PAD estimate because income returns on the completion of primary and upper primary education
            improved significantly over the project period. In addition, the ICR analysis used separate income estimates
            for men vs. women (rather than the aggregate estimate used at appraisal) due to the wage gap and higher
            labor force participation of men.




                                                                                                                Page 8 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: SSA III (P144447)



In addition, the following implementation experiences point to efficiency in the use of project resources: The
project funds disbursed fully before the original project closing date; funds allocated to state budgets were
utilized more fully (the number of states/territories that used at least 80% of funds increased from only 3
states at project start to 31 states by project closing); some small schools were consolidated thereby
rationalizing the use of teachers and infrastructure (21,000 schools were consolidated over the last three
years of the project period); in-service teacher training was reduced from 20 to 10 days, due to a shift from
standardized to needs-based training, which led to reduced per-teacher training costs (however, no specific
data were reported on the reduced costs); development partner activities were well coordinated; and the
project leveraged the government's data cleaning exercise (UIDs) to improve implementation of this
project. There were some shortcomings in fiduciary performance that may have diminished efficiency (see
Section 10b).



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate
                                                         Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                   Available?
                                                                                   100.00
Appraisal                                               17.70
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                   100.00
ICR Estimate                                            19.20
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


Relevance of the project objective is rated Substantial due to alignment with country conditions and sector
program. Achievement of the objective to improve education outcomes for elementary school children is rated
Substantial due to evidence of increased attendance, retention and transition rates, as well as evidence of
intermediate outcomes including improved quality of teaching, monitoring and evaluation, and equitable
access. Efficiency is rated Substantial due to a estimated EIRR of 19.2% (compared to 17.7% at appraisal) and
other implementation experience that points to efficiency in the use of project resources, such as full
disbursement at the original closing date, more states using at least 80% of funds, and consolidation of small
schools. The outcome of the project is overall Satisfactory, reflecting only minor shortcomings in the project's
preparation and implementation.




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 15
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        IN: SSA III (P144447)



a.    Outcome Rating
      Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


Policy and institutional support for improving the quality of elementary education has been well
established. Government expenditures are being increasingly channeled to quality investments, as reflected by
the organization of state‐level financial allocations into three categories, one of which is for interventions focused
on education quality. Monitoring and educational data systems have also improved in functionality, which will
contribute to more accurate student data and subsequent programmatic and budget decisions. However, state
level capacity remains uneven.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

     The project was the third in a series of SWAp operations in the elementary education sector in India;
     therefore, implementation arrangements built upon existing structures. Lessons learned from these prior
     operations were also incorporated into the project design, including focusing on teacher performance,
     utilizing financing as a tool to improve quality, producing data to assess learning outcomes, and
     demonstrating results to ensure political commitment. Key project interventions focused on monitoring and
     evaluation (including a strong framework for project monitoring) not just for the national system, but at the
     district/school level such that immediate remedial action could be taken due to more timely identification of
     academically weaker students. Partnerships with other donors were effectively utilized to add technical
     expertise; the ICR (page 13) cited the example of DFID providing technical assistance in educational
     assessments to improve technical quality. Overall project risk was assessed as Substantial, due to
     capacity and governance issues; mitigation measures were effectively identified, including significant
     capacity building in fiduciary management.


     Quality-at-Entry Rating
     Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

     Project supervision featured the continued participation of other donors, including through JRMs, which
     helped to enhance project supervision; jointly-delivered recommendations were taken onboard by
     the government, including for critical large-scale reforms such as the provision of untied funds for quality
     reforms and introduction of the performance assessment systems at the state level. The ICR (page 19)

                                                                                                        Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: SSA III (P144447)



  noted that the JRMs' focus on "actionable and time‐bound recommendations" was an important factor in
  helping the government to undertake these reforms in a short time frame. Overall, the supervision period
  was marked by a sustained focus on improving data quality and using M&E data for decision-making.

  There were some minor shortcomings in fiduciary performance, including inadequate internal controls and
  staffing constraints, although there were no major fiduciary problems or negative impact on project
  performance reported.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The results framework and M&E arrangements were overall strong. Indicators captured overall outcomes in
  attendance, retention, and transition rates, as well as intermediate outcomes in quality and equity. As noted in
  the ICR, the results framework did not include indicators to track improvements in learning levels, as there was
  no robust measurement system in place at the time of project appraisal and therefore no meaningful baseline
  could be established; also, given the expected influx of out-of-school children into the school system as a result
  of project interventions, setting a target for improved learning levels was also not tenable. The M&E
  arrangements relied on existing monitoring systems that had been used effectively in previous operations,
  including collecting a common set of data through the annual work program process. Monitoring arrangements
  also included contracting 41 Monitoring Institutions (research organizations and universities) to carry out
  independent reviews of implementation at the school level (visits to a random sample of schools in a given state
  once per quarter). SWAp indicators were highly relevant but were program-wide, and therefore created some
  difficulties in capturing project-specific achievements.



b. M&E Implementation

  Monitoring of project progress was regularly carried out, with data collected from identified sources as
  planned and frequently triangulated with data from external sources. JRMs with participation from multiple
  donors and the government were conducted once or twice per year and included field missions to six
  states. The ICR (page 15) noted the following: while all JRMs initially incorporated field missions to states, it
  became clear that this was unnecessarily burdensome to the states and the Ministry, and so field visits were
  subsequently arranged for only one JRM per year. However, this change enabled more in‐depth engagement


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: SSA III (P144447)



  with national agencies and the datasets/reports being produced for the project, and also reduced the reporting
  burden on states.



c. M&E Utilization

  The ICR (page 15-16) reported that M&E had a "substantial influence" on the project and led to various
  operational and policy changes. Examples cited included: the importance of cleaning data records using
  UIDs for students; creation of the online educational data portal, which was an effective tool for program
  monitoring and assessment of quantitative data; a recommended reduction in the duration of in‐service
  training for teachers through a shift to customized, needs‐based training, which enabled the provision of
  training to a significantly greater percentage of teachers than anticipated; and alerting the central Ministry
  to inefficiencies caused by the oversupply of school infrastructure, which led to the merging of several
  thousand schools.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project. The safeguard policy on Indigenous
  Peoples (OP/BP 4/10) was triggered given the targeted activities among marginalized groups.

  The ICR (page 18) cited some examples of project efforts to promote "green and clean" schools,
  including: (a) integration of basic environment, health, and safety elements in the Program’s Planning and
  Appraisal Manual; (b) nation‐wide campaign on Clean Schools; (c) provision of ramps, railings, and toilets
  for the physically challenged and initiatives for Children with Special Needs; and (d) monitoring the status
  and condition of physical infrastructure elements. However, there is no explicit statement of compliance
  with environmental management guidelines.

  The PAD (page 18-19) referenced an Indigenous Peoples Plan that built upon the prior plans from the first
  two SWAp operations in the series. The ICR (page 17) reported on the social assessment that suggested
  actions for improving equity among disadvantaged groups, but stated incorrectly that "the OP 4.10 on
  Indigenous Peoples was not triggered." There was no information in the ICR to verify compliance with this
  safeguard.




                                                                                                      Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: SSA III (P144447)




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial management: The financial management arrangements built upon existing arrangements from prior
  operations while including additional measures to further strengthen capacity, such as: (i) application of a
  uniform approach to fiduciary management through use of a comprehensive manual on these topics to all
  states; (ii) launch of the online portal to provide a transparent mechanism for continuous financial monitoring;
  and (iii) quarterly review meetings of states’ Finance Controllers, overseen by the central Ministry. The ICR
  (page 14) noted that stronger internal control systems than originally anticipated were required under the
  project, especially for internal audit processes and maintenance of Utilization Certificates. Financial
  management staffing constraints, both in terms of vacant posts and staff capacity limitations, were also
  continuously flagged by the Bank in supervision reports.

  Procurement: Given the SWAp nature of the operation, the project received a waiver (obtained through the
  Managing Director) that the legal documents for Bank financing would not require application of Bank
  procurement guidelines. Instead, the procurement procedures adhered to the central government norms and
  procurement provisions in the project's Financing Agreement and Financial Management and Procurement
  Manual. However, some weaknesses remained, as noted in a post‐procurement review conducted in seven
  states. These included the splitting of requirements, not using the desired method as per the procurement
  threshold, and delays in payment. The ICR noted that these issues appeared to be due to a "lack of awareness
  about procurement guidelines on the part of the officials handling procurement."



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                       IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                       Satisfactory              Satisfactory               ---
Bank Performance              Satisfactory              Satisfactory               ---
Quality of M&E                Substantial               Substantial                ---
Quality of ICR                                          Substantial                ---



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: SSA III (P144447)



12. Lessons


Lessons drawn from the ICR and adapted by IEG:


  •  The Sector-Wide Approach (SWAp) can be an effective instrument for early sector reform efforts, given
  the convergence with national government programs and the broad-based reach of the reforms; however, a
  more results-based approach can come into play once the early reforms have been achieved and more
  targeted, specific initiatives are needed. In the case of this project, the SWAp helped to bring about
  increased access through widespread teacher training and early childhood initiatives. However, improving
  quality required a more state-by-state approach in order to address specific challenges in each state, which
  the project began to support through state-level performance assessments and the use of state annual work
  program processes.
  • The development of grade-level, subject-specific learning standards, which are then directly
  linked to student assessments and remedial actions by teachers, can have an immediate impact on
  education outcomes. In the case of this project, results from grade-level assessments alongside teacher
  training (including in evaluation of student performance) contributed to improved retention and transition
  rates.




13. Assessment Recommended?

Yes

Please explain


To verify impact from the series of three SWAp operations in the elementary education sector.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR quality was substantial, with an evidence-based assessment of performance. It was concise and
adhered to ICR guidelines. There was a substantial amount of quantitative evidence in the ICR to support
overall outcomes; although, due to the SWAp approach, the data reporting relied heavily on program-wide
indicators and thus made it challenging to verify project-specific impact. As mentioned in Section 4, although
the project design did not intend to track learning outcomes due to the initial lack of capacity to monitor and
assess learning, the ICR referred to national and state assessments that were able to report on learning levels;


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: SSA III (P144447)



reporting these data in the ICR would have further strengthened the evidence of project impact. Also, for
Component 3, there were no specific data on outputs for marginalized groups (i.e. habitation coverage, number
of children from marginalized groups receiving free uniforms and supplies, number of children with special
needs receiving services) to verify project impact. Given the amount of financing/proportion of project costs
that comprised Component 3 activities, actual figures would have strengthened the results chain and attribution
of outcomes to the project. Annex 1B (Key Outputs) should have contained a report of actual outputs, not the
planned outputs. There was insufficient information to verify environmental and social safeguards compliance.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 15
