          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          Sust. Growth and Income Convergence DPL(P149609)



                                                                                    Report Number : ICRR0021301

   1. Project Data



    Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
    Colombia                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


    Programmatic DPL
    Planned Operations:         2              Approved Operations:          2

    Operation ID                              Operation Name
    P149609                                   Sust. Growth and Income Convergence DPL


     L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
     IBRD-84540                               30-Jun-2017                                         700,000,000.00

     Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
     12-Dec-2014                              30-Jun-2017

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                         700,000,000.00                                              0.00

     Revised Commitment                          700,000,000.00                                              0.00

     Actual                                      700,000,000.00                                              0.00




     Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
     Paul Holden                Robert Mark Lacey            Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)


PHPROJECTDATATBL




     Operation ID                             Operation Name
     P154821                                  Colombia Growth and Convergence DPL 2 ( P154821 )



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sust. Growth and Income Convergence DPL(P149609)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                      Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-84540,IBRD-85580                    30-Jun-2017                                            696,107,840.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 08-Dec-2015                              30-Jun-2017

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           700,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            700,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                        696,107,840.00                                                0.00




2. Program Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   Original Objective: The Program Development Objective (PDO) for the first Development Policy Loan (DPO)
   as stated in the Loan Agreement dated December 15, 2014 (p. 11) was: (i) Improve the access to financial
   markets for road infrastructure investments and improve access to finance for firms; (ii) improve training, build
   productive skills and improve their allocation; and (iii) strengthen regulations that affect innovation and
   business efficiency, as means to support sustained growth and income convergence.
   　
   The PDO for the second DPO in the Loan Agreement (LA) dated April 15, 2016 modified the original PDO (LA
   p. 13) to (i) foster solutions to develop infrastructure financing and increase access to finance for firms; (ii)
   build productive skills and improve their allocation; and (iii) strengthen regulations that affect innovation and
   business efficiency. However, the substance of the PDO remained essentially unchanged.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   There were three pillars:
   　
   Pillar 1 focused on fostering solutions to promote infrastructure financing and improving access to finance for
   firms. The Country Partnership Strategy 2012-2016 (CPS1, p. 23) had identified the infrastructure gap and
   access to finance by firms as key bottlenecks. These were to be addressed by allocating more financing to
   infrastructure through a concession program; increasing the registration of security interests in the collateral
   registry following on from a reform of the secured transactions framework; and enhancing capital market
   development by increasing the number of issuers in the alternative securities market.

   　


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sust. Growth and Income Convergence DPL(P149609)



   Pillar 2 focused on upgrading the quality and allocation of production and training programs in the labor
   market through better job placement, retraining the unemployed and providing professional training through
   firms. Weak training and allocation of productive skills was identified in CPS1 as an important constraint to
   higher productivity, which pillar 2 sought to address.

   　
   Pillar 3 focused on promoting innovation and improving the regulatory environment by expanding the number
   of firms utilizing incentives for science, technology and innovation and utilizing regulatory evaluations to
   reduce the number of regulations and upgrade the regulatory environment. CPS1 (p. 26) identified that the
   utilization of incentives for innovation was highly concentrated among a small number of large firms. In
   addition, the regulatory environment for firms was adversely affecting productivity and needed rationalizing.
   The ICR (p. 8) describes the framework for evaluating existing regulations and the process for introducing
   new ones.




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   The first DPO (P149609) was approved on December 12, 2014 in the amount of US$700 million. It became
   effective on December 16, 2014. It closed on schedule on June 30, 2017. The actual amount disbursed was
   US$700 million.
   　
   The second DPO (P154821) was approved on December 8, 2015 in the amount of US$700 million. It became
   effective on May 16, 2016. It closed on schedule on June 30, 2017. The actual amount disbursed was
   US$696.11 million, due to the change in the exchange rate between the US$ and the Euro.
   .




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  The objectives were based on the National Development Plan 2014-2018 and were consistent with the World
  Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2012-2016. Two of the strategic areas of the National
  Development Plan were "Equality of Opportunity for Social Prosperity" and "Sustainable Growth and
  Competitiveness" (CPS p. 6), whereas the CPS proposed three strategic themes, of which two were
  Expanding Opportunities for Social Prosperity and Inclusive Growth with Enhanced Productivity (p. 12).
  Among the desired outcomes, the CPS specified: (i) enhancing skills for shared growth, including increasing
  education quality and skills formation and the improvement of technical and institutional capacity to monitor
  and evaluate education policies and programs; (ii) inclusive growth and enhanced productivity, through



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sust. Growth and Income Convergence DPL(P149609)



  human capital development, science, technology and innovation, improved business and property
  registration, and higher financial inclusion.
  　
  The objectives were relevant to country circumstances at appraisal. Slowing external demand, falling
  commodity prices and lower foreign direct investment, were beginning to affect the Colombian economy
  adversely. Structural bottlenecks included limited access to finance for firms and infrastructure projects, a
  shortage of skills and human capital that contributed to low productivity, a weak financial system, and onerous
  regulations that raised the costs of doing business and hampered trade.
  　
  The objectives remained relevant at closure. The government had requested World Bank support for
  implementing its reform agenda (Country Partnership Framework, 2016-2021, p. 64) as well as assistance
  with external financing needs. The objectives in the two DPOs were part of the government’s ongoing reform
  agenda.
  　
  The objectives were ambitious, covering infrastructure financing, financial market reform, labor market reform,
  and reforming regulations governing the operation of firms. Sub-objectives had an even broader scope and
  included the issuing of securities by sub-prime borrowers, expanding the mutual fund industry, training the
  unemployed, broadening the scope of technology adoption by firms, reforming the institutions governing tax
  and customs, improving border clearing of imports and exports, and the trade relationship with Ecuador. A
  tighter focus with fewer reform areas could have improved outcomes.




  Rating
  Substantial

b. Relevance of Design
  The strength of the causal chain between activities supported by the series and expected results is uneven.
  Overall, the theory of change is less than robust.
  　
  Increasing the availability of financing for road construction and enhancing access to finance for Colombian
  firms (the first part of the first objective) was to be achieved through the establishment of an institutional
  framework to widen private sector participation in the overall infrastructure program. However, the program-
  supported amount of incremental financing (less than US$4 million), would have no significant impact on
  reducing road infrastructure bottlenecks.
  　
  Enhancing access to finance for firms (the second part of the first objective) was to be attained through an
  already reformed secured transactions framework, an increase in the number of private bonds issuers, and
  augmenting the number of investors in mutual funds. Secured transaction reforms would allow firms to pledge
  their moveable property as collateral, hence reducing lending risks. Regarding private bonds, the program
  focused primarily on SMEs, less well-known investment grade borrowers, and those who had poorer credit


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Sust. Growth and Income Convergence DPL(P149609)



       ratings. It is unclear why the issuing of bonds by SMEs or companies with poor credit ratings was considered
       a priority. There was no assessment of the demand for such securities, or of associated transaction and
       interest costs. In most countries, SMEs are financed primarily by lending institutions rather than through bond
       issues. The lack of consideration of the significant risks to investors undermines the theory of change related
       to this objective. The PDs do not make it clear how increasing the number of mutual fund investors would
       necessarily improve access to finance for firms and for infrastructure investment. This would depend on how
       mutual fund managers direct the proceeds from the larger number of investors. They may even be invested
       outside Colombia (the Authorities had already put in place regulations allowing mutual fund investments in the
       countries of the Pacific Alliance – Chile, Mexico and Peru). A more relevant target would have been increased
       investment by mutual funds in infrastructure and company financing in Colombia.
       　
       Enhancing the skills of the labor force, building productive skills and improving skill allocation (the second
       PDO) was to be achieved through provision of appropriate training and better matching of job vacancies to
       the available skill mix. These links are clear.
       　
       Encouraging innovation and business efficiency and hence sustained growth and income convergence (the
       third PDO), was to be achieved by increasing tax benefits for technology and innovation, reducing the burden
       of regulation, and trade facilitation. Tax incentives were expected to encourage more firms to adapt (mostly
       foreign) technology to their needs. However, the link is tenuous. The PDs do not refer to analytical work that
       links low productivity of Colombian firms with their failure to innovate. Other causes of low productivity - for
       example, poor management practices - may have been given insufficient weight. Moreover, the link between
       faster growth and income convergence is unclear.
       　
       One of the barriers to innovation in Colombia is weak protection of intellectual property (CPS, p. 26). Yet this
       does not feature in the program. Burdensome regulations, which tend to drive firms into the informal sector
       (where productivity is low), were to be addressed through a piloting a system of regulatory evaluation that
       would identify those regulations that constrain productivity. The evaluation would examine the rationale
       behind specific regulations and specify their costs and benefits. However, the program falls short of
       supporting actual changes to the regulatory framework.



       Rating
       Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     Improve the access to financial markets for road infrastructure investments and improve access to finance
     for firms.



                                                                                                         Page 5 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Sust. Growth and Income Convergence DPL(P149609)




    Rationale
    Under DPO1, the prior action consisted of amending credit limits that would allow institutions to increase
    their lending for a single project from 10% to 25%, provided that the additional 15% be used to fund 4G
    highway concession investments under government guarantee. A trigger for DPO2 was a reduction in
    restrictions on pension funds investing in private infrastructure funds and an easing of restrictions on funding
    in international markets. PD1 indicated that these actions were expected to increase the amount of financing
    allocated to the 4G program by credit institutions by US$ 3.3 million. Under DPO2, the allocation of financing
    between types of institutions was broken down: banks US$2.1 million; National Development Bank – US$0.7
    million; and Pension Funds US$1.8 million. The ICR reports (20) that the US$3.3 million target was
    exceeded by early 2018, with a total of US$5.7 million being financed. Although this amount remains very
    small in relation to infrastructure needs (planned investments in the 4G program total US$26 billion), the task
    team subsequently explained to IEG that the Colombian Authorities viewed this as a demonstration aimed at
    proving the feasibility of raising private sector financing for the 4G program.

    Improving access to finance by firms was to be attained through (i) a new secured transactions framework,
    which allows firms to pledge their moveable property as collateral (prior action, DPO1); and (ii) promoting
    issuance of bonds. The collateral registry was linked to that for motor vehicles, and a central registry for
    electronic invoices was created (both prior actions, DPO2) Triggers involved the definitions and regulations
    governing credit guarantees and the operation of the registries. The target was the registration of 1 million
    security interests in the secured transactions registry; the actual number achieved was 1.65 million. The ICR
    (p. 17) reports that 85% of the registered security interests were for automobiles, but in addition, the
    factoring of accounts receivable was encouraged by the invoice registry to promote the financing of
    receivables.

    A prior action under DPO1 encouraged the issuing of bonds by less well-known investment grade borrowers,
    as well as SMEs and other sub-prime borrowers through reducing issuing requirements, reducing issuance
    costs and faster approval times by the regulatory authorities. The issuing of rules and policies for the
    operation of mutual funds, and of further regulations governing their management, were, respectively, a
    trigger and a prior action for DPO2. The outcome targets were, first, that 10 new bond issuers would enter
    the market, and, second, that there would be an increase in the number of investors in mutual funds to 1.5
    million. In the event, although there were 10 new bond issues, these were not executed by new entrants, but
    by existing firms taking advantage of the more relaxed regulations governing issues; the first target was
    therefore not achieved. The actual number of investors in mutual funds was 1.6 million by March 2018,
    thereby exceeding the second target. However, as noted in Section 3b above, more relevant to the
    program’s objectives would have been a target for increased investment by mutual funds in infrastructure
    and company financing in Colombia.




    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


                                                                                                        Page 6 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Sust. Growth and Income Convergence DPL(P149609)




    Objective 2
    Objective
     Improve training, build productive skills and improve their allocation.

    Rationale
    Allocation of skills was to be improved through better job placements. A Public Employment Service
    incorporating a unified national unemployment registry with a system for matching skills with vacancies was
    established, and training courses for the unemployed, involving learning centers and special human capital
    formation for indigenous populations, were created (both prior actions, DPO1). Prior actions under DPO2
    were (i) specification of the institutional arrangements and responsibilities in the public employment services
    for the implementation of management and job placement tools; (ii) creation of a national framework of
    professional qualifications and competencies; (iii) establishment of a system of transfers and credits
    connecting the different branches of tertiary education; and (iv) establishment of a special educational
    regime (through the tertiary level) for indigenous communities.

    There was no indicator to measure whether job placements had better matched skills with vacancies.
    Rather, the outcome target was expressed in terms of the number of job placements: an increase of
    149,000. This was significantly surpassed, with the cumulative number placed in employment between 2014
    and 2017 increasing by more than 1.7 million. Whether this indicates improved productive skills and skill
    allocation is unclear, as is the extent to which it can be attributed to actions supported by the series. It is
    impossible to ascertain whether these were new jobs that moved workers in the informal sector into the
    formal sector, or whether these were job placements that would have occurred anyway under the pre-
    program system. Further outcome target were: (i) 1.12 million persons referred to management placement
    services (actual achievement 3.38 million); (ii) at least 40 firms providing professional training and the
    preparation of qualification matrices for different education levels (actual achievement 40); and (iii) four
    indigenous communities to be certified for the administration of budgetary funds for training (not met - to be
    certified, communities must become indigenous territories and demonstrate that they can administer
    budgetary funds; by program closure, no communities had yet qualified, although the ICR reports partial
    progress towards qualification in a number of instances). A DPO1 target of 60,000 retrained unemployed
    was dropped under DPO2 because of lack of progress under DPO1.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective
     Strengthen regulations that affect innovation and business efficiency, as a means to support sustained
     growth and income convergence.

    Rationale


                                                                                                         Page 7 of 15
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Sust. Growth and Income Convergence DPL(P149609)



    There were three sub-objectives: (i) expanding the use of science and technology; (ii) reducing the
    regulatory burden on businesses; and (iii) trade facilitation.
    　
    Science and Technology. The system of tax credits for scientific and technological innovation was
    strengthened (prior action, DPO1). Prior actions under DPO2 were the definition of eligibility criteria, creation
    of an information platform, the definition of criteria for eligible expenses, and the merging of the Governance
    System of Competitiveness and Innovation with that for Science and Technology. There were three outcome
    targets: (i) an increase in the number of projects financed with royalty resources from 0 to 20 (exceeded - by
    the end of 2017, 47 had been approved); (ii) an increase in the share of budgeted tax benefits utilized from a
    baseline of16 per cent to 50 percent (exceeded - in both 2016 and 2017, 100 per cent of resources were
    used); and (iii) an increase from zero to 30 percent in the number of projects and programs designed and
    implemented under the combined system of governance (this was not met; the ICR reports on page 21 that
    inter agency disagreements hampered the operation of the unified system). No evidence is provided
    concerning the impact of these technology programs on business efficiency or on sustained growth and
    income convergence.

    Reducing the Regulatory Burden. For the second sub-objective, a more coherent framework for reviewing
    existing regulations and designing new ones was designed (prior action, DPO1). Triggers were the creation
    of a Committee for Improving the Production of Regulations, and the reorganization of the National Tax and
    Customs Administration to streamline processes. Under DPO2, all agencies drafting new regulations were
    required to consult with the Superintendence of Industry and Commerce, although this was subsequently
    amended to improving procedures for the issuance of regulations. There was one outcome target: an
    increase from zero to five in the number of pilots carrying out the new regulatory evaluation process (this
    was exceeded: four pilots were prepared in 2016 and three in 2017). However, no evidence is yet available
    on reducing the regulatory burden on Colombian businesses.

    Trade Facilitation. For the third sub-objective, the National Tax and Customs Administration was
    reorganized to allow for improved inspection methods for imports, and the single window for international
    trade was strengthened by permitting the extension of simultaneous inspection methods to imports (both
    prior actions, DPO1). Under DPO2, Customs procedures were further streamlined, and a system established
    whereby eligible economic operators would be authorized to benefit from such procedures. The outcome
    target was 30 economic operators, which was exceeded (40 had been authorized by March 2018). However,
    simultaneous inspections for imports were not yet operational at the time of ICR completion (p. 13).
    Moreover, the decline in oil prices and the consequent fall in government revenue, together with a change in
    Customs leadership, resulted in the postponement of the planned restructuring of the service. No evidence is
    presented of faster Customs procedures.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




                                                                                                         Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sust. Growth and Income Convergence DPL(P149609)




5. Outcome

The projects objectives were substantially relevant in the light of both deteriorating external conditions and the
slowing growth and low productivity of the domestic economy and were in accordance with both World Bank
and government strategies. Relevance of design was mixed, however, with the large number of sub-objectives
contributing to the less than robust theory of change.

The outcome of the first of three objectives - improving infrastructure financing and financing for firms - is rated
substantial. The secured transactions reform increased the potential for the financing of firms, and the target for
the registration of security interests was substantially exceeded, although the goal of promoting bond issues by
sub-prime lenders was not met. The value of the instruments issued for infrastructure financing relative to needs
was very small, although the institutional and regulatory framework for such lending was tested and
strengthened.
　
The efficacy of the second objective - improving worker training, enhancing productive skills and better job
placement - is rated modest. Information on the efficacy of training and productive skills is not available. There
was no evidence of better matching of job placements and skills. Although the targeted number of job
placements was substantially exceeded, it is unclear to what extent this result could be attributed to the
program.
　
The third objective is rated as modest because little evidence is provided on results. For example, the impact of
the regulation rationalization framework on the regulatory burden facing firms was not specified, while the
increase in the number of economic operators benefiting from accelerated customs clearing provides no
indication of reduced clearance time. No evidence is provided that program-supported reform enhanced
economic growth or income convergence.
　
Overall, the shortcomings are significant, and outcome is assessed as moderately unsatisfactory.




a.   Outcome Rating
     Moderately Unsatisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

The improved legal framework, particularly in the area of secured transactions, supports economic activities and
is likely to be sustained. The effectiveness and sustainability of the infrastructure financing program will depend
on the extent to which private sector financing will utilize the new institutional framework. Since the job
matching program resulted from a change in the institutional structure, it will likely continue. Trade facilitation
reforms have been only partially carried out and are vulnerable to exogenous influences, vested interests and
leadership of key services.

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sust. Growth and Income Convergence DPL(P149609)




a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
    Modest

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The program was prepared in close collaboration with the government and reflects both the CPS 2012-
  2016 and the priorities of the government as indicated in the National Development Plan. The objectives
  were relevant for country’s needs. The program was implemented during a period of macro-economic
  pressure and was therefore timely. Design of the operations benefited from extensive analytical work
  performed by the government, the Bank, OECD and others, part of it some years previously. There were no
  fiduciary or environmental aspects that arose. M&E arrangements were the responsibility of the
  Government and were discussed by the task team during supervision. Risks were appropriately identified,
  and mitigation arrangements made; overall risk was assessed as modest. However, the strength of the
  theory of change reflected in project design was variable: in some instances, the causal chain between
  actions supported by the series and the expected results was unclear. For example, although the third PDO
  stated that higher growth and improved income distribution were desired outcomes, the link between these
  and the prior actions and other policy measures is obscure.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  No Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) were prepared since they are not required for operations lasting
  less than one year. M&E arrangements were delegated to the Colombian government – according to the
  task team, there was sufficient in-house capacity to monitor the program. During the preparation of DPO2,
  the Bank team examined progress in implementation and as a result adjusted a number of indictors. Any
  loss of institutional memory stemming from the lack of formal supervision would be partly addressed
  through a follow up Development Policy Financing operation that was approved in 2016 which documented
  progress on the technology portion of the PDOs.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                               Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sust. Growth and Income Convergence DPL(P149609)



8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  The ICR reports that the government was committed to the implementation of the program. The task
  team indicated that the government performed effectively in monitoring the program. Implementation of
  the reforms supported by the series was, however, mixed. While actions under the second pillar were
  mostly carried out, there were some shortfalls in other areas. Achievement under the first pillar was
  partial, and under the third, there were significant gaps. Trade facilitation was halted by adverse external
  developments and by changes in the leadership of the Customs Administration. Extending simultaneous
  inspection methods to imports was postponed because of lack of time to put in place the necessary
  logistics. Instead, the Authorities proposed streamlining procedures for authorized operators and
  implementing the multi-modal Andean International Transit of Goods (Transito Aduanero Internacional
  Multimodal,TIM) with Ecuador. In the event, the TIM was in place for only 18 months while financed
  through an Inter-American Development Bank project. No alternative plans have been put forward (ICR,
  p. 19).

  However, the task team reports that the government remains committed to reform. Colombia took the
  necessary measures to align with OECD entry requirements, and was admitted in 2018


  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  N/A


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  PD1 and PD2 (p. 30 and p. 36 respectively) both state: "The MHCP (Ministry of Finance and Public Credit),
  DNP (National Planning Department), and DANE (National Administrative Department of Statistics) are
  responsible for coordinating actions among the concerned agencies." The ICR (p. 14) states that "MHCP and
  DNP have the authority and capabilities to monitor implementation of the Program, although their staff is
  overstretched by the multiple functions that they perform". The task team subsequently informed IEG that the
  Colombian authorities had a high level of monitoring and evaluation capability.
  　

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sust. Growth and Income Convergence DPL(P149609)



  DPL1 had 3 indicators under the first pillar, which was to foster solutions to improve infrastructure finance and
  to increase access to finance for firms. They were; (i) increasing the amount of financing allocated to 4G
  concession programs from 0 in 2013 to COP$10 billion in 2016; (ii) that the number of registrations of security
  interests in the collateral registry exceed 1 million, by 2016; and (iii) that 10 new issuers enter the bond market
  by 2016. The first of these does not capture the aim of this aspect of the pillar, which was to establish the
  institutional foundation for private sector infrastructure financing because it provides no information on whether
  this had been achieved and the actual amount of the financing target was so small as to be inconsequential.
  The second two indicators are of more relevance.
  　
  Under Pillar 2, which aimed to improve the quality and allocation of productive skills, the indicators were (i) the
  number of job placements achieved through the new system; (ii) the number of unemployed retrained; and (iii)
  the number of firms providing professional training. These indicators do not capture how productive skills were
  enhanced, although the number of job placements under the new system does go some way towards this,
  under the assumption that the placement system was more effective. Whether relevant skills were improved
  skills is unknown.
  　
  Under Pillar 3, promoting innovation and an efficient regulatory environment, the indicators were; (i) The share
  of budgeted tax benefits used by firms; and (ii) the number of sectors for which pilot regulatory evaluations
  occurred, and the evaluation of proposed regulations. The first of these is an input and provides no information
  regarding how this promoted innovation. The second does measure how the regulatory environment improved.
  　
  DPL2 revised some of the results indicators and replaced others.
  　
  Under pillar 1, the indicator for 4G financing was disaggregated by funders. And a new indicator was added
  related to the number of investors in mutual funds. The former left the DPO1 indicator essentially unchanged.
  The added indicator provides little information on how access to finance for firms, or for infrastructure financing
  would be enhanced.
  　
  Under pillar 2 the indicator regarding the number of unemployed that were retrained was dropped and
  indicators on the number of qualification matrices defining job skills was added. An additional indicator relating
  to the number of communities certified to manage transfer resources directly was also added. It is unclear how
  these indicators would improve the quality and allocation of productive skills.
  　
  Under pillar 3, new indicators were added: (i) an indicator that measured the number of projects evaluated
  under a new methodology for formulating, selecting and approving innovation projects; (ii) the number of
  instruments designed and implemented under a new governance system and (iii) the number of authorized
  economic operators increase. In addition, the target for the utilization of tax benefits for science and technology
  increase, and the target for the number of pilots for the regulatory evaluation process was revised upwards.
  Of the indicators, only the last relates directly to the goal of the third pillar.



b. M&E Implementation


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sust. Growth and Income Convergence DPL(P149609)



  The Bank monitored the program through the preparation of the second DPO (ICR p.14), in which progress
  was recorded in associated Aide Memoires.




c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR provides no information on M&E utilization



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  There were no environment implications for either of the DPOs. Positive social impacts could be expected
  from the focus on employment in Pillar 2.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  There were no fiduciary or procurement issues reported



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  N/A



d. Other
  N/A



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                     ICR                        IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Program objectives are
                            Moderately              Moderately
Outcome                                                                          substantially relevant, but
                            Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 relevance of design is modest.

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Sust. Growth and Income Convergence DPL(P149609)



                                                                                  Efficacy of two of the three
                                                                                  objectives is rated modest,
                                                                                  and the third substantial.
Risk to Development
                              Modest                  Modest                      ---
Outcome
                              Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory     ---
                              Satisfactory
                              Moderately
Borrower Performance                                  Moderately Satisfactory     ---
                              Satisfactory
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                 ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

  The following lessons are taken from the ICR with some adaptation of language:
 　
 The design and preparation of this DPO series benefitted from continuity with respect to Task Team Leaders
 and core team members, both with respect to knowledge of the issues and the economy and in regard to
 relationships with country counterparts;
 　
 The reform experience in Colombia underlines the need for intensive dissemination and implementation to
 bring about changes in behavior when institutional reform involves new laws or regulations. The use of the
 secured transactions reform to extend credit access is a case in point, where the initial use was primarily for
 financing of motor vehicles. More dissemination could have broadened its use
 　
  IEG draws the following two lessons:
 　
 Design of development policy operations can benefit from international experience and research. In this case,
 expected financing of SMEs and other sub-prime borrowers through issuing instruments such as bonds did
 not materialize since the risks associated with such instruments were perceived to be too high. Sufficient
 study of international experience would have illustrated the likelihood of such an outcome.
 　
 Political economy issues can often undermine reform objectives. Two examples were the difficulties
 associated with the attempted consolidation of the Committee for Competitiveness with the System for
 Science, Technology and Innovation, and the restructuring of the National Tax and Customs Administration,
 both of which undermined the achievement of the third pillar of the program. Intensive consultation,
 dissemination of the advantages of the reforms, and ensuring that all participants support the reform are
 necessary to reduce the risks of non-achievement of objectives.



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Sust. Growth and Income Convergence DPL(P149609)




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written and explains clearly the issues faced by both the World Bank Group and the
Government of Colombia in formulating the reform program. More discussion of the M&E issues would have
been welcome, as would a more critical analysis of the labor market and technology issues. Overall, however,
this is a sound document.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                Page 15 of 15
