     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Kabeli Transmission Project (P112893)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0021427

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P112893                                    NP: Kabeli Transmission Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Nepal                                      Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-49320,IDA-H6760                        30-Jun-2015                                           17,274,997.95

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 10-May-2011                                31-Dec-2016

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             38,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              20,725,856.06                                               0.00

 Actual                                          17,274,997.95                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Hiroyuki Yokoi              Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   The objectives of the project are (i) to support the addition of transmission capacity to the Recipient’s
   integrated power system; and (ii) to provide access to electricity and cooking fuel to communities in the area
   of the Kabeli 132 kV transmission line (Financing Agreement, p 5).

   In light of the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) Guidelines, this ICR Review assesses the outcomes of
   the project in the efficacy section, since the stated objectives primarily measure the output level performance.


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Kabeli Transmission Project (P112893)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                           PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   Component 1: Kabeli Corridor 132 kV Transmission Line (Appraisal cost: US$31.56 million, Actual
   cost: US$15.97 million)
   This component included construction of a 90-kilometer 132 kV double circuit transmission line from the
   Damak substation to the Kabeli substation including an erection of approximately 300 towers and four
   substations. The International Development Association (IDA) funded three substations (Amarpur, Phidim,
   Ilam) and the Government of Nepal funded one substation (Damak). The component also provided
   technical assistance for facilitating project implementation (PAD, p.7 and p. 32, and Financing Agreement,
   p. 14).

   Component 2: Community-based Rural Electrification-Grid Extension (Appraisal cost: US$5.71
   million, Actual cost: US$7.44 million)
   This component included a grid extension to the unelectrified communities located within 2.5 kilometers of
   either side of the constructed transmission line under Component 1. Activities were to finance and
   construct 11 kV distribution lines, 400/230 V distribution lines, distribution transformers, and associated
   engineering services and technical assistance (PAD, p. 7 and p. 33).

   Component 3: Rural Enhanced Energy Services (Appraisal cost: US$2.32 million, Actual cost: US$2.20
   million)
   This component included off-grid rural electrification of communities where the grid extension was not a
   feasible option. Activities included off-grid electrification through a pilot village micro-hydro scheme which
   would be connected to the grid; solar systems for home and institutions (schools and health posts); and
   improved cooking fuel through biogas applications. (PAD, p. 7 and p. 34)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

   Project Cost: The estimated project cost was US$47.68 million. The actual cost was US$29.61 million
   (ICR, p. 18).




                                                                                                               Page 2 of 16
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        NP: Kabeli Transmission Project (P112893)



     Financing: The appraisal estimated that the IDA would finance a US$27.4 million loan and a US$10.60
     million grant. The actual disbursement of the loan and grant was US$19.97 million and US$5.6 million
     respectively (ICR, p. 18).

     Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was expected to contribute US$7.75 million at appraisal. The
     actual contribution was US$6.2 million (ICR, p. 18).

     Dates: The project was approved on May 10, 2011 and became effective on September 21, 2011. The
     project underwent two restructurings. The first restructuring was made on March 2015 to extend the
     project period by 18 months to compensate for the implementation delay. The second restructuring
     occurred in April 2016 to reallocate US$3.08 million from Component 1 to Component 2 to fill the
     expected financing gap of Component 2. (ICR, p. 3 and p. 20). The project was closed on December 31,
     2016.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a.   Relevance of Objectives


     Alignment with strategy: The objective of the project was tightly aligned with the bank's strategy. The
     Country Partnership Strategy (FY14-18) focused on increasing economic growth and competitiveness for
     which measures included an increase in electricity supply (CPS, p. 15). The Country Partnership
     Framework (FY19-23) also set out the priority on private sector-led jobs and growth for which improved
     power generation capacity and access to electricity were two of the main outcomes (CPF, p. 14).

     Country context: Improving power supply has been the major issue of the development in Nepal, which
     was fully consistent with the objective of the project. At appraisal, 88 percent of the country's total primary
     energy demand was dependent on traditional forms of energy and over half of the population did not have
     access to reliable sources of electricity (PAD, p. 1). A national energy crisis in 2008 exacerbated the
     situation, prompting the Government of Nepal to formulate the Electricity Crisis Management Action Plan.
     The Plan put a priority on the development of the Kabeli Transmission Corridor to facilitate the development
     of new hydropower projects, which required an increase in transmission capacity to evacuate their power to
     the integrated national power system. (PAD, para. 27). At closing, the Government of Nepal maintained its
     focus on increasing electricity supply and its priority on the Kabeli Corridor. A Government's concept paper
     on National Energy Crisis Mitigation and Electricity Development Decade published in 2016 committed to
     advancing the Kabeli Corridor development (ICR, p. 12). Throughout the project life, the project objective
     was aligned with the country and sector context.

     Previous sector experience: The project was realistically designed based on experience and lessons
     learned from an earlier project, Power Development Project (P043311). In this project, the Bank supported
     to develop Nepal's hydropower potential to help meet electricity demand; to improve access of rural areas
     to electricity services; and to promote private participation in the power sector. The Bank identified several

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            NP: Kabeli Transmission Project (P112893)



        lessons: acceleration of procurement through advance procurement, contract management by assigning an
        Owner’s Engineer so that an Implementing Agency would be able to monitor a project effectively; multi-
        sectoral capacity in the project team; and benefit sharing of the power development around the project area
        such as an offering of an additional rural electrification program. All the lessons were incorporated into the
        project design (PAD, p. 7-8. ICR, para. 14).

        In summary, the objectives of the project were fully aligned with the Bank's strategy and the country
        context. Relevance is rated high.



        Rating
        High

   b.   Relevance of Design


        The theory of change of the project was based on two main activities: one aimed at increasing transmission
        capacity and another aimed at improving access to electricity and energy sources along the Kabeli corridor.
        For the former objective, the project would construct a 90 km 132 kV transmission line, evacuating power
        that would be generated by the Independent Power Producers (IPPs). An underlying assumption was that
        IPPs would construct the hydropower stations and would use the transmission line. For the latter objective,
        the project would support on- and off-grid rural electrification as well as improved cooking fuels. Another
        assumption was that people in the benefitted areas would change their behavior to substitute a new source
        of energy for their conventional energy.

        The design entailed three shortcomings. First, the outcome was inadequately stated. As the ICR itself
        indicates, the outcome should be the evacuation of power instead of an increase in transmission capacity.
        Second, the outcome indicator of the second objective - to provide access to electricity and cooking fuel to
        communities in the area of the Kabeli 132 kV transmission line – did not capture both on-grid and off-grid
        electrification. Third, Component 3 had inconsistent input-intermediate outcome relationship. The
        intermediate outcome was the increased percentage of off-grid rural electrification schemes. But the inputs
        in Component 3 included not only electrification schemes but also an improved source of energy such as
        improved cooking fuel. To that extent. the results framework did not reflect appropriate causality and
        attribution.



        Rating
        Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


                                                                                                          Page 4 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NP: Kabeli Transmission Project (P112893)




Objective 1
Objective

To support the addition of transmission capacity to the Recipient’s integrated power system.

Rationale

Theory of Change:

Theory of Change of Project Development Objective (PDO) 1 was to increase transmission capacity up to
150 MW along the Kabeli corridor, by constructing the electricity transmission line. The ICR pointed out that
the outcome should have been evacuation of power from hydropower plants along the corridor (ICR, para.
26). This was because increased transmission capacity would be operationalized if power from IPPs would
flow on the transmission line.

IEG agrees with the statement, but notes that the causality of the outcome could be further strengthened.
The project constructs the transmission line to evacuate power to the integrated power system, which
eventually flows into those in demand for power. In other words, the shortage of power compelled the
Government to incrementally increase the power supply through IPPs and transmission line. Hence, the
outcome is restated as “to meet the demand of IPPs along the Kabeli corridor for evacuating their aggregate
power generation to electricity consumers, by increasing the transmission capacity.” IEG evaluates efficacy
of PDO 1 with the restated outcome since the objective in the ICR was not properly articulated.

Outputs


  •  Stringing of the transmission line was completed up to 64 km out of 90 km (71 percent).
  • Tower foundation was completed for 252 points out of 258 (98 percent).
  • Tower installation was completed for 235 points out of 258 (91 percent).
  • Construction of four substations which included one substation financed by the Government of Nepal
  was fully completed.
  • Through these activities, the transmission line equipped with 200 MW transmission capacity was
  completed (ICR, para. 26).
  • The task team leader (TTL) informed IEG that the likelihood of completing the remaining works was high.
  90 percent of supplies for civil works were procured by the Bank’s funding before its closure. The
  contractor is the same as for the Bank’s project and has completed almost all civil works. The remaining
  financing, approximately US$ 1.5 million, should be financed by the implementing agency, but this is not a
  substantial budget for the Nepal Electricity Authority (NEA) given the current financial statement. Also,
  there has been intense pressure from the IPPs to complete the stringing, prompting NEA to act on the
  remaining section.




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            NP: Kabeli Transmission Project (P112893)



    Outcome

    The project was able to evacuate 71 MW of power generated by the IPPs along the Kabeli corridor against
    the target of 150 MW. The ICR indicated the likelihood of power generation by the IPPs amounting to a
    combined generation capacity of 173 MW by 2022 (ICR, para. 43), which would flow into the transmission
    line under the project. However, IEG considered this as optimistic. Table 9 of the ICR presented the latest
    estimate of the generation capacity in each hydropower project. This table showed that four projects, with a
    combined capacity of 102 MW (58.4 percent of total capacity of the Kabeli corridor), are still under
    construction. The average capacity of the remaining hydropower projects is 2.5 times larger than that of the
    completed projects (10.1 MW for the completed projects, 25.5 MW for the on-going projects on average).
    The large volume of the remaining works and the comparatively larger projects may involve more complex
    and unforeseeable conditions, such as environmental and social considerations, contract management
    issues, and natural and geological constraints. IEG was not provided adequate and convincing evidence that
    these remaining works would be completed as estimated by the ICR. Hence, the likelihood of meeting the
    demand of IPPs is still in question.

    At a higher level of the outcome to respond to the shortage of power supply, it was recognized, according to
    the IEG’s query to the task team and IEG’s own analysis, that the project would have contributed to reducing
    the national power demand and supply gap. The national power demand has continued to grow at a rate of 7
    percent from 2009 to 2018, and the demand and supply gap had also widened at a rate of 8 percent until the
    project was completed in 2016. After the completion of the project, it contributed to 3.7 percent of the
    national demand, raising its proportion to 4.7 percent in 2018 in accordance with the increasing power
    generation around the Kabeli corridor (52 MW in 2016 and 71 MW in 2018). As a result, the demand and
    supply gap has started to decrease after 2016. Given the limitations of data, it is not feasible to directly
    attribute the project outcome to specific power demand centers at the national level, but it was at least
    accurate to say that the project had responded to the shortages in power supply.

    Counterfactual

    In the absence of the project, the existing IPPs would not be able to evacuate power. Unavailability of the
    transmission line might have caused a problem in the Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) with the IPPs,
    which would eventually require the Government to pay a compensation or any other required fees specified
    in the PPAs. Also, in light of consumers who were the eventual beneficiaries, they were benefitted by
    reducing the cost of power purchases. Consumers, in the absence of the project, would have purchased
    more expensive power such as diesel generation.

    Given the partial achievement of the outcome, the efficacy of achieving the project’s first objective is rated
    modest.


    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


                                                                                                         Page 6 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NP: Kabeli Transmission Project (P112893)




Objective 2
Objective

To provide access to electricity and cooking fuel to communities in the area of the Kabeli 132 kV
transmission line.

Rationale

Theory of Change:

The theory of change for PDO 2 was to extend the grid and off-grid rural electrification as well as to provide
improved cooking fuels, which would lead to improving energy access around the Kabeli 132 kV
transmission line. The instruments for electrification were 11 kV and 400 Volt distribution lines, micro-hydro,
toilet attached biogas applications for cooking fuel, solar systems for both home and institutions such as
schools and hospitals. The ICR made a valid argument that the project outcome indicator only measured off-
grid energy services and did not measure the on-grid electricity (ICR, para. 26). IEG agreed with this,
however, it also considered that PDO 2 should have been expressed in terms of outcome level performance.
Improving access to electricity and providing cooking fuel were the outputs directly derived from the project
interventions. Given the causal links to a higher objective, this PDO should have been restated as “the
improvement of a quality of life in rural areas along the Kabeli corridor through improved on-grid and off-grid
electricity access and energy sources.” Like PDO 1, the IEG assessed the efficacy of PDO 2 with the
restated outcome.

Outputs


  • No households were connected to the grid through 11 kV distribution lines in Panchthar and Ilan Districts
  against the target of 5,200 households.
  • The planned 250 kW micro-hydro schemes were not implemented. Instead, the project constructed the
  11 kV mini grid based on the close consultation with the communities who preferred the grid connection.
  This change was not reflected in the results framework. For a reference, the anticipated electrification by
  micro-hydro schemes, which intended to install the capacity of 250 kW to 2,000 households in 14
  communities in Ilam and Panchthar districts, was partially met by the introduction of the 11 kV mini-grid
  which served 8 communities in Taplejung District.
  • The project successfully installed 230 toilet attached biogas applications for cooking fuel against the
  target of 200 households.
  • 369 solar home systems were installed, exceeding the target of 300 installations.
  • Institutional level solar power systems were introduced to 16 institutions (14 schools and 1 health post).
  Exceeded the target of 15 institutions.


Outcome



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 16
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               NP: Kabeli Transmission Project (P112893)



    For the on-grid electricity services, the achievement of the project was negligible as the 11 kV distribution
    lines were dropped from the project. The distribution lines are currently covered by another IDA financed
    project, Grid Solar Energy Efficiency Project (P146344), yet no tangible evidence is observed about the
    likelihood of completing the lines. For the off-grid electricity services, the project accomplished the
    connection of 47 communities against the target of 25 communities. For improved energy sources, the
    project installed the toilet attached biogas for cooking fuels, which exceeded the target. As a result, the
    project partially achieved the improvement of the quality of life in the project area.

    Counterfactual

    In the absence of the project, the local communities had to continue to use the traditional energy such as
    diesel and wood. This would have exacerbated the pressure on household incomes as they would have had
    to pay the higher cost for energy use while emitting more carbon dioxide. It was likely that those in the 47
    communities were benefitted by the project in terms of improving their quality of life.

    In summary, considering the partial achievements for on- and off-grid electrification and provision of
    improved energy sources, the project’s efficacy in achieving PDO 2 was rated modest.


    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Efficiency


    Economic analysis: The project calculated both Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and Financial Rate of
    Return (FRR) at the appraisal and ICR stages. The original estimate of ERR for the transmission line was 38
    percent, while the ICR's ERR at closing was 60 percent. Both analyses used the same assumptions with
    some variations. The economic cost, which excluded any customs, duties, and taxes, was calculated based
    on the latest available construction cost for (i) the transmission line and substations (appraisal: US$ 30.3
    million, ICR: US$15.47 million for the completed and remaining transmission line works); (ii) hydropower
    plants (appraisal: US$ 141 million for 5 hydropower projects with 73.5 MW, ICR: US$ 341 million for 11
    hydropower projects with 173 MW); and (iii) O&M cost (1.5 percent for the transmission line and 5.0 percent
    for the hydropower plants, applicable to both appraisal and ICR). The benefit was calculated based on the
    avoided diesel generation cost by the introduction of the hydropower plants (appraisal: US$0.20 per kWh,
    ICR: US$0.25 per kWh). Both applied a 10 percent discount rate and a 25-year project life. The significant
    increase in ERR was explained by (i) the benefits from the increased number of hydropower plants offset the
    increase in the cost of hydropower construction; (ii) the decrease in the construction cost of transmission line;
    and (iii) the increased avoided cost.



                                                                                                         Page 8 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Kabeli Transmission Project (P112893)



Concerning the FRR, the appraisal estimated equity IRR at 22.2 percent with an assumption that debt and
equity would be financed by 70:30. The ICR highlighted that the review should apply FRR instead of equity
IRR. Equity IRR is used when the private sector is involved in the operation of the infrastructure, but there is
no plan for the private sector to participate and operate this transmission line. In fact, the source of financing
to the NEA was 100 percent equity. The ICR recalculated FRR at the time of appraisal as it was not given in
the PAD, which showed 12.96 percent, while the FRR at closing was 26.0 percent. The increase of the
financial return was attributed primarily to the increased volume of power selling.

Aspects of design and implementation: At the project’s design stage, the critical assumption of the project
was the estimated total generation capacity. The estimated capacity was 73.5 MW by 2015 and 140 MW by
2023 (PAD, para 20 and 61), which were proved to be more or less valid. The actual installed capacity was
52 MW at project closing in 2016, rising to 71 MW in 2018, and the total installed capacity is now expected to
be 173 MW by 2022 (ICR, para. 43). In spite of the realistic estimation, the project design had some shortfalls
in design and implementation. As being described above, the theory of change and the results framework
involved deficiencies in their outcome setting and indicators. The complicated institutional arrangements
required close coordination among the NEA, Community Rural Electrification Department (CRED), and
Alternative Energy Promotion Center (AEPC), which resulted in prolonged decision-making, slow project
implementation, and extension of the project. During the project implementation, it should be noted that the
project made a laudable effort to better manage external relations. NEA assigned Public Relation Officers for
better communication among the Project Management Unit, contractors, and the local community. The
Implementing Agencies (IAs) managed the communities’ expectations by replacing the idea of installing micro
hydro schemes with mini-grid extension. Nevertheless, the overall project implementation was very slow
because of the issues around the scant inter-agency coordination. It was a fact that the earthquake in April
2015 suspended the project at least for five months, however most of the inefficiency was derived from the
internal issues in the IAs’ project management and the Bank’s supervision.

In summary, although the project sufficiently achieved economic efficiency, it faced many difficulties in
efficiently managing the project. Overall, the project’s efficiency is rated modest.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                    Rate
                                                          Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                    Available?
                                                                                     66.19
Appraisal                                                38.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                     53.93
ICR Estimate                                             60.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NP: Kabeli Transmission Project (P112893)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


The outcome of the project is rated moderately unsatisfactory, concurring the ICR’s overall outcome rating.
Relevance of the objective is high because the project highly aligned with the country context and bank
strategy. Nepal has faced with the shortage of electricity supply, hindering sustainable economic and social
development. The Government of Nepal has pursued a stable electricity supply through the development of the
Integrated Nepal Power System. The Bank's CPS and CPF consistently prioritized the development of the
energy sector to bolster private sector development and economic growth. Relevance of design is modest
given the major shortcomings in theory of change and the results framework. Efficacy is modest since two
PDOs did not achieve, or only partially achieved, the intended results. Efficiency is modest given the limited
design and implementation efficiency.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating


Technical and Operational Risks: There would be relatively limited risk in completing the remaining works of
the transmission line. After the project closure in December 2016, there was substantial progress by the NEA –
the completion rate of tower foundation works increased by 17 percentage points, that of tower installation
increased by 26 percentage points, and that of stringing increased by 30 percentage points. As stated in the
outputs of PDO 1, the progress has been significant and no major risks are observed. On the other hand, the
off-grid electricity activity may face technical difficulty, particularly on the operation and maintenance of the 11
kV mini-grid (ICR, para. 36).

Financial Risks: The financial risk would not be substantial. A concern may arise in the remaining works of the
transmission line, but the additional explanation by the task team was convincing that NEA had already
procured goods and equipment for the transmission line by using Bank funds before its closure, which
accounted for 90 percent of the contract. Given the progress of the works, the financial risks would be minimal.
For Component 3, the AEPC acquired the supplementary budget (US$300,000) for the procurement and
installation of the control system of the mini-grid, and no procurement and construction remained. But it is still
uncertain how the AEPC procures the budget to conduct training on O&M of the mini-grid and to provide
remaining social safeguard packages such as non-formal education program and resettlement and
rehabilitation assistance to residential structures (ICR, para. 30).

Institutional Risks: The PMU of Component 1 still needs to complete the remaining works. The institutional
risk of Component 1 is low. Also, since the major works under Component 3 were completed and the installed

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Kabeli Transmission Project (P112893)



equipment and facilities are maintained by the communities, which have been performing well so far, there is no
emerging issue on institutional risk.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
    Modest




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  The project properly estimated the capacity and power generated by the hydropower plants around the
  project area, which was the critical assumption for successful implementation of the project. Also, the
  quality of the project design incorporated sector experience at the Bank. The lessons were properly applied
  in project design, for example, advance procurement with International Competitiveness Bidding, contract
  management by assigning the Owner's Engineer, and benefit-sharing of power supply for both the on- and
  off-grid areas. However, the institutional arrangements should have been more streamlined since it
  required a lot of communication and coordination between different institutions. Since the earlier project
  showed that the institutions were weak in coordinating and bringing coordinated decisions, the institutional
  arrangement could have been organized in a different way.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  The Bank supervised the project through the periodic review missions. Although this contributed to
  advancing various elements of the project (project implementation, fiduciary management, procurement
  actions, and safeguards compliance), the Bank should have instituted stronger supervision mechanisms.
  The ICR reiterated the institutional complexities of the Government and IAs such as lengthy and complex
  decision-making, limited communication within and across the IAs, and cumbersome land valuation and
  compensation processes. More qualified and robust supervision such as regular meetings between the
  Bank and the IAs and Mid-Term Reviews could have unpacked such complexities or at least established an
  action plan with due dates. Also, the project did not improve the results framework despite a flaw in the
  articulation of its objective and a change of the activities under Component 3.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Kabeli Transmission Project (P112893)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

9. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance

  The Government showed strong commitment through policy and budgetary actions. Despite the slow
  progress of the project, the Government continuously prioritized the project in its policy paper throughout
  the project period. The Government also disbursed 80 percent (US$7.75 million) of the estimated
  governmental expenditure, which accounted for over 16 percent of the total project cost. However, the
  Government lacked active engagement in directing the IAs to expedite the project. Inter-governmental
  issues such as access to forestry areas managed by the Department of Forest could have been resolved
  by the government’s active involvement. Also, the Government should have played a role in resolving the
  land valuation and compensation issue in an earlier stage of the project, which was the cause of the
  delay at the initial stage of the project.


  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance

  The NEA, an Implementing Agency for Component 1 and 2, showed the ownership of Component 1 but
  was more limited in executing Component 2. Given the strategic importance of Component 1, the NEA
  was actively engaged in the project through procurement, safeguards implementation, and project
  execution. But for Component 2, the IAs’ engagement was partial, which were seen in a frequent
  turnover of staff and shortage in the number of PMU staff. Also, the lack of interdepartmental
  coordination between PMU and CRED hampered the achievement of outputs of Component 2.

  In contrast, the AEPC committed to executing the activities of Component 3. AEPC’s involvement was
  demonstrated by limited staff turnover, a streamlined decision-making process, and proactive problem-
  solving. With this high level of ownership, Component 3 successfully achieved its outputs.

  On balance, taking into consideration the relative performance of NEA and AEPC, the IAs’ performance
  is rated moderately unsatisfactory.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Kabeli Transmission Project (P112893)



   Moderately Unsatisfactory



10. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The PAD designed the M&E to require periodic implementation progress reports to be prepared by the NEA
  and the AEPC, which would describe project progress, scheduling, contract status, institutional components,
  and implementation of the Environmental Management Plan and Resettlement Action Plan. In addition, the
  annual reports prepared by the respective IAs would be the resources for the Bank to monitor project progress.
  However, such instruments did not address issues embedded in project design, particularly the results
  framework. As the ICR described, the project encountered the discrepancies in the outcome indicators. As a
  result, the ineffective results framework led to the difficulties in measuring the project output and outcome in the
  course of project implementation.



b. M&E Implementation

  M&E implementation was conducted through the Implementation Status and Results Report (ISR) missions.
  The data collected during the ISR missions were used for updating the regular reports. However, the project
  could have established more robust M&E mechanisms. Such regular updates, in comparison to the detailed
  evaluation such as the Mid-Term Review, did not contribute to deciding the restructuring of the project nor
  addressing the critical issues promptly. Also, the project could have improved the results framework during its
  implementation as mentioned earlier. The timely update of the results framework would have enabled project
  stakeholders to become more engaged with achieving the outcome.



c. M&E Utilization

  There was limited utilization of M&E as well as the results framework. The project had updated data through
  the ISR missions, but it was not substantial enough to operationalize the M&E system. A more regular M&E
  utilization could have expedited project implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

11. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Kabeli Transmission Project (P112893)




  The project was classified as Environmental Category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies on
  Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), Involuntary Resettlement
  (OP/BP 4.12), and Forests (OP/BP 4.36).

  The project IAs prepared the Environment Management Plan and implemented a set of mitigation measures
  including the compensatory plantation of 97,800 trees, training on Non-Timber Forest Product and
  biodiversity conservation and awareness program, and protection of towers from landslide/flood risks. In
  contrast, social safeguards were partially implemented. 55 percent of compensation for the Project Affected
  Families (PAFs) was paid, the breakdown of which was 82 percent (188 PAFs out of 228 PAFs) for tower
  pads; 50 percent (41 PAFs out of 82 PAFs) for structures; and 50 percent (673 PAFs out of 1,339 PAFs) for
  easement fee of Rights-of-Way (RoW). Some other social safeguards were also not completed yet, which
  included reconstruction of community schools that had been located within RoW of the transmission line
  (expected to be completed by end of December 2018); and the resettlement and rehabilitation assistance to
  residential structures’ owners and non-titleholders. The project IAs have committed to completing the
  pending safeguard activities through an external monitor hired by the project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial Management

  There were issues in financial management until mid-2014 according to the ICR. The issues identified in the
  ICR were the late submission of audit reports with limited quality in accounting, asset management, and
  internal controls; the deficiencies in outstanding advances/inter-unit balances; lack of verification of project
  assets; and AEPC’s capacity to develop an expenditure report at the district level. However, such issue was
  resolved after late 2014 through the regular monitoring by the Bank.

  Procurement

  According to the ICR, the project complied the Bank’s procurement procedures. The Bank’s regular
  procurement clinics contributed to building the IA’s procurement capacity. However, the project experienced
  delays in procurement primarily caused by slow decision making by the IAs.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

  The project’s interventions may have contributed to the communities’ self-help due to the need for additional
  water and for mobilizing own financial resources to meet water requirements of biogas plants (ICR, para.
  47), although there was no comparison or counterfactual case to validate these.


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 16
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         NP: Kabeli Transmission Project (P112893)




d. Other
   ---



12. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately            Moderately
Outcome                                                                           ---
                                  Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  Technical, financial and
Risk to Development                                                               institutional risks appear low in
                                  High                  Modest
Outcome                                                                           light of the construction
                                                                                  progress to date.
                                  Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                  ---
                                  Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                  Moderately            Moderately
Borrower Performance                                                              ---
                                  Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of ICR                                          Substantial               ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

13. Lessons


1. A robust monitoring and evaluating system is essential in a country where the Implementing
Agency’s capacity is limited. The project was built upon lessons informed by an earlier project in the country
and equipped with some preventive measures to avoid project implementation failure. Nevertheless, the project
was not implemented efficiently and effectively. One of the reasons was the lack of a robust monitoring and
evaluation system. Due to the complexities and limited capacity of the IAs, there were a lot of points where the
project was stalled. A robust M&E system, such as regular meetings with a periodic review of indicators and
action plans, could have been a platform for project stakeholders to gather and change its project management
approach.


2. Adaptability of the project is the key to mobilizing citizen engagement. Unlike Component 1 and
Component 2, Component 3 showed significant success in the project. One of the reasons could be the close
dialogue with the beneficiaries and adaptation of the project. The beneficiaries continuously requested grid

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NP: Kabeli Transmission Project (P112893)



electricity instead of micro-hydro schemes. This was not anticipated in the project design, but close dialogue
with citizens discovered the genuine needs of the beneficiaries and the project effectively adjusted its activities
by applying a standard design of the 11 kV mini-grid to squeeze in the time for construction. Even though this
alternative solution was not able to meet the output indicator, the satisfaction level of the beneficiaries was
sufficient as the project efficiently managed the citizen’s expectations.

3. A periodic review of the Theory of Change and the results framework is critical to bring stakeholders
in an appropriate direction. A lack of causal relationship in theory of change of the project negatively
influenced project implementation. It could be assumed that the lack of on-grid rural electrification indicator
under Component 2 resulted in dropping this activity, which was transferred to another project. An effective
theory of change and valid results framework could have clarified the causal relationships of the project, and
the consequences might have been different.




14. Assessment Recommended?

No

15. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR was clearly written and provided a candid review of the project’s performance. The critical review of
the project’s design, implementation, and supervision was to the point, based on adequate evidence, and
provided compelling explanations. Although the ICR should have strictly assessed the efficacy section by
differentiating outcome and outputs, it largely complied with the OPCS guidelines for ICR preparation.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 16
