          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihoods (P088520)



                                                                                       Report Number : ICRR0021425

   1. Project Data



     Project ID                                   Project Name
     P088520                                      IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihoods

     Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
     India                                        Environment & Natural Resources


     L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
     IDA-49430                                    31-Mar-2018                                           8,906,927.80

     Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
     17-May-2011                                  31-Mar-2018

                                                  IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

     Original Commitment                              15,360,000.00                                               0.00

     Revised Commitment                               15,360,000.00                                               0.00

     Actual                                            3,170,222.24                                               0.00




     Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
     Katharina Ferl               Ridley Nelson                 Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)


PHPROJECTDATATBL



     Project ID                                   Project Name
     P088598                                      IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihoods ( P088598 )




     L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                   Total Project Cost (USD)
     TF-96651                                    31-Mar-2018                                            5,960,589.32



                                                                                                         Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihoods (P088520)




 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 17-May-2011                                31-Mar-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                                Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                        0.00                                             8,140,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                         0.00                                             5,960,589.32

 Actual                                                     0.00                                             5,960,589.32




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 5) the objective of the project was “to develop and
   promote new models of conservation at the landscape scale through enhanced capacity and institution
   building for mainstreaming biodiversity conservation outcomes”. The objective as stated in the Financing
   Agreement of June 14, 2011 (p. 4) only differed slightly by using landscape “level” instead of “scale”.
   The Project Global Environmental Objective is to enhance the conservation of globally significant biodiversity
   and ensure its long-term sustainability by promoting appropriate conservation practices in biodiversity-rich
   landscapes.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                          PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:
   Component 1: Demonstration of Landscape Conservation Approaches in Two Pilot Sites (appraisal
   estimate US$13.11 million of which US$3.12 million from Global Environmental Facility (GEF) and
   US$6.73 million from the International Development Agency (IDA), actual US$3.43 million): This
   component was to finance the development of tools, techniques, knowledge and skills towards improved
   conservation and rural livelihoods outcomes in the Little Rann of Kutch in Gujarat and Askot in
   Uttarakhand. These landscapes were to include protected areas, biological corridors, and high-value
   conservation sites in production landscapes. This component was to include activities such as participatory
   ecological and social mapping to identify areas of high biodiversity value and resource dependencies and
   threats, improved management of biodiversity rich areas within and outside the protected areas in the
   landscape, and mainstreaming of biodiversity considerations in production areas within the

                                                                                                              Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihoods (P088520)



  landscapes. Furthermore, activities such as the development of common agreement and frameworks for
  the coordination among stakeholders, and technical assistance and training to facilitate the integration of
  biodiversity considerations in development plans of sectoral line agencies through dialogue and
  collaboration with sectoral agencies were to be financed. Also, this component was to support the
  development and implementation of livelihood strategies to enhance local community benefits from
  sustainable management of natural resources linked to conservation.
  Component 2: Strengthening knowledge management and national capacity for landscape
  conservation (appraisal estimate US$6.22 million, of which US$2.49 million from GEF and US$2.28
  million from IDA, actual US$2.20 million): This component was to finance support to improve knowledge
  and capacity building based on learning and experience from the two demonstration landscapes (in
  Component 1) and other local conservation models. Two sub-components were to support field learning
  centers and a national capacity-building program which was to draw on and distil good practices from the
  two pilot sites (in Component 1) and the three field learning centers as well as other successful
  conservation initiatives in the country.
  Component 3: Scaling up and replication of successful models of conservation in additional
  landscape sites (appraisal estimate US$7.57 million of which US$2.06 million from GEF and
  US$3.28 million from IDA, actual US$3.10 million): This component was to finance further testing and
  replication of landscape conservation approaches to two additional high biodiversity landscapes from the
  third year onwards with project financing.
  Component 4: National Coordination for Landscape Conservation (appraisal estimate US$4.12
  million, of which GEF US$0.48 million from GEF and IDA US$3.06 million from IDA, actual US$0.24
  million): This component was to finance the coordination for landscape conservation at the Ministry of
  Environment and Forests (MOEF). Activities to be financed were to include the establishment of a
  Management Information System (MIS) for project and landscape monitoring, impact evaluation, and
  limited operational and technical support to enable MOEF to coordinate and administer the implementation
  of project activities and facilitate replication elsewhere in India. This component was also to support
  preparation activities for the two additional landscape sites to be supported under Component 3 as well as
  the establishment of a national communication system for the project, policy and legal studies relating to
  conservation, impact assessment and review, and third-party monitoring of the project.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$31 million. Actual cost was US$8.51 million.
  Financing: The project was financed by a US$15.36 million IDA credit of which US$3.17 million was
  disbursed and a US$8.14 GEF Trust Fund of which US$5.96 million was disbursed.
  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$6.59 million and local communities were to
  contribute US$930,000. Both contributions did not materialize since at appraisal, the estimated
  contributions from borrower and local communities expected were in kind only.
  Dates: The project became effective on July 13, 2011. The Mid-Term Review was held as planned on
  February 27, 2015 and project closing was as planned on March 31, 2018.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihoods (P088520)



   3. Relevance of Objectives

       Rationale
       India is one of 12 mega-diversity countries in the world and accounts for approximately 10 percent of the
       world’s biodiversity. India’s biodiversity is critical for sustainable livelihoods. It is estimated that around 27
       percent of India’s population is dependent locally on forests for their subsistence and livelihoods, which they
       earn from fuelwood, fodder, poles, and a range of non-timber forest products. However, the country’s
       biodiversity is threatened by increased population pressure, overutilization of resources, and by sectoral
       planning and development which largely do not support conservation objectives. The government of India
       has established more than 500 protected areas (PAs). However, these PAs are often surrounded by other
       form of land use which often does not support conservation efforts. Therefore, in 2005, the Prime Minister’s
       Office established a task force which developed a set of conservation actions and emphasized the
       importance to include larger production systems surrounding PAs when addressing conservation and
       livelihood concerns.
       According to the Bank team (November 19, 2018) important lessons from the project informed the latest
       National Wildlife Action Plan (NWAP) 2017-2031.
       The objective of the project was in line with the Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (FY09-12) which aimed
       to ensure sustainable development by working for improving livelihoods in high biodiversity landscapes
       under its second pillar. Also, the objective of the project supported the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy
       (FY13-17) which focused in its engagement area “transformation” on bringing 500,000 hectares under
       enhanced biodiversity protected area management. The objective of the project is also in line with the
       Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework (FY18-22) which includes “resource efficient growth”
       as a focus area



       Rating
       Substantial

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To develop new models of conservation at the landscape scale through enhanced capacity and institution
     building for mainstreaming biodiversity conservation outcome:

    Rationale
    The project’s theory of change linked the development of protected area (PA) management plans, the
    preparation of village based micro-plans that included economic activities and biodiversity conservation, the
    development of national courses on landscapes, and government institutions receiving capacity building
    support with enhancing capacity and institution building for mainstreaming biodiversity conservation
    outcomes.


                                                                                                            Page 4 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihoods (P088520)



Note that this objective is to ‘develop new models of …’, Objective 2 is to “promote new models of …..”.
Outputs:

  • Four landscape conservation approaches were successfully adopted in two landscape sites. However,
  the ICR (p. 29) stated that the scale of implementation remained low and several project activities that
  would have contributed to a successful adoption were only partially implemented. Therefore, the target
  was only partially achieved.
  • 550,000 hectares of areas were brought under enhanced biodiversity protection, achieving the target of
  500,000 hectares. The ICR (p. 31) stated that the evidence for this indicator came from the published
  management plan, expenditure vouchers for habitat improvement works and population census reports.
  However, the ICR did not specify what the "enhancement" entailed.
  • The amount of forest areas which were brought under management plans increased from 300,000
  hectares in 2012 to 600,000 hectares in 2018, achieving the target.
  • Over 400 micro-plans with identified investments of about US$7 million were developed but actual
  investment fell significantly short of target (less than $3 million spent).
  • About 500 youth were trained in hospitality services and about 350 youths were gainfully employed for
  over a year.
  • Sustainable resource use practices including production and use of organic fertilizers, gravity-based
  storage and harvesting, sustainable forestry management practices were introduced.
  • Landscape management approaches were adopted in two additional sites with project funding,
  achieving the target of two additional sites.
  • Five staff were hired for the national coordination unit within the MOEF to actively supporting landscape
  approaches, not achieving the target of 11 staff. The ICR (p. 39) stated that some key positions such as
  communication expert was never appointed. This indicator contributed to both parts of the PDO.
  • Key project outputs were not completed on time compared against the implementation plan.
  Consolidated bi-annual progress reports were not submitted, updated procurement plans were not shared
  and uploaded to the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) platform and IUFR
  submission was generally delayed. Therefore, this indicator, which was to contribute to both parts of the
  PDO, was not achieved.


Outcomes:

  • Four new landscape approach-based models emerged including the decentralized planning and
  mainstreaming centric, the traditional institutions and local governance centric, the community participation
  and financial inclusion centric, and the convergence centric.
  • The amount of landscapes that were more effectively managed for conservation outcomes increased
  from 300,000 hectares in 2011 to 600,000 hectares 2018, achieving the target of 600,000 hectares. This
  indicator contributed to both parts of the PDO achieved.




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihoods (P088520)




    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     To promote new models of conservation at the landscape scale through enhanced capacity and institution
     building for mainstreaming biodiversity conservation outcome:

    Rationale
    Outputs:

        • An institutional and methodological framework was under consultation for finalization at the time of
        project closing. However, the framework has not been field tested and formally approved by the MOEFCC.
        Therefore, the target was only partially achieved.
        • Six government institutions (the Forest Departments of Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Gujarat, Tamil
        Nadu and Kerala, and the Wildlife Institute of India) were provided with capacity building to improve
        management of forest resources, fully achieving the target.
        • Landscape management approaches or specific elements of it were adopted in three additional sites
        and funded from the state government budget, achieving the target.
        • 1,000 key stakeholders from at least five national priority landscapes were trained in landscape
        conservation approaches, surpassing the target of 250 key stakeholders.
        • 15 new documents on good practices were prepared and knowledge dissemination events were
        sponsored, surpassing the target of ten documents.


    Outcomes:

        • The population of all key indicator species across all project landscapes showed stable and/or
        increasing trend. The project supported a census in 2014 which found that the wild ass population at LRK
        was estimated at 4,451 against the baseline of 3,863 in 2004. Therefore, the target was achieved.
        However, first the period from 2004 to 2014 was only covered by three theoretical years of project support
        and probably barely 2 years of practical support so the quoted change in population could have come
        before the project completed any significant intervention. Second, changes like this can be impacted by
        external variables such as rainfall. Therefore, there may be limited causation.
        • 550,000 hectares are reported to have been covered by strengthened management. However, the ICR
        (p. 34) stated that no Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT) score was undertaken so it was




                                                                                                       Page 6 of 14
                    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                    IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihoods (P088520)



                  not possible to estimate the percentage increase in management effectiveness as this indicator would
                  have required. Therefore, this indicator is considered only partially achieved.
                  • 10 percent of target user groups adopted alternate and/or sustainable resource use practices, not
                  achieving the target of 20 percent.
                  • 75 percent of targeted villages or user groups completed 400 micro-plans across the four project
                  landscapes. However, the implementation of micro-plans remained partial. Therefore, this indicator was
                  only partially achieved.
                  • A large part of the population are reported, qualitatively, to have benefited from non-cash incomes
                  through sustainable access and use of natural resources, agro-forestry, improved pastures etc. However,
                  real income was not measured and was only based on anecdotal evidence. Therefore, it is not clear to
                  what extend the target of at least 20 percent of targeted population was achieved.
                  • 50,000 hectares of new areas outside protected areas were managed as biodiversity friendly, achieving
                  the target of 50,000 hectares.
                  • documents. This indicator contributed to both parts of the PDO.




             Rating
      Modest
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale
The achievement of both objectives was Modest.




Overall Efficacy Rating                                               Primary reason
Modest                                                                Low achievement

     5. Efficiency

            Economic Efficiency:
            The PAD did not include a traditional economic analysis due to the lack of data to monetize benefits.
            Furthermore, the PAD stated (p. 69) that available methodology for quantifying biodiversity benefits of this
            project would result in estimates of relative weights for various benefits that would not be consistent with
            judgments by specialists. The PAD did not explain what it meant by "estimates of weights not being
            consistent with judgments by specialists".
            The ICR (p.13) estimated the Net Present Value (NPV) and Internal Rate of Return (IRR) for specific
            investment activities with measurable outputs. In terms of livelihood improvements only 40 percent of
            committed project funds were disbursed, and outcomes achieved were lower than expected. The ICR

                                                                                                                Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihoods (P088520)



estimated an IRR of around 14 percent. Based on projections for the next 10 years and applying a discount
rate of 12 percent for four investment activities including cash crops, honey production, revenue from park
entry fees and job placements following skill training, the ICR estimated the NPV at INR 3.03 crores (US$0.44
million). The ICR did not indicate the basis for the use of the 12% discount rate.
Furthermore, the ICR (p. 14) stated that a recent study in India estimated the monetary value of flow benefits
of 25 ecosystems services from six protected areas. The benefits ranged from INR 50,000 to INR 190,000
(US$725 to US$2,758) per hectare per year. The economic value of provisioning water to downstream
regions from Kanha Tiger Reserve was estimated at approximately INR 400 (US$58) per hectare per year.
The ICR used the Benefits Transfer Method to calculate benefits of investments to improve habitats and
Protected Area Management. Taking the low disbursement of 40 percent into account, water provisioning
services of about INR 1,600 (US$25) per hectare per year (a total economic value of INR 96 core or US$14
million) were estimated from protected areas within project landscapes. However, these estimates were not
included in the calculation of the NPV and IRR since actual valuation of flow of benefits was not estimated for
project sites.
Operational Efficiency:
During project implementation the project experienced delays in the release of funds and delays in
contracting staff for the PMU. Furthermore, the project experienced implementation delays due to low
financial management and procurement capacity. All these delays suggest inefficiency in the use of project
resources.
Given the modest IRR relative to the discount rate and the fact that it was only based on some of the
investments and given the significant implementation delays, the overall Efficiency is rated Modest.



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                     Rate
                                                         Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                     Available?
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome

Relevance of objective was Substantial given the importance of India’s biodiversity for sustainable livelihoods.
Achievement of both objectives and efficiency was Modest. The overall outcome rating was Moderately


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 14
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihoods (P088520)



Unsatisfactory. The project exhibited significant shortcomings in efficacy and efficiency and warranted early
restructuring.


a.    Outcome Rating
      Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MOEFCC) has funded the continuation of the project
as a central sector scheme and has allocated approximately US$2 million for the year 2018-2019 out of its own
budget. Also, the Ministry has issued an impact assessment to identify potential areas which require continuous
support by the government. The ICR (p. 27) reported that stakeholders are motivated to continue to build on
conservation-linked livelihood opportunities. Also, the government of Gujarat, has decided to replicate the
project.
However, the risks of slow budget transfer and disbursement in addition to limited technical and administrative
capacity persist, posing a threat to the sustainability of outcomes achieved under the project. Furthermore, the
Bank team (November 20,2018) stated that even though all project supported landscape societies want to
continue their activities, only some societies that had already existed before the project, and were co-opted by
the project, have a higher possibility of continuing as they have access to financing and technical resources.
The newly formed societies may find it challenging to arrange funds and technical resources, in absence of
project financing. This is primarily because resources to augment and establish these societies for operating
independently could not be found due to limited available funding from the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     The project design was informed through site specific studies and indicative plans for landscape. The
     objective of the project reflected the government’s priorities and was realistic. The Bank team conducted
     several multi-stakeholder consultative workshops, prepared investment plans for identified landscapes and
     complied with its fiduciary role and developed a Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP) and a
     Project Process Framework.
     Project preparation was extensive and lasted over seven years which resulted in a change and reduction in
     project scope and in implementing agency. Also, the ICR (p. 19) stated that even though the preparation
     phase was long, the readiness of the implementing agencies was low and the staff was not ready at the
     beginning of project implementation. Furthermore, the project design was overly complex, lacked an
     adequate Results Framework and did not plan for sufficient resources for project monitoring (see section
     9a for more details).
     The Bank team at appraisal identified relevant risks. The risk of the implementing agencies being new and
     widespread with limited financial management and procurement capacity was identified as High.


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihoods (P088520)



  The following risks were rated Substantial: i) strict interpretation of existing and proposed policies and laws
  relating to conservation hindering the promotion of local decision-making and participation in conservation
  action; ii) project benefits not being captured by intended beneficiaries due to lack of adequate measures
  of transparency and disclosure and absence of a grievance-handling system; iii) inadequate and inaccurate
  flow of information resulting in misconceptions about the project and hence leading to opposition by some
  civil society groups; iv) MOEF lacking capacity to coordinate and monitor project effectively and ensure
  timely fund flows to landscape and training sites. Mitigation measures were not adequate and there were
  several risks such as challenges to financial management and procurement, flow of funds and lack of
  capacity for project monitoring materialized resulting in implementation delays and shortcomings such as
  poor fiduciary oversight.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  According to the ICR (p. 26) the Bank team conducted ten implementation support missions and one mid-
  term review mission. Several interim technical missions on specific topics such as preparing the landscape
  atlas were also conducted. The Bank conducted an annual post-procurement review and findings were
  shared with the client in a report. Also, the Bank built capacity through conducting procurement trainings on
  a regular basis at the MOEFCC and implementing agencies. Furthermore, the Bank supported the
  implementing agencies in addressing complaints to improve internal controls and provided technical and
  operational advice to address implementation issues. The Bank raised the issue of insufficient budget and
  delayed release in tri-partite portfolio review meetings, aide memoires and implementation status reports. At
  the mid-term review and every mission afterwards, the Bank team suggested a project restructuring.
  However, the Bank was unsuccessful. This failure to achieve a substantial early restructuring was a
  significant weakness in both Bank and Borrower supervision and contributed directly to the weak
  implementation and monitoring.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The objectives of the project were clearly specified. However, the project’s theory of change and how outputs
  would lead to intended outcomes was not well reflected in the selected indicators in the Results Framework.
  Some of the indicators were not sufficiently well defined. For example, PDO Indicator 3 “Institutional and
  methodological framework and guidelines for landscape conservation approaches developed and tested in high

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihoods (P088520)



  biodiversity landscapes” aimed to measure two outputs at the same time, the development and test of
  framework and guidelines. Also, some indicators were not sufficiently specific and required interpretation
  instead of unit-based or target-based assessment, making it subjective. Furthermore, most indicators measure
  outputs than outcomes. According to the ICR, no comparators were selected during the preparation process of
  the Results Framework.
  According to the ICR (P. 23) the M&E design was not well-embedded institutionally.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 21) the M&E specialist was only working in the PMU for less than two years. After
  2015, the position remained empty until project closing. Also, the PMU did not track any results or outcomes,
  a M&E system was not implemented, and no progress report was produced throughout project
  implementation. Monitoring activities only included monitoring the achievement of annual physical and
  financial targets for releasing grants to Implementing Agencies. The ICR (p. 24) stated that the external
  monitoring tool, Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT) was not used. Also, no mid-term and end-
  term evaluations by an independent third party to assess some of the social benefits due to project activities
  were not conducted. The Bank team assessed project implementation through field visit observations and
  conversations with project beneficiaries, implementing agency staff and other stakeholders. According to the
  ICR (p. 24) the Bank team recommended the revision of the Results Framework to assess project outcomes,
  however, the borrower did not agree to a project restructuring, leaving a weak Results Framework in place
  until project closing.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p. 24) stated that M&E was not used to inform decision making, to improve project performance, to
  inform investment decisions during in regards to the approvals of Annual Plans for Operations (APOs) since
  the Borrower did not conduct any systematic data collection.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
  (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management), OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous People), and
  OP/BP 4.36 (Forests). According to the ICR (paragraph 53) the project complied with all safeguard policies.
  According to the PAD (p. 19) An Environmental and Social Monitoring Framework (ESMF) and consultative
  framework was to ensure that environmental and social assessment and management and mitigation



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihoods (P088520)



  processes were to be incorporated into the entire landscape planning and management process from the
  village, landscape, state, and national levels.
  The Bank team (November 20, 2018) stated that given that the funded activities were small scale and
  geographically spread, the environmental and social risks were modest, and there were adequate
  provisions to address any potential impact. Each landscape society appointed a qualified ecologist and
  livelihood specialist, in addition to a few social mobilizers who monitored the investments and project
  activities. Other than site selection criteria for constructing small infrastructure, such as water trough for
  animals, minor connecting paths, etc. no major mitigation action was required to be undertaken. The project
  ensured good participation and social inclusion of women and other vulnerable communities.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement:
  According to the ICR (paragraph 44) the project experienced implementation challenges due to low fiduciary
  capacity. The project included a large amount of small value procurement activities across four landscapes and
  three field learning centers, putting a lot of pressure on the limited capacity of the PMU. The ICR also stated
  that the project experienced frequent changes of procurement focal points in the implementing agencies,
  inconsistencies in the use of standard bidding documents, poor record keeping, late payments to
  contractors/vendors, and slow administrative decision making, all resulting in implementation delays.
  According to the ICR (paragraph 53) the project complied with the Bank’s legal covenant.

  Financial Management:
  Due to low financial management capacity, the project faced several challenges. According to the ICR
  (paragraph 44) Interim Unaudited Financial Reports and annual audit reports were generally submitted late.
  With the exception of one year the Ministry of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change did not have an
  internal auditor which resulted in poor financial management oversight.
  According to the ICR (paragraph 55) the Bank team conducted trainings to build fiduciary capacity.
  The Bank team (November 20, 2018) stated that in general, no significant qualifications were given by the
  external auditors. The external audits at the landscape level were mostly in time. However, audits of the central
  ministry and that of the Wildlife Institute of India were generally delayed. Overall the delay happened as the
  central ministry had to consolidate the audit reports from all the implementing agencies.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other
   ---


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihoods (P088520)




11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately               Moderately
Outcome                                                                             ---
                                Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately               Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                    ---
                                Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Negligible               Negligible                 ---
Quality of ICR                                           Substantial                ---

12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 27-28) provided several lessons learned which were adapted by IEG:

  • Bank teams working with entities at different institutional levels in a pilot project need to identify a
  strong champion at each entity to ensure ownership for implementation. In case of weak leadership, it
  is critical to analyze institutional mandates and technical and administrative capacities to ensure successful
  project implementation. This project lacked ownership and commitment by the Project Implementation Unit
  (PMU) and Implementing Agencies resulting in weak implementation and significant delays. It needed a
  restructuring.
  • Sound data derived from benefit assessments and impact analysis is critical for providing evidence
  to guide policy decisions on biodiversity conservation. In this project, the positive results of beneficiary
  engagement and the prospect of potential gains for the communities made the government of Gujarat decide
  to replicate the project out of its own budget.
  • In a landscape conservation project with a vision for outcomes beneficial to a wide range of
  stakeholders, building partnerships with stakeholders from different sectors, including particularly
  technical agencies, is important.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a good overview of project preparation and implementation. Also, the ICR was candid,
internally consistent, and concise. A shortcoming of the ICR is that it did not provide sufficient information on


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihoods (P088520)



how the triggered safeguard policies were managed or mitigated. More information about the issue of the Bank
proposed, but never agreed, restructuring would have filled a gap in the performance narrative.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                               Page 14 of 14
