     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AF: ARTF-Public Fin. Mgmt. Reform II (P120427)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0021292

1. Project Data



 Project ID                           Project Name
 P120427                              AF: ARTF-Public Fin. Mgmt. Reform II

 Country                              Practice Area(Lead)                          Additional Financing
 Afghanistan                          Governance                                   P150632,P150632


 L/C/TF Number(s)                     Closing Date (Original)                      Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-10024                             31-Dec-2014                                               107,002,627.42

 Bank Approval Date                   Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Jun-2011                          31-Dec-2017

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           114,125,000.00                                  114,125,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            114,070,775.00                                  107,002,627.42

 Actual                                        109,209,939.31                                  107,002,627.42



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Robert Mark Lacey           Malathi S. Jayawickrama         IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   According to the Grant Agreement (p. 4), the project's objectives were to "strengthen the Recipient's public
   financial management (PFM) through effective procurement, treasury and audit structures and systems, in
   line with sound financial management standards of monitoring, reporting and control."

   At a 2016 restructuring and Additional Financing (AF) of US$ 41.13 million, the objective was changed to
   "further strengthen the efficiency and effectiveness of Afghanistan's procurement, treasury, and audit
   systems" (Project Paper, p. 14). At the time of this restructuring, US$ 68.72 million, or 62.9% of total Bank
   financing, had been disbursed. This Review treats the original objective, strengthening PFM, as equivalent to


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AF: ARTF-Public Fin. Mgmt. Reform II (P120427)



   the second part of the revised objective, to strengthen the effectiveness of the procurement, treasury, and
   audit systems. The revised objectives add efficiency. This Review therefore conducts a split rating, with
   the original objective as strengthening PFM/strengthening effectiveness, and the revised objectives as
   strengthening (a) effectiveness and (b) efficiency.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  27-Jan-2016
                                                           PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project initially contained four components:

   1. Procurement reform (appraisal: US$ 21.47 million; additional US$ 11.00 million at the AF; actual: US$
   32.46 million). This component was to support building procurement management capacity throughout
   government, building institutional capacity in the public sector (and the private sector where practical), and
   completing the legal and institutional framework for procurement. It contained three subcomponents, on
   procurement facilitation to assist the Afghanistan Reconstruction and Development Services (ARDS);
   capacity building for procurement institutions in line ministries and provinces; and institutional development
   for completing the legal framework.

   2. Financial management reform (appraisal, US$ 23.88 million; additional US$ 15.96 million at the AF;
   actual: US$ 39.84 million). This component was to build staff and institutional PFM capacity throughout
   government through support for training, systems development, and process renewal (not defined in the
   Project Paper or ICR, but commonly referring to management of change in practices and procedures). It
   contained four subcomponents, on treasury operations and systems development, human resources
   capacity development, development of a professional organization for accountants, and line ministry PFM
   assessments.

   3. Audit reform and performance (appraisal, US$ 24.70 million; additional US$ 9.57 million at the AF;
   actual: US$ 34.27 million). This component was to improve public sector governance through nine
   subcomponents grouped under Internal Audit and External Audit.

   4. Reform management (appraisal, US$ 2.95 million; additional US$ 0.77 million at the AF; actual: US$
   3.72 million). This component was to support monitoring and management of technical assistance and

                                                                                                               Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AF: ARTF-Public Fin. Mgmt. Reform II (P120427)



   human resources in the Ministry of Finance (MOF). Its subcomponents focused on strengthening
   monitoring and evaluation, strengthening the MOF Human Resources Management department, project
   executive management, and other institutional strengthening and capacity building.

   At the 2016 restructuring, a fifth component was added:

   5. Revenue mobilization (US$ 3.85 million at the AF; actual: US$ 3.84 million). This component supported
   activities related to the maintenance of computerized tax systems, the implementation of risk-based
   compliance, preparation for a value-added tax, and establishment of new organizational structures. It was
   added after United Kingdom Department for International Development support for revenue concluded in
   2015.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost and financing: The project was initially financed by an Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust
   Fund (ARTF) Grant of US$ 73 million. AF of US$ 41.13 million was approved in 2016 to scale up some
   existing activities, add the component on revenue mobilization, and act as a bridge to a planned follow-on
   project, bringing total planned financing to US$ 114.1 million. Actual total cost was US$ 109.21
   million. The difference between planned financing and actual disbursements was due to exchange rate
   fluctuations.

   Borrower contribution: No Recipient contribution was anticipated or made.

   Dates: The project underwent four restructurings. On September 1, 2014, the closing date was extended
   from the original December 31, 2014 to December 31, 2015, to allow for completion of activities. On
   December 19, 2015, the closing date was extended again to June 30, 2017, to prepare and implement
   activities under the AF. On January 27, 2016, AF was approved in the amount of US$ 41.13 million,
   and the project's objectives and some outcome targets were revised. In addition some indicators were
   modified to take into account the replacement of the ARDS with the National Procurement Authority
   (NPA), to eliminate reference to Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) methodology to
   focus more on the quality and scope of audit coverage, and to enhance results monitoring to reflect citizen
   engagement and gender issues. On April 19, 2017, the closing date was extended a final time to
   December 31, 2017, to accommodate preparation of the follow-on project.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale
  After decades of war and civil strife, building effective governance mechanisms that would provide security
  and services to citizens is key to Afghanistan's reconstruction effort. Despite progress in key areas including


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            AF: ARTF-Public Fin. Mgmt. Reform II (P120427)



       primary education, basic health services, irrigation rehabilitation, and rural development, the country
       remained extremely fragile at appraisal. Poverty and social indicators were among the lowest in the world.
       Government capacity was weak, and the implementation of reconstruction programs fell below
       expectations. In this context, strengthening PFM was seen a key to accelerate aid utilization, provide better
       and faster services to the Afghan people, and ensure transparency and accountability of public expenditure.

       Previous Bank-financed operations, together with those of other donors, had made significant progress in
       establishing a PFM system under the MOF. The legal framework governing PFM had been put in place, and
       according to PEFA ratings, public finances were (by and large) being used for their intended purposes as
       authorized by the budget. A December 2007 PEFA-based PFM performance assessment highlighted the
       need for improvement focused on PFM capacity outside the MOF, and internal and external audit. Given
       these previous operations and PEFA findings, this project's original objectives and planned activities, as well
       as its revised objectives, were appropriately ambitious and focused.

       Both the original and revised objectives were highly relevant to country strategy at appraisal, specifically a
       PFM Roadmap prepared by the government and shared at the Kabul Donor Conference in June 2010. This
       Roadmap, under the umbrella goal of ensuring efficient, transparent, and accountable use of public
       resources, outlined a decisive strategy to delegate responsibility for budget making, spending decisions, and
       procurement to line ministries and provinces. The revised objectives were intended to reflect the specific
       language of this Roadmap, and to be more specific and measurable than the original objectives. The revised
       objectives remained highly relevant to country and Bank strategy at closing. The government's strategic
       plan, prepared by MOF, proposed reforms to enhance efficiency in management of public resources and
       maintenance of standards for oversight and governance (ICR, p. 11). The World Bank Group's Country
       Partnership Framework at closing (2017-2020) contained a pillar on building strong and accountable
       institutions, and a specific objective on improving public financial management and fiscal self-reliance.




       Rating
       High
   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     Strengthen the Recipient's public financial management/Further strengthen the effectiveness of
     Afghanistan's procurement, treasury, and audit systems (original and first revised objective)

    Rationale
    The project's theory of change was based on the idea that addressing procurement, treasury, audit, and
    management of the reform process in a complementary manner would strengthen PFM throughout the


                                                                                                         Page 4 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AF: ARTF-Public Fin. Mgmt. Reform II (P120427)



budget cycle within the context of support provided by other donors. Support for a new Procurement Law
and procurement procedures, including debarment, appeal and review, domestic and foreign preference
policies, and zero corruption tolerance policies, was plausibly connected to the desired outcomes of
increased procurement capacity, transparency, decentralization, and oversight. Maintenance and
enhancement of financial management information systems in all line ministries and provinces, together with
treasury capacity building and development of professional accounting organizations, was logically expected
to improve treasury procedures. Institutional development and information technology support for audit
systems, including training and professional certification for auditors and examiners, would reasonably lead
to improved internal and external audit coverage.

Outputs

A Procurement Facilitation Consultant assisted the ARDS in processing civilian on-budget procurement,
completing procurement regulatory and institutional frameworks, and building capacity through knowledge
transfer to staff in the line ministries. 7,938 line ministry and mustofiat (tax office) procurement staff
completed duty-specific procurement training, exceeding the original/revised target of 7,800. NPA now
carries out key managerial functions through civil servants.

The Appeal and Review Committee (ARC) began operation in early September 2015. As of November
2017, it had received and reviewed 650 cases. During this same time frame, 213 debarment cases were
received, of which 145 were debarred, 35 rejected, and 33 under debarment processes. Debarment notices
are now updated weekly and published in a separate section on the NPA website. According to the project
team, a comprehensive section on the ARC was included in the 2017 NPA annual report.

The National Procurement Committee (NPC) held 125 sessions during the project period, reviewing over
2,800 cases worth AFN 440 billion. Of these reviewed cases, 2,435 (worth AFN 399.6 billion) were
approved. According to the ICR (p. 29), AFN 18.3 billion was saved and more than AFN 50 billion was
safeguarded that could have been wasted. A database was prepared for the NPC and made public on its
website, allowing NPC decisions to be reported within one day after its meetings. The NPA has completed
design of an on-line mechanism for tracking cases submitted to the NPC, with user accounts for public
entities, NPC members, and donor agencies to track submitted cases and share comments and information.

A financial management consultant provided support to develop treasury functions, strengthen internal
controls, and provide counterpart training. 14 line ministry PFM assessments were conducted, achieving the
target. Version 7.0 of the Afghanistan Financial Management Information System (AFMIS) web-based
system is being implemented in all budgetary units in Kabul and in provincial tax offices. First-stage
activities as specified in the contract with the vendor were "almost complete" as of March 31, 2017 (ICR, p.
37). According to the project team, system instabilities encountered after the upgrade to version 7.0 have
been resolved, and the system is now fully functional. A Disaster Recovery Plan was prepared and is in
place.




                                                                                                  Page 5 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AF: ARTF-Public Fin. Mgmt. Reform II (P120427)



Support was provided to develop job-specific certifiable finance and general skills of treasury and finance
staff of MOF and the line ministries. 997 internal audit staff were trained and accredited, exceeding the
original/revised target of 546. A law governing development of the accounting profession was drafted and
approved by the Lower House of Parliament and was, at the time of the ICR, awaiting approval by the Upper
House, but regulations were still in draft form at the time of the ICR. According to the project team, the
drafting of regulations is now complete, and approval is pending. Local variants of tax and company law
were under development. CPA Afghanistan (the only professional accountancy organization in the country)
offered 1,054 Association of Chartered Certified Accountants scholarships in 2017 to develop the auditing
and accountancy profession in the country, with 171 (17%) of the recipients female. Treasury has
transitioned some key functions from advisors to civil servants, and no external firms have been contracted
for treasury operations since 2014, though many positions continue to require special pay arrangements,
and consultants continue to advise on key functions. The Supreme Audit Office (SAO) developed a
mechanism for citizen participation in audit processes in 2016, with an annual plan for implementation
specified in 2017.

Support was provided for capacity building and carrying out of independent reviews of on-budget donor-
funded operations, including all operations under the budget of nine line ministries.

A clear strategy and roadmap were adopted for revenue mobilization and administration. A Standard
Integrated Government Tax Administration System (SIGTAS) was implemented in all major tax offices in
Kabul and the provinces, helping to increase transaction volume through automation of core
functions. A fast-track filing system was completed to facilitate large payments. An awareness and
education campaign was conducted for taxpayers. Return filing requirements were simplified (a reduction
from five steps to three), a functional appeals department was created, and some policy reforms were
undertaken by the Afghanistan Revenue Department (ARD, an increase in the business receipts tax from 2%
to 4%, and the introduction of a 10% telecommunication fee).

1,809 human resource management staff completed duty-specific training in their areas of specialty,
exceeding the original/revised target of 750. These trainings took place in Kabul and in the provinces.

Outcomes

The average number of days taken by the NPC to dispose of cases declined from 10 in 2015 to 7 in 2017,
meeting the target of 7 days.

The annual number of internal audits done to acceptable standards increased from four in 2011 to 138 (115
in the fiscal year ending in December 2016, and 23 in the first quarter of the fiscal year ending in December
2017), exceeding the original/revised target of 38. SAO audited all World Bank ARTF projects for FY 2015
and submitted the reports to the Bank and the MOF. The annual audited financial statement for the fiscal
year ending December 2016 was submitted to the President and Parliament, as legally required. The audit
team was, at the time of the ICR, in the process of auditing the consolidated budget financial statements for
the fiscal year ending December 2017. The ICR (p. 40) noted that there was an improvement over time in


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            AF: ARTF-Public Fin. Mgmt. Reform II (P120427)



    the quality of the audits, and that SAO was submitting the auditing financial statements within six months of
    the close of each fiscal year. With the assistance of a contractor, SAO completed nine audits in line
    ministries over the project period, achieving the target of nine audits. Coverage of internal audit increased
    from 49% in 2011 to 56% coverage of expenditure and 42% coverage of revenue in 2017, achieving the
    overall internal audit target coverage of 50%. Coverage of external audit increased from 49% in 2011 to
    71.03% in the fiscal year ending in December 2016, almost achieving the target of 75%. Of this coverage,
    47.62% was by the central budgetary audit directorate, and 23.41% was by local budgetary audit
    directorates. The audit results for the fiscal year ending in December 2017 were due to be submitted to the
    legislature by June 21, 2018. The project team confirmed that this took place, and that the results are now
    publicly available on SAO's website.

    The time required for dissemination of in-year budget execution reports decreased from 30 days from
    month's end in 2011 to 15 days in 2017, almost meeting the target of 14 days. The ICR (p. 37) reported that
    15 days is a median figure, with reports actually posted ranging from 12 to 18 days from month's end.

    Revenues as a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP) increased from 8.7% in 2014 to over 11% in
    2016 (no target was set).

    According to data from the Aid Management Directorate, the percentage of development assistance that was
    on-budget increased from zero in 2011 to 65% in 2017, exceeding both the original target of 60% and the
    revised target of 20%.




    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     Further strengthen the efficiency of Afghanistan's procurement, treasury, and audit systems (second revised
     objective)

    Rationale
    The AF and revision of objectives did not have significant implications for the project's theory of change. The
    project's planned activities, including the added component on revenue mobilization, were plausibly linked to
    improved efficiency and effectiveness of procurement, treasury, and audit systems.

    The ICR highlighted some additional outcomes related to strengthened efficiency:




                                                                                                       Page 7 of 14
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   AF: ARTF-Public Fin. Mgmt. Reform II (P120427)



              Procurement: Bringing procurement functions under a single regulatory body (the NPA), and having the NPA
              serve as the Secretariat of the NPC, have created structural efficiencies. According to the ICR (p. 16), NPC
              oversight and NPA follow-up activities have produced more responsibility and accountability within
              procurement entities and the line ministries, and overall there is more confidence in national procurement
              systems. Bid evaluations, an open-ended process that generally took more than two years prior to the
              project, are now governed by service standards of 30 days with the possibility for a one-time extension. As
              noted above, the number of days taken by the NPC to dispose of cases has declined from 10 in 2015 to 7 in
              2017. Transparency International has called the NPA "one bright spot" in the government's anti-corruption
              reforms, citing cost savings of US$ 200 million through 2016 (ICR, p. 47), with a further savings of US$
              160.8 million in FY 2017.

              Treasury: According to the ICR (p. 17), the upgraded AFMIS allows for increased efficiency, as real-time
              access to financial data (with no delays) allows organizations to keep track of their budgets and financial
              transactions. The outcomes cited above under the original objective, including the use of on-budget donor
              support, underpin this assertion. The ICR (p. 48) estimated cost savings of US$ 2 million annually in
              international contracted staff costs and expenses through AFMIS, but the details underlying this estimate
              were not provided.

              Audit: Due to reported adoption of common good practices in internal audit across audit professionals at the
              line ministries and independent directorates, 175 internal audits were performed in 2017 per standards
              (against a target of 34); out of US$ 11.2 million of collectable revenue, US$ 0.9 million had been recovered
              at the time of the ICR and deposited into the government's account; and 52 civil servants were terminated for
              fraudulent activities. The ICR (p. 48) estimated cost savings of US$ 0.5 million annually due to ARTF audits,
              but the details underlying this estimate were not provided.




              Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL

 PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




 Rationale
 Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial under both the original and revised objectives. Convincing evidence,
 plausibly attributed to project interventions, is provided for strengthening of Afghanistan's public procurement,
 treasury, and audit systems.




 Overall Efficacy Rating
 Substantial
PHREVISEDTBL




                                                                                                                Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AF: ARTF-Public Fin. Mgmt. Reform II (P120427)



5. Efficiency

The Project Paper did not carry out an economic analysis, arguing that such analysis was not appropriate for a
technical assistance project (p. 8). It made the qualitative case that the project would yield "high benefits"
because line ministries would be able to execute budget and deliver services more efficiently, that fast-track
capacity building of civil service to operate PFM systems would contribute to sustainability of PFM, and that a
strengthened internal and external audit function and operation would contribute to good governance.

The ICR (p. 15) argued that credible economic benefit calculation is challenging with broad-based PFM
reforms, as it is difficult to claim attribution for all downstream benefits. Nevertheless, the ICR (pp. 47-49)
calculated a Net Present Value for the project of US$ 1,022 million at a 5% discount rate and US$ 832 million
at a 12% discount rate, and an economic internal rate of return of 236.5%. The main benefits included
efficiencies gained from shifting ODA on-budget and savings from public procurement efficiency gains: US$
142 million from procurement reform (derived by comparing the estimated price against the average price of all
awarded projects, though the ICR stated that "the methodology of this calculation was not reviewed"); US$ 2
million from financial management reform (based on previous annual costs for the external consultants
engaged to operate the AFMIS system, which is now operated directly by civil servants); and US$ 0.5 million
from audit reform and performance (based on previous annual costs for engaging a private firm to complete
tasks that are now completed by government) (ICR, p. 48). The ICR did not provide details on these
calculations, and its assumptions on attribution of gains to the project's interventions may have been generous.

The ICR's qualitative discussion of efficiency focused primarily on sectoral efficiencies attributable to the
project's interventions rather than the efficiency of the project itself. In terms of project efficiency,
implementation arrangements were carried over from previous Bank-financed operations, including a project
coordination unit (Reform Implementation and Management Unit, RIMU) in MOF supported by a technical
assistance team funded by the project, and implementation support from firms and local contract staff in all
implementing units. The project had two task team leaders, both of whom were based in Kabul, facilitating
project implementation. However, there were significant shortcomings in implementation efficiency. The ICR
(pp. 23-24) noted delays in procurement of goods and consultancy packages because the government was not
able to prepare a timely and comprehensive procurement plan, arguing that "had these packages been
combined, the benefit from the economy of scale could have been realized." NPA staff faced implementation
challenges because of non-familiarity with the Bank's procurement policies and procedures (ICR, p. 23), though
this improved over time as the staff gained experience. The revenue mobilization component added at the AF
experienced implementation delays because of inadequate coordination between MOF and ARD, staff
turnover, and low staff capacity. Finally, because of the country's volatile security environment, field visits
outside Kabul were "difficult or impossible" (ICR, p. 23), and foreign contractors were reluctant to bid, requiring
the Bank to adjust procurement methodology to align "to the market realities."

Based on evidence of significant shortcomings in implementation efficiency, Efficiency is rated Modest.



Efficiency Rating


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AF: ARTF-Public Fin. Mgmt. Reform II (P120427)



Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                    Rate Available?        Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
ICR Estimate                                              236.50
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome

Relevance is rated High due to alignment with country conditions, government strategy, and Bank
strategy. Efficacy is rated Substantial under both the original and revised objectives due to convincing
evidence, plausibly attributable to project interventions, of strengthening of Afghanistan's public procurement,
treasury, and audit functions. Efficiency is rated Modest due to evidence of significant shortcomings in
implementation efficiency. Because Efficacy was rated identically under both the original and revised
objectives, is it not necessary to go through the mechanics of the split rating. Taken together, these ratings
indicate moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation, leading to an Outcome rating
of Moderately Satisfactory.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The institutional strengthening achieved under the project, covering the NPA (including through the establishment
of the National Procurement Institute), the upgrading and extension of the AFMIS, the expansion of professional
development opportunities for treasury employees and related curriculum development at Kabul University,
approval of the Accounting Law, institutional development for internal and external audit, and implementation of
SIGTAS in all major tax offices, appears likely to be sustained. There is concern, however, that some systems
developed under the project (most importantly, AFMIS) require annual license payments; the project team added
that these license payments are US$ 293,000 annually, with additional vendor support needed to roll out the
software to additional sites. Furthermore, a major focus of the project was its partial transition from external
provision to civil service delivery of key functions. While reliance on external consultants has been reduced, the
transition is fragile and incomplete. Many staff performing higher-skilled work are paid significant salary top-ups,
and without measures to sustain these payments and therefore retain technical staff, the project's gains are at


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AF: ARTF-Public Fin. Mgmt. Reform II (P120427)



risk. The follow-on Fiscal Performance Improvement Support Project (US$ 100 million, 2018-2022) with
objectives to improve domestic revenue mobilization and public expenditure management, and to reinforce a
performance-oriented management culture in the Ministry of Finance, may address these issues through its
support for human resources.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project's objectives were straightforward and monitorable. The project built on a series of previous
  Bank-financed operations and bilateral donor technical assistance aimed at assisting the country with
  establishment of a legal framework for PFM and building capacity at the central government level to
  operate PFM systems and processes for budget planning, execution, and monitoring, treasury
  operations, public procurement, and internal and external audit. Key lessons learned from these
  previous projects included the need to address sustainability of human resources for PFM; the
  importance of monitoring government commitment to the legal framework governing PFM to ensure
  durability; the key role of automation of PFM processes; the high risk of corruption in the country
  operating environment; the crucial role of both internal and external audit functions; and the need for
  development of accounting capacity and a sustainable structure of regulation and oversight of the
  accounting profession (Project Paper, pp. 10-11). The Project Paper (p. 12) envisioned that supervision
  would be relatively unencumbered by security issues impacting the provinces, as project operations were
  to be concentrated in Kabul. Overall risk, however, was rated High based on challenges related to
  capacity, coordination, and a history of delays in procurement and misprocurement. To mitigate these
  risks, the project's extensive risk assessment framework (Project Paper, pp. 39-54) structured
  supervision to include long lead times and engagement of specialist support for procurement, as well as
  specific support for capacity issues in accounting and auditing. According to the ICR (p. 25), the task
  team was "experienced and committed." M&E design and arrangements were satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  According to the ICR (p. 25), the task team responded to government requests in a timely
  manner. Supervision missions, which took place on average every six months, were appropriately
  staffed. The Bank's technical and fiduciary teams provided regular support with a continued focus on
  maximizing development impact. High-value sector expertise and guidance were provided across
  multiple areas, including AFMIS procurement, accounting entry details, and business process
  analysis. Implementation Status Reports and aides-memoire were detailed and candid.




                                                                                                Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AF: ARTF-Public Fin. Mgmt. Reform II (P120427)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  Results were to be monitored by MOF through a ministry-wide technical assistance monitoring process
  under RIMU, and through a monitoring program under the National Priority Program for Finance and
  Economic Reform under the Deputy Minister for Policy. Donor groups also were monitoring progress
  on government commitments on PFM. Expected outcomes were clearly specified in the Project Paper,
  with indicators that were effective measures of achievement of the objective, and well-defined
  baselines, annual benchmarks, and outcome targets. However, the indicators did not adequately
  measure the outcomes of support for treasury operations, and no indicators were added to measure
  outcomes of the activities added at the AF on revenue mobilization (nor target for revenue as a
  percentage of GDP).



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E specialists at RIMU carried out activities according to plan, with a further focus on institutionalization of
  the M&E system and creation of a permanent M&E Unit within MOF. RIMU regularly reported to the MOF's
  top management, to the project's Steering Committee, and to the Bank. From the Bank's side, progress was
  monitored during eleven implementation support missions and regular engagement with the country-based
  team. The task team collected detailed data, updated progress against baselines, and highlighted issues
  requiring further attention.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project was restructured, with indicators and target values adjusted, in response to analyzed M&E
  data. According to the ICR (p. 24), data were also used to analyze reasons for implementation delays and
  determine appropriate corrective measures.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AF: ARTF-Public Fin. Mgmt. Reform II (P120427)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
  According to the 2011 Project Paper (p. i), the project was category A for environmental assessment
  purposes. The project did not trigger any safeguard policies, and the Project Paper did not discuss
  safeguards outside the notation of the category A rating. The Project Paper for the 2016 restructuring (p.
  6) and ICR (p. 1) corrected the error, noting the environmental assessment category as C. The ICR (p. 24)
  confirmed that no civil works or activity that could have negative environmental implications were
  undertaken.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The ICR (p. 25) reported that the project complied with all fiduciary covenants during
  implementation. Internal control arrangements were in place, and adequate financial management,
  procurement, and disbursement systems were maintained. Financial management performance was rated
  "Satisfactory," and auditors expressed unqualified opinions on all recent-year financial statements. While
  there were no reported cases of misprocurement, there were significant procurement-related delays (see
  Section 5).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                      ICR                      IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                             Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory   ---
                             Satisfactory
Bank Performance             Satisfactory             Satisfactory              ---
Quality of M&E               Substantial              Substantial               ---
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial               ---



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AF: ARTF-Public Fin. Mgmt. Reform II (P120427)



12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 26-27) offered several useful and insightful lessons, including:

Reducing aid dependency requires a long-term transition plan. In this case, transition of consultants to the
civil service is threatened by the government's inability to afford the higher rates of pay required for technical
staff. Human resources issues are a major focus of the follow-on project.

Building a sound public financial management system is one of the first priorities of a recovering,
fragile state. In this case, building government capacity in procurement, treasury, and audit has contributed to
increased confidence in the use of on-budget systems, including among donors previously reluctant to use
government systems.

Especially in low-capacity environments, flexibility is needed in the Bank's response to emerging
circumstances and priorities. In this case, the Bank team needed to be willing to go beyond its usual
supervision responsibilities and provide regular mentoring and training in procurement and other areas.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a clear, concise description and analysis of the project's context, activities, and
outcomes. It was internally consistent. Its lessons and recommendations were insightful and should prove
broadly applicable to projects in fragile and aid-dependent contexts. However, its discussion of the project's
relevance to country and Bank strategy was cursory, as was its account of the factors underlying the
project's restructuring, revision of objectives, and Additional Financing.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 14
