     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY-Schistosomiasis Control Project (P113102)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0021395

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P113102                                    RY-Schistosomiasis Control Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Yemen, Republic of                         Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H5420                                  30-Jun-2016                                         20,518,971.64

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Dec-2009                                31-Jan-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            25,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             25,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         22,420,508.64                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Salim J. Habayeb            Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   According to the Financing Agreement dated 1/6/10, the objectives of the project were to decrease the
   prevalence and intensity of infection of both urinary and intestinal schistosomiasis among school-age
   children by 2015 in endemic regions of Yemen. The statements of objectives in the Financing Agreement,
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD), and ICR were identical.

   Explanatory note on schistosomiasis from World Health Organization (WHO) references:


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY-Schistosomiasis Control Project (P113102)



   Schistosomiasis is a disease caused by parasitic worms, which affect the urinary tract and/or
   intestines. Symptoms include abdominal pain, diarrhea, bloody stools, or blood in the urine. The
   disease progresses to renal failure and bladder cancer in urinary schistosomiasis, and liver fibrosis and portal
   hypertension in intestinal schistosomiasis. Infected water snails act as intermediate hosts releasing
   schistosomiasis parasites in fresh water bodies, lakes or rivers, and which in turn penetrate the skin of the
   human host. People are infected when they are exposed to infested water, such as in routine agricultural
   and occupational activities. School-age children who play, swim, or fish in infested water make them
   especially vulnerable to infection. Schistosomiasis is prevalent in tropical and subtropical areas, especially in
   poor communities without access to safe drinking water and adequate sanitation.

   Notes on objectives and associated outcome targets:


     • The statement of objectives specified the date of the intended achievement “by 2015”. But the closing
     date was extended and the project closed on 1/31/18. Since achievements are more appropriately
     assessed upon the completion of project activities, this ICR Review will assess the reported project
     achievements around project closing, when the impact evaluation was undertaken.
     • The methodology for measuring schistosomiasis intensity by numbers of parasitic eggs was revised in
     2014 from numbers to percentages for technical reasons. Hence, outcome targets for the intensity of
     infections were also modified to fit the calculation methodology. The revisions were unrelated to project
     ambition.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                           PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   Original Components

   1. Preventive Chemotherapy for Schistosomiasis Control (Appraisal US$22.65 million; Actual
   US$21.1 million).

   The component consisted of activities for campaign-based preventive chemotherapy using fixed and
   temporary sites; routine preventive chemotherapy; and information, education and
   communication. Provision of drugs, laboratory equipment, goods, consultant services and training.




                                                                                                               Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RY-Schistosomiasis Control Project (P113102)



  2. Independent Monitoring, Audit and Project Administration (Appraisal US$2.35 million; Actual
  US$1.2 million).

  (a) Support to technical and financial audits, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) preventive
  chemotherapy interventions; and (b) support to the project administration unit, including implementation,
  external audits and M&E.

  Revised Components

  A project restructuring on 3/14/13 maintained the original two components and added the following third
  component:

  3. Output-Based Deworming and Control of Other Neglected Tropical Diseases (Approved amount
  US$5 million; Actual US$0.11 million). The new component was meant to support school-based
  deworming for the treatment of soil-transmitted helminths, and to the control of onchocerciasis, trachoma,
  and other neglected tropical diseases.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Cost and financing. The original overall project cost was reported in the ICR (p. 2) at US$28.8 million,
  comprising contributions of US$25 million from an International Development Association (IDA)
  Grant, US$2.14 million from the government, US$1.46 million from WHO, and US$0.2 million from foreign
  universities (Imperial College London). Actual total cost at closing was reported in the ICR as US$23.5
  million, covering US$22.4 million in disbursements from the IDA Grant, US$0.9 million from WHO, and the
  full US$0.2 million from Imperial College London (the ICR, p. 18, stated that Imperial College London's
  actual contribution was in the range of US$1.5-2 million). The ICR reported that some drug procurement
  (in the amount of US$0.5 million) was not completed, and these funds were returned to the Bank (see
  Section 10b).

  Note on other support provided to the project. WHO support to the project included quality assurance
  of drugs, procurement of praziquantel for the treatment of schistosomiasis, training, and design of sentinel
  surveys. The Schistosomiasis Control Initiative of the Imperial College London provided technical
  assistance in designing impact evaluation and financed its implementation. The END Fund (a private
  philanthropic organization registered in the United States and United Kingdom, dedicated to ending
  common neglected tropical diseases) supported an additional mass drug administration round.

  Dates. The project was approved on 12/17/09 and became effective on 8/3/10. A level 2 restructuring
  was undertaken on 3/14/13 to revise the results framework and allocations between categories, and to
  add deworming and other tropical disease activities. The Mid-Term Review was carried out on
  6/30/16. Three closing date extensions aggregating at 19 months were undertaken on 6/21/16, 5/26/17,


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            RY-Schistosomiasis Control Project (P113102)



         and 9/2/17 to complete project activities. The project closed on 1/31/18, 19 months after the original
         closing date of 6/30/16.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

       Rationale


       At appraisal, schistosomiasis was among the significant public health problems in Yemen, where 42% of
       the population lived in poverty. About three million people were infected with either urinary schistosomiasis
       or intestinal schistosomiasis, or with both, corresponding to an estimated prevalence of about 15
       percent. At least 600,000 school-age children and adults suffered from severe morbidity resulting from the
       parasitic worm disease, where the severity of clinical symptoms increases with the worm burden. 15 million
       individuals were living in schistosomiasis endemic areas, and, as noted in Section 2a, school-age children
       bathing or participating in recreational activities in contaminated water were most at risk. The project was
       linked to the third strategic objective for fostering human development under the FY10-FY13 Country
       Assistance Strategy, which specifically noted the priority of reducing the prevalence of schistosomiasis
       (ICR, p. 6).

       At closing, the objectives remained fully relevant to the Bank’s Country Engagement Note (CEN) FY17-18,
       which was prepared in lieu of a Country Partnership Framework because of the volatile country
       situation. The CEN defined two objectives for engaging and supporting the country during the conflict and
       post-conflict period: (1) provide emergency support to preserve local service delivery capacity to support
       conflict-affected families and communities; and (2) prepare for post-conflict recovery and reconstruction,
       with due attention to state and institution building and laying the foundation for a more inclusive and resilient
       development framework in the future. The schistosomiasis control project was included as an integral part
       of CEN activities under its objective to preserve local service delivery to support conflict-affected
       communities. At the same time, in its discussion on investment choices, the ICR (p. 17) referred to
       the Global Burden of Disease (2010) that estimated Yemen’s top three causes in disability-adjusted life
       years (DALYs) - lower respiratory infections, diarrheal diseases, and congenital anomalies - while the
       burden of schistosomiasis accounted for only 3.16% of the total DALYs in Yemen. However, since
       relevance of objectives is largely qualified by alignment with the Bank's partnership and engagement
       strategy with the country, relevance of objectives is rated High.



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL



                                                                                                           Page 4 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            RY-Schistosomiasis Control Project (P113102)




    Objective 1
    Objective

     Decrease the prevalence of infection of urinary and intestinal schistosomiasis among school-age children in
     endemic regions.

    Rationale

    The implementation of campaign-based preventive chemotherapy, supported by technical
    assistance, training and health education, could reasonably be expected to increase program coverage of
    drug administration in targeted endemic districts and among enrolled and non-enrolled school-age
    children. In turn, it was reasonable to anticipate a decrease in the prevalence of infections.

    Intermediate results


        • The project covered 275 endemic districts through mass drug administration campaigns, attaining 100%
        geographic coverage, exceeding the target of 90% for geographic coverage.
        • The program of distribution of praziquantel for enrolled and non-enrolled school-age children in all 275
        endemic districts covered 6 million children out of a total of 7 million school-age children, reflecting
        program coverage of 86%, exceeding the target of 75%. The program of drug distribution for enrolled
        school-age children reached coverage of 100% by 1/1/18, exceeding the target of 80%. The ease of
        reaching school-enrolled students might explain the universal coverage for this sub-group, while program
        coverage for non-enrolled school-age children reached 70.7%, slightly above the target of 70%.
        • 11,711 health personnel received training, including doctors, nurses, midwives, pharmacy staff,
        laboratory staff, and health administrators. The project also trained teachers and volunteers, and the total
        number of persons trained under the project reached 36,732 persons.
        • The number of all direct project beneficiaries was 11.4 million at the end of the project, exceeding the
        target of 6 million beneficiaries.


     Outcomes

    The prevalence of infection with any form of schistosomiasis among school-age children decreased from a
    baseline of 17.3% in 2013 to 7.4% in 2017, exceeding the target of 10%. Also, overall prevalence (all ages)
    decreased from a baseline of 16.7% in 2013 to 6.9% in 2017, exceeding the target of 10%.


    Rating
   High
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL




                                                                                                         Page 5 of 14
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      RY-Schistosomiasis Control Project (P113102)




             Objective 2
             Objective

                  Decrease the intensity of infection of urinary and intestinal schistosomiasis among school-age children in
                  endemic regions.

             Rationale

             The implementation of campaign-based preventive chemotherapy, supported by technical
             assistance, training and health education, could reasonably be expected to increase program coverage of
             drug administration in targeted endemic districts and among enrolled and non-enrolled school-age
             children. In turn, it was reasonable to expect a decrease in the intensity of both urinary and intestinal
             schistosomiasis infections.

             Outputs were as listed under Objective 1.

             Outcomes

             Urinary schistosomiasis: Heavy infections of urinary schistosomiasis among school-age children decreased
             from a baseline of 3.1% in 2014 to 1.3% in 2017, short of the target of 1%. Also, the overall percentage (all
             ages) of heavy infections decreased from a baseline of 2.7% in 2014 to 1.2 % in 2017, short of the target of
             1%.

             Intestinal schistosomiasis: The ICR (p. 29) stated that the impact evaluation did not report on
             the disaggregated rate of intensity of infection specific to school-age children, but on the decrease in the
             overall rate (all ages) for heavy and medium infection of intestinal schistosomiasis from a baseline of 4.1% in
             2014 to 1% in 2017, exceeding the target of 2.5%. The ICR, p. 29, stated that the overall target of
             2.5% could not be applied to children's data, including because the children’s baseline of 0.7% was already
             below the overall target of 2.5%. The TTL (11/1/18) stated that a sample (of unknown size and methodology)
             was reviewed in collaboration with partners to identify the children-specific rate in heavy infections, which
             was denoted by the ICR in the results framework's comments as 0.3% (and that a related target of 0.3% was
             achieved, ICR, p. 12), having decreased from a baseline of 0.7%.



             Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale




                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RY-Schistosomiasis Control Project (P113102)



The aggregation of one fully achieved objective on disease prevalence with one almost fully achieved objective on
disease intensity indicates an overall efficacy rating of Substantial.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

5. Efficiency


 The PAD’s economic analysis calculated DALYs to assess cost-effectiveness. The analysis estimated that
 the cost of avoiding one DALY ranged between US$25.8 and US$48.3 (PAD, p. 68). The estimates
 compared favorably with US$25 to US$100 per DALY, which is the range considered to be cost-effective in
 developing countries. The PAD also compared its estimates with an alternative scenario, under which
 treatment is provided only to those actually infected after their identification by screening, and where the cost
 per DALY was estimated at US$346. The alternative scenario was not deemed to be cost-effective because
 the cost of screening is high. The PAD concluded that, given high screening costs and low drug costs for
 mass chemotherapy, large-scale preventive chemotherapy in endemic areas, as undertaken by the project,
 would be cost-effective (PAD, p. 81).

 The ICR carried out a cost-benefit analysis, assessing the benefits arising from the reduction in disease
 prevalence: reduced mortality, reduced cost of care due to reduced morbidity, reduced loss of productivity,
 and increased health personnel productivity, all aggregating at US$125.54 million. The time period used was
 eight years with costs starting in 2010 and benefits starting in the third year. With an investment cost of
 US$22.7 million over eight years, the net present value was estimated at US$49.7 million using a discount
 rate of 3%. The benefit-cost ratio was estimated at 12.44 and the internal rate of return at 43.13% (ICR, p.
 40). The ICR did not provide a sensitivity analysis that would have shown estimated values under higher
 discount rates. Also, as stated in Section 3, the burden of schistosomiasis accounted for only 3.16% of the
 total disability-adjusted life years in Yemen.

 Some aspects of implementation contributed to efficiency, such as the inclusion of activities to reach out-of-
 school children (ICR, p. 14) and leveraging of partnerships (ICR, p. 18). But there were shortcomings related
 to other aspects of implementation and design. The project allocated US$5 million to the addition of a new
 component (Output-Based Deworming and Control of Other Neglected Tropical Diseases) described by the
 ICR (p. 21) as extremely ambitious, as there was insufficient capacity in managing output-based financing in
 the Ministry of Public Health and Population (MoPHP). The component had minimal progress and a negligible
 expenditure (US$0.1 million) used for printing materials. Also, the ICR (p. 18) stated that the project entered
 into a technical assistance agreement with WHO that focused solely on the implementation of mass drug
 administration campaigns, and hence other activities were no longer financed. Financial management
 shortcomings were noted throughout the implementation period. According to the ICR, hygiene education
 and behavior change interventions did not receive much consideration, and yet, they could have enhanced


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RY-Schistosomiasis Control Project (P113102)



the results gained from mass drug administration (ICR, p. 24). The ICR (p. 18) noted that there was lack of
attention to integration aspects with the regular health system such as the use of existing platforms for drug
distribution and integrated supply chain and monitoring, and referred to IEG's Portfolio Review of World Bank
Lending for Communicable Disease Control, Working Paper 2010/3, which stressed that investments for
strengthening health systems are an essential means to controlling disease outcomes, especially for the poor,
and should not be viewed as alternative investments in communicable disease control. In view of the conflict
situation in the country, disbursements were suspended twice in 2011 and 2015 for a cumulative period of 15
months. There were periods of severe restrictions to operate the project administration unit due to the lack of
operating costs and salaries (ICR, p. 15). The Bank Office in Yemen was closed in February 2015, and
interaction with the project administration unit was undertaken from a distance through virtual
meetings. Three project extensions were needed to complete project activities. However, within the broad
context of overall efficiency, these shortcomings are considered relatively moderate and efficiency is rated
Substantial.



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                    Rate
                                                         Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                    Available?
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
ICR Estimate                                            43.13
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


Relevance of objectives is rated High as the objectives were fully consistent with the Bank’s Country
Engagement Note. Efficacy is rated Substantial, as the project almost fully achieved its objectives. Efficiency is
rated Substantial because of moderate shortcomings. Therefore, the overall Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Satisfactory




                                                                                                     Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY-Schistosomiasis Control Project (P113102)



7. Risk to Development Outcome


The continued conflict situation in the country constitutes a major risk that development outcomes may not be
maintained, although the government remains committed to schistosomiasis control with continued support
from partners, and remains specifically committed to continue the implementation of preventive drug
therapy. Transitioning from an intensive phase to a future maintenance phase to prevent resurgence of
schistosomiasis transmission would require health systems that function effectively, inclusion of non-medical
and environmental measures, and overall improvement in living conditions and sanitation.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  An important element of the project design was the appropriate focus on mass drug administration to
  rapidly reduce schistosomiasis infections and their morbidity in endemic areas. But there were
  shortcomings. According to the ICR (p. 18), due attention was not provided during project preparation to
  health education and behavior change interventions for water and sanitation, as they are known to play an
  important complementary role in the interruption of disease transmission. Environmental interventions for
  snail control were not included, and the TTL (11/1/18) clarified that such interventions would have
  required a rigorous assessment and the involvement of multiple sectors, with extensive training beyond the
  MoPHP, and that the project constituted a first phase focusing on preventive chemotherapy. On the other
  hand, the ICR (p. 18) stated that the National Schistosomiasis Control Program regretted during the
  preparation of the ICR that there were no substantial steps taken during implementation to control
  snails. The ICR also noted that snail control was expected to be considered at the Mid-Term
  Review. Eventually, such complementary strategies along with mass drug administration will be needed to
  interrupt disease transmission.

  The project considered lessons learned from country and global experience, including the importance of a
  single purpose public health intervention; the value of expanding targeting to reach non-enrolled school-
  age children and other pockets of underprivileged populations; securing drug procurement to support large-
  scale drug administration campaigns; and adequate technical support to the line ministry in charge of the
  national control program (PAD, p. 10). Since the procurement of drugs was a major part of the project, it
  was secured through direct contracting with WHO. Risks were well identified, including considerable risks
  of political instability and unrest (PAD, p. 18). Mitigation measures for other risks were put in place,
  including the contracting of an Independent Technical and Internal Audit Firm to provide fiduciary support
  and independent verification of mass drug administration campaigns.

  M&E design and arrangements were adequately prepared, but with shortcomings related to school-age
  children data, as disaggregation of results and targets were not specified by the PAD (ICR, p. 11), and it


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY-Schistosomiasis Control Project (P113102)



  was not clear whether the three PDO indicators measured progress in school-age children in endemic
  areas or the entire population that was treated in those areas. The ICR (p. 18) stated that the project could
  have paid more attention to related health system strengthening aspects such as existing platforms for drug
  distribution and integrated supply chain to facilitate the eventual integration of the vertical program into the
  regular health system to ensure long term sustainability and impact.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  During accessible periods, all supervision missions were jointly undertaken with partners and the MoPHP
  (ICR, p. 22). The Bank team’s engagement was reportedly solid during implementation with a maintained
  focus on achieving results on the ground. According to the ICR (p. 25), counterparts valued Bank
  implementation support, including hands-on support in fiduciary aspects. Frequent virtual meetings with
  government officials and partners were conducted remotely to discuss progress and challenges. The Bank
  team and Country Management Unit were pro-active in lifting the disbursement suspension in
  2015. Coordination with partners was reportedly strong, including WHO and the Schistosomiasis Control
  Initiative of the Imperial College London, along with the MoPHP and its National Schistosomiasis Control
  Program. Partnership with the END Fund enabled the national program to conduct an additional mass drug
  administration campaign.

  However, there were shortcomings. Deficiencies in the team's reporting were noted. According to the ICR,
  the Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) always reported overall figures (ICR, p. 11) without
  disaggregating data for school-age children, even though such data were collected and available (ICR, p.
  25). Also, according to the ICR, the ISRs' reporting on implementation status and results monitoring was not
  systematic, and data for some indicators, namely geographic and program coverage, were erratic (ICR, p.
  22). The ICR (p. 25) stated that the addition of deworming and control of other neglected tropical diseases
  at the 2013 restructuring was too ambitious in view of limited capacity in implementing output-based
  financing, and that, at the Quality at Entry Review, the team had proposed the testing of output-based
  financing, but this was not recommended, as it would bring complexity to project implementation. A
  revision of the project's environmental assessment category at the 2013 restructuring was not undertaken
  (see Section 10a and ICR, p. 22).


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                      Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY-Schistosomiasis Control Project (P113102)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The objectives were clear and measurable, although it was unusual to set an achievement date in the statement
  of objectives. The selection of indicators was appropriate. The results framework was aligned with the theory
  of change. Building on the National Schistosomiasis Control Program M&E system, which was already in
  place, and on sentinel site surveys, impact evaluation was adequately planned in collaboration with WHO and
  the Schistosomiasis Control Initiative of the Imperial College London. There were no baselines at entry, and
  these were collected in 2013 (ICR, p. 21). But disaggregation of data by adults and school-age children should
  have been specified in the PAD to avoid potential confusion during project implementation (ICR, p. 21) and to
  facilitate the assessment of objectives that were specific to school-age children.



b. M&E Implementation

  Overall, M&E implementation was adequate. Data collection and analysis for the impact evaluation were
  conducted for the baseline, mid-term and end-line surveys. Data for intermediate results indicators
  were collected by the National Schistosomiasis Control Program. After each of the 13 mass drug
  administration campaigns, the collected data were independently verified by a third-party agency. Difficulties
  were encountered in assessing the intensity of intestinal schistosomiasis in school-age children because
  of M&E gaps, and the lack of a relevant target.



c. M&E Utilization

  According to the ICR (p. 22), data were utilized by MoPHP to recategorize the districts in terms of
  endemicity. The baseline and mid-line surveys of the impact evaluation informed the planning for
  subsequent mass drug administration campaigns in targeting vulnerable districts.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY-Schistosomiasis Control Project (P113102)



  At entry, no safeguard policies were triggered by the project which was classified as Category C under the
  Environmental Screening Category. However, the ICR (p. 22) stated that the 2013 restructuring included
  surgical treatment for trachoma (with an intermediate result indicator on the number of persons benefiting
  from trachoma surgery), thus generating a potential medical waste risk. The ICR stated that a change in the
  project's environmental category was not discussed by the team.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial Management. Relevant arrangements were put in place, and the Independent Technical and
  Internal Audit firm verified that mass drug administration campaigns were properly conducted and constituted a
  reliable base for fund disbursements. The ICR stated that the independent audit firm was instrumental in
  fiduciary capacity building at the project administration unit, and the firm contributed to enhancing the
  confidence of the Bank and partners during inaccessible periods caused by the conflict in the country (ICR, p.
  23). There were shortcomings, many of which were related to weak capacities. Quarterly interim financial
  reports presented to the Bank required revisions throughout the implementation period. Independent financial
  auditors reported a number of observations, such as missing documentation, delays in settling advances, and
  discrepancies in the information provided.

  Procurement. There were delays related to the preparation of technical specifications, incorrect preparation of
  procurement documents, and centralized decision-making at MoPHP, notably in the early stages of
  implementation. Post procurement reviews were carried out annually by the Bank and were used for improving
  the quality of procurement documentation, specifications, and filing.

  Suspension of disbursement; and procurement through UN agencies. Following civil unrest in 2015, the
  Bank suspended disbursement for all Bank-financed projects in the Yemen portfolio on 3/11/15, in line with
  OP/BP 7.30 on dealing with de facto governments. In December 2015, the Bank team obtained exceptions to
  lift disbursement suspension for both this Schistosomiasis Control Project and the Health and Population
  Project (P094755) in view of the dire needs for basic health services (ICR, p. 9). The policy exception was
  granted subject to entering into Operational and Technical Assistance Agreements with UN agencies to further
  ensure that the funds were properly used for their intended purposes. The project administration unit was
  sustained through its access to the project’s designated account to continue the discharge of its duties. Near
  the end of project, procurement of praziquantel worth US$0.5 million was planned to be utilized under the
  Yemen Emergency Health and Nutrition Project (P1618109). However, procurement was not completed before
  project closing, including because of shifting attention to the cholera epidemic in the country, and related funds
  were returned to the Bank.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       RY-Schistosomiasis Control Project (P113102)




d. Other
  --



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  The ICR rated efficacy as
                                                                                  High, and this ICR Review
                                                                                  rated efficacy as Substantial
                                                                                  because the objectives were
                                                                                  almost fully achieved. The
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory    Satisfactory
                                                                                  ICR rated efficiency as High,
                                                                                  and this ICR Review rated
                                                                                  efficiency as Substantial
                                                                                  because of moderate
                                                                                  shortcomings.
                                                                                  This ICR Review rated both
                                                                                  quality at entry and
                                                                                  supervision as Moderately
                                                       Moderately                 Satisfactory because of
Bank Performance                Satisfactory
                                                       Satisfactory               shortcomings discussed in
                                                                                  Section 8, including
                                                                                  shortcomings in monitoring
                                                                                  and the quality of reporting.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial                ---
Quality of ICR                                         Substantial                ---

12. Lessons


The ICR (pp. 26-27) offered several lessons, restated by IEG:

Leveraging comparative strengths of partners under clear terms of reference maximizes partnership
effectiveness. Partnerships that were developed by the project under clear terms of reference with the World
Health Organization, the Schistosomiasis Control Initiative of the Imperial College - London, and the End Fund
leveraged the core comparative strengths of these agencies in the interest of the project.

Integrating relevant health system strengthening activities with a vertical disease approach promotes
sustainability and resilience. The project focused primarily on immediate needs, but could have dealt with


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       RY-Schistosomiasis Control Project (P113102)



relevant health system strengthening aspects such as the integration of drug distribution for schistosomiasis
with the regular health system.

When a vertical approach for a disease control project is adopted, maintaining its single disease
purpose maximizes the likelihood of its progress and cost-effectiveness. Although primary attention
to schistosomiasis was temporarily diluted by the introduction of deworming and other neglected tropical
diseases, the project was focused on attaining its stated objectives and maintained its primary attention on
schistosomiasis control.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR established and illustrated the theory of change in a lucid and convincing manner. It was aligned to
development objectives. The ICR was very candid and clear overall, with some gaps in its presentation
of results. The quality of the evidence was adequate, but with moderate shortcomings related to the project
M&E and not to the ICR's sound analysis. The narrative, findings, and evidence supported the ICR's
conclusions, but not its ratings. Lessons and recommendations were related to project experience and should
prove useful to future projects in countries with fragility, conflict and violence situations. The ICR's discussion
in highlighting the value of UN partnerships and the identification of alternative supervision arrangements in
conflict environments was noteworthy. The ICR was consistent with the guidelines.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 14 of 14
