     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0021373

1. Project Data



 Project ID                           Project Name
                                      GW- Emergency Electricity & Water
 P120910
                                      Rehab.

 Country                              Practice Area(Lead)                        Additional Financing
 Guinea-Bissau                        Energy & Extractives                       P125374,P125374


 L/C/TF Number(s)                     Closing Date (Original)                    Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H6060,IDA-H6890                  30-Sep-2013                                              15,372,329.38

 Bank Approval Date                   Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Jul-2010                          30-Jun-2015

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           12,700,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            14,690,489.76                                               0.00

 Actual                                        15,372,329.38                                               0.00



 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan         Robert Mark Lacey             Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p.4) and the Emergency Project Paper (EPP, p.4) the project
   objective was:

   "to assist the Government of Guinea Bissau in the rapid restoration and improvement of electricity and water
   supply services in its capital city".



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                          PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   The project had four components, some with multiple sub-components.

   1: Institutional Development and Sector Performance Improvement. (Appraisal cost: US$1.50 million;
   Actual cost: US$1.50 million)

   1.1: Technical Assistance to prepare the Electricity and Water Utility of Guinea-Bissau
   (Electricidade e Aguas de Guinea-Bissau – EAGB) for restructuring and private sector participation.
   (Appraisal cost: US$0.35 million; Actual cost: US$0.35 million) The activities to be financed under this sub-
   component were: (i) human resource assessment and operational assets evaluation; (ii) assessment of
   public-private partnership options, including risks and mitigation measures; and (iii) stakeholder
   consultation and strategic communication campaign.

   1.2: Technical Assistance for enhanced operational management of EAGB during the transition
   period. (Appraisal cost: US$1.15 million; Actual cost: US$1.15 million) The funds allocated to this
   subcomponent were to cover technical assistance to improve the management of EAGB, both technically
   and commercially. It was envisaged that an expatriate general manager would be hired for a period of up to
   two years, with short-term expert support on key operational matters (e.g., commercial, financial,
   accounting, human resources).

   2: Restoration and Rehabilitation of the Power System. (Appraisal cost: US$8.50 million; Actual cost:
   US$11.70 million)

   2.1: Power generation scale-up. (Appraisal cost: US$6.0 million; Actual cost: US$9.2 million) This
   component consisted of the supply and installation of a new 5 megawatt (MW) mobile heavy fuel oil (HFO)
   unit, and one 10 mega volt amp (MVA) transformer. This project activity was deemed essential to restore
   rapidly power generation capacity to a level where sufficient supply could be provided to essential service
   providers, such as hospitals and for water pumping. It would also reduce the extent of power cuts to
   households, firms, and other institutions. About one year’s consumption of fuel, to run the EAGB
   generators, would be purchased through a parallel US$10 million Economic Community of West African
   States/West African Economic and Monetary Union (ECOWAS/WAEMU) grant.

   2.2: Commercial operations improvement. (Appraisal cost: US$2.5 million; Actual cost: US$2.5 million)
   This component consisted of the supply and installation of prepayment meters and installation of a new

                                                                                                              Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)



  customer management system (based on prepayment meters) that would ensure all commercial
  functionalities. Prepayment metering for electricity customers would improve revenue collection, thus
  enabling EAGB to increase its ability to purchase fuel and maintain its infrastructure.

  3: Rehabilitation of water production and storage. (Appraisal cost: US$1.23 million; Actual cost:
  US$1.23 million)

  Under this component, a 700 m3 water storage was to be constructed, in order to improve the quality and
  reliability of water supply to end-users.

  4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation. (Appraisal cost: US$0.47 million; Actual cost:
  US$0.47 million)

  The project would be implemented by a project implementation unit (PIU) at the Ministry of Economy, Plan
  and Regional Integration, which had been implementing the prior Multisector Infrastructure Rehabilitation
  Project (MIRP, P097975). Under this component, the project would finance project coordination,
  evaluation, supervision, and implementation, including: (i) the strengthening of the capacity of the PIU to
  comply with its responsibilities; (ii) the carrying out of project audits; and (iii) the implementation of a
  program to monitor and evaluate the carrying out of the project.

  Revision to Components

  Due to the political situation in the country and the insufficient attractiveness of the job opportunity because
  of the poor financial and commercial state of the utility, an expatriate general manager could not be
  recruited. As a result, the parties agreed to hire a full-time consultant financed by the project to support the
  managing director of EAGB and other part-time specialists in the commercial, financial, technical, and
  other divisions of the utility. Furthermore, in addition to the 700 m3 reservoir under the third component, a
  100 m3 reservoir was added to provide water for firefighters. Project documents do not include any
  information on how these revisions were made.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$22.70 million including US$1.0 million
  for contingencies and a US$10.0 million grant from ECOWAS/WAEMU for the purchase of HFO for the
  operation of generators. The actual project cost at project completion was US$24.90 million, which was
  110 percent of the appraisal amount. This was a result of a cost overrun for the generators, which was
  financed by a contingency fund of US$1.0 million and Additional Financing (AF) of US$2.20 million,
  approved in May 2011.

  Financing: The originally approved IDA grant ws US$12.70 million equivalent. With the additional
  financing amount of US$2.2 million to cover the increase in generator costs, IDA financing stood at


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)



   US$14.90 million at closure, and all the funds were accounted for. As noted, ECOWAS and WAEMU
   provided US$10.0 million for the purchase of fuel.

   Borrower contribution: There was no borrower contribution planned and none materialized.

   Restructurings and Dates:

   The project was restructured once: On April 17, 2013, the closing date was extended for 21 months from
   September 30, 2013 to June 30, 2015, to complete activities which had been delayed because of the
   military coup in April 2012.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives


  The project objective was relevant to the country conditions at the time of appraisal in 2010. Electricity and
  water supply was erratic in the capital, due to the failure of seven out of nine EAGB generators, the repair of
  which was not the least-cost option. The project was processed under the IDA Crisis Window Response,
  because it was deemed that without rapid intervention, electricity and water sectors would collapse entirely
  creating risks to civil peace and political stability.

  The project objective was also consistent with Guinea Bissau’s development priorities at appraisal and at
  closure. Guinea Bissau, which is one of the poorest and most fragile countries in the world, needs to
  increase the availability and reliability of electricity and water supply in its capital city, Bissau, and the
  country, in order to achieve the ultimate goal of poverty reduction. The aim of the government’s Second
  National Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, 2011-2015, was to "significantly reduce poverty in all its
  dimensions creating greater opportunities for income generation, employment, and improved access
  to improved basic public services in a state where the rule of law is entrenched." In this regard, the
  Emergency Electricity and Water Rehabilitation Project is fully aligned with the PRSP II Core Area 3:
  "Promote Sustainable Economic Development," which aims to accelerate the development of basic
  economic infrastructure, particularly in energy (expansion of the production and distribution infrastructure)
  within the framework of the new sectoral policies and institutional reforms, and in keeping with environmental
  requirements, in particular those related to climate change (ICR, p.20).

  Although there was no available World Bank Group strategy document for the project period, the
  development objectives were highly relevant to the Bank´s priorities for Guinea Bissau. According to the
  Country Economic Memorandum, dated January 12, 2015, the key priorities for Guinea Bissau are
  strengthening of the public sector, improvement of the provision of basic public services including electricity
  and water, and fostering of private investment. Chapter 2 of the Country Economic Memorandum (p.30)
  identifies the actions to be taken in the power and water sectors, which are consistent with the project’s
  development objectives. The project also supports the Bank’s twin goals of reducing extreme poverty and

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)



  boosting shared prosperity by aiming to provide access to safe water to the poor in unserved urban and peri-
  urban areas of Bissau and to restore water and electricity services under affordable conditions throughout
  the city (ICR, p.20).



  Rating
  High

b. Relevance of Design


  Project design was consistent with the stated objectives to assist the Government of Guinea Bissau in the
  rapid restoration and improvement of electricity and water supply services in its capital city. A solid causal
  chain could be established between funding and outcomes. The problem to be addressed was clearly defined
  as the unreliable and limited electricity and water supply in the capital city of Bissau. The main project activity
  of augmenting the power generation capacity through the installation of HFO-fired generators was to address
  this problem by increasing the amount of electricity supplied to consumers in Bissau, while providing
  electricity to water pumps for water supply. Likewise, construction of a 700 m3 water reservoir was expected
  to improve the quantity and quality of the water supplied to the consumers in Bissau. In addition, installation
  of prepayment meters and technical assistance was intended to improve EAGB’s financial viability and
  management so that electricity and water supply services would, over time, become more sustainable and the
  utility more manageable. The theory of change was adequately defined with actions to be taken to address
  the problems.

  However, there were significant shortcomings in project design. First, it was assumed that with the
  improvement in its financial viability and strengthening of its institutional capacity, EAGB would be capable of
  operating and maintaining the HFO-fired generators. Therefore, the project did not include any funds for the
  maintenance and repair of the generators, which became a significant problem even before closure, since
  both generators broke down and needed major repair. Second, although the funds were secured from
  ECOWAS/WEMU for the purchase of HFO to operate the generators for one year, design did not address
  procurement and storage. EAGB is the only consumer of HFO in Guinea-Bissau, for which there was no local
  supplier and no storage facility. EAGB had insufficient funds to sign a medium-term HFO purchase
  agreement. Consequently, the utility switched to diesel to operate the generators, which was not only more
  costly, but also more subject to theft, since, unlike HFO, it can be used in motor transport (diesel theft is a
  common problem in the country). Third, design did not include any activities to improve the distribution
  networks for electricity and water, which continued to be a serious bottleneck throughout implementation.
  Although other projects, which were ongoing at appraisal (such as the MIRP), included activities aimed at
  rehabilitating the electricity and water distribution networks, these latter remained in a poor state. In May
  2014, unaccounted-water was estimated at 50 percent of production, due to leaks in the distribution system
  and low bill collection. Frequent electricity outages adversely affected the water supply. Flaws in electricity
  distribution are thought to have adversely affected the operation of the new generators, resulting in their
  eventual breakdown (ICR, p.17). Fourth, design took insufficient account of the fragile status of Guinea
  Bissau. In particular, the objective of improving EAGB’s financial viability and institutional capacity was over-
  ambitious for an emergency intervention.

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 18
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)




       Rating
       Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To assist the Government of Guinea Bissau in the rapid restoration and improvement of electricity supply
     services in its capital city.

    Rationale

    Outputs

    • Two 2.5 MW generators and 700 m3 fuel tank were installed. The target of increasing the electricity
    generation capacity from 3 MW to 8 MW was achieved during project implementation. However, in early
    2015, both generators broke down and they have been out-of-service since then. The 3 MW generation
    capacity owned by EAGB at the beginning of the project also broke down. At closure, EAGB did not own any
    operational generation capacity.
    • 21,500 pre-payment meters and software to operate them were installed as targeted. Due to voltage
    variations and weather-related problems, 1,500 pre-payment meters were out-of-service at project closure.
    • With the support of technical assistance, a study of the electricity legislation was prepared and presented
    to the government (no details are available on the terms of reference). An assessment of human resources
    and evaluation of operational assets of the EAGB, an assessment of public-private-partnership options, and
    a stakeholder consultation and strategic communication campaign to be implemented under this project
    were financed and implemented under the MIRP and by IFC and EAGB.
    • Technical assistant consultants were hired to support EAGB in commercial and financial management and
    technical aspects through formal and informal training sessions, preparation and review of studies, and study
    tours. Instead of the expatriate general manager, a consultant was hired to support the EAGB
    management.

    Outcomes

    • Two 5 MW capacity generators started operation in October 2012 and continued supplying electricity to
    Bissau until January 2015. As a result, the electricity generated by EAGB increased from 7.4 GWh per year
    to 45.8 GWh per year. The target was 35 GWh per year. However, in January 2015, after the breakdown of
    both generators, EAGB leased 10 MW capacity to provide electricity to Bissau using its own funds. The two



                                                                                                      Page 6 of 18
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)



    generators have been out of service since January 2015 due to lack of technical capacity and insufficient
    funds, and there is currently no prospect of their once again becoming operational.
    • The number of consumers of public electricity supply services increased from 115,000 to 218,700
    exceeding the target of 140,000. This was mostly achieved through the technical assistance given to EAGB
    to regularize customer records and the installation of pre-payment meters.
    • The electricity bills collection rate increased from a baseline of 81 percent to 93 percent (target 95
    percent), mostly because of the installation of pre-payment meters.
    • However, the increase in the collection rate did not result in an improvement in the financial viability of the
    utility. Operating costs of EAGB covered by its own cash flow was at 75 percent at project start. The target
    was to increase this ratio to 100 percent and by the third year of the operation to start recording profits.
    However, high generation costs caused by continued use of more expensive diesel rather than HFO,
    significant diesel theft, weak commercial management, and poor condition of the distribution network
    resulted in a worsening of EAGB’s financial situation despite the installation of pre-payment meters and
    technical assistance support. At closure, 70 percent of the operating costs were covered by the utility's own
    cash flow.

    Since EAGB does not regularly keep records of load shedding and electricity outages, the utility was unable
    to determine how reliable the electricity supply was. According to the May 2014 PAD (p. 3) for the follow-up
    Emergency Electricity and Water Services Upgrading Project (EEWSUP), reliability was still a major
    problem: "service interruptions were general and … services were, for instance, available only three to four
    hours per day in September-October 2013". At that time, both generators financed by the project under
    review were operational. Furthermore, "[t]he average monthly electricity consumption of customers with pre-
    payment meters fell from 50kWh in June 2013 to 10 kWh in September-October 2013"(also p.3).

    With both project-financed generators out of service, and with no plans to repair them, the project’s short
    term positive impact has not been sustained, and the objective of rapidly restoring and improving electricity
    supply services in Bissau has not been achieved.



    Rating
   Negligible
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     To assist the Government of Guinea Bissau in the rapid restoration and improvement of water supply
     services in its capital city.

    Rationale

    Outputs

                                                                                                          Page 7 of 18
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)




    • Water storage capacity increased by 700 m3 as targeted at appraisal.
    • Additionally, 100 m3 water storage capacity was created for the use of firefighters.
    • With the support of technical assistance, a study of the water legislation was prepared and presented to
    the government (the ICR presents no details on the study's terms of reference).
    • Other tassistance support described under Objective 1 above also applies to Objective 2.

    Outcomes

    • Following the construction of 700m3 and 100 m3 reservoirs (originally included in the Multisector
    Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project but transferred to the one under review due to procurement delays and
    lack of funding), corresponding to one-hour of average daily production, the number of consumers with direct
    access to water supply increased from 101,300 to 158,000, surpassing the target of 118,500.

    This achievement is, however, relativized by three factors. First, according to the PAD for the EEWSUP,
    water service interruptions were common because of interruptions in electricity supply. Services were
    available only for three or four hours per day in September-October 2013, although the project-financed
    reservoirs were operational from January 2013. Second, average daily consumption per capita via domestic
    connections was 25 liters in 2013 compared to 60 to 100 in other countries in the Region (EEWSUP-PAD,
    p.3). Third, the project included no activities to improve the quality of the water supply, nor is any information
    included on it in the ICR. Although the quality of Guinea Bissau’s unprocessed water is reputedly high,
    requiring minimal treatment, the distribution network, mostly consisting of aged asbestos cement pipes, is
    prone to contamination (EEWSUP-PAD, p.28). As noted above, leakage is estimated at about half of
    production, and this would likely increase if water pressure were to be adjusted to industry standards.
    Hence, while higher water storage capacity in Bissau is a necessary condition for the improvement of water
    services, it is not a sufficient one.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Efficiency


  Economic and Financial Analysis

  At appraisal, the existing generation capacity was 5.5MW, diesel fired. Compared to this and other feasible
  alternatives, the ex-ante economic analysis showed that purchase of a 5 MW HFO-fired capacity was the least
  cost option for supplying electricity to Bissau, rather than leasing additional capacity (PAD, pp.51-53). Similarly,

                                                                                                          Page 8 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)



the economic analysis resulted in a net economic benefit for the installation of pre-payment meters. In return
for a monthly charge of US$5 for a pre-payment meter, the energy savings benefit was estimated at US$15.
Furthermore, due to its pre-payment model, these meters were expected to increase EAGB’s collection rate,
hence improving its finances. The water storage investment was shown to be economically feasible.

The internal rate of return (IRR) and net present value (NPV) were calculated separately for the generator
investment and the water storage investment. These two investments together constituted 57 percent of the
total actual project cost, excluding the financing from ECOWAS/EUWA for HFO purchase. The IRR and NPV
for the generator investment was estimated to be 46 percent and US$10.69 million respectively, and. for the
water storage investment as 14.35 percent and US$0.33 million respectively.

The same methodology was used for the ex post economic analysis, apart fromt the discount rate, which was
reduced from 12 percent at appraisal to 10 percent. With both generators out-of-service, the economic analysis
resulted in an IRR of 4.4 percent and a negative NPV of US$2.48 million, with the assumption that the
generators would be repaired and become operational in the second half of 2016. The sensitivity analysis
showed that in case of no repairs, the IRR would be minus 44.4 percent and the NPV would be minus US$6.28
million. The repairs have not yet been, and are unlikely to be, scheduled.

The economic analysis conducted for the water storage investment at closure resulted in an IRR of 12.4
percent and NPV of US$0.03 million, which are lower than the values calculated at appraisal. The ICR does not
discuss the reasons for this. Comparison of the economic analyses at appraisal and project closing indicates a
possible error in the appraisal calculations due to discounting by one more year. These two investments
constituted 75 percent of the project actual cost, an 18 percentage point increase from the appraisal amount
due to the cost overrun of the generators.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

The project implementation period was estimated to be three years at appraisal. This was realistic given the
scope of work and the political situation in the country, which was classified as fragile. Until the military coup in
April 2012, the project was implemented faster than planned and the nearly 80 percent of the grant funds had
been disbursed. Disbursements were suspended for a nine-month period and implementation resumed in
January 2013 in a difficult political context, which eventually necessitated the extension of the closing date from
September 2013 to June 2015.

Efficiency was also negatively affected because of design weaknesses. EAGB faced difficulties with the
procurement of HFO which is not easily available in Guinea Bissau, an important point which was overlooked
during appraisal. This resulted in continued lack of electricity and water supply due to the unavailability of fuel
to operate the generators (ICR, p.17). EAGB eventually shifted to leased, diesel-fired, which is considerably
more costly.

Overall, given the breakdown of the generators (with little apparent prospect of their repair in the foreseeable
future) which constituted 66 percent of the actual project cost, and the problems faced in the procurement of
fuel to operate the generators, efficiency is rated negligible.


                                                                                                        Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)




Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate Available?         Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


Due to erratic electricity and water supply services in Bissau, and the high risk that both sectors could collapse
entirely further worsening civil peace and political stability in the country, the project objectives were highly
relevant to the country conditions at appraisal. They were also consistent with Guinea Bissau’s development
priorities and the Bank’s priorities for the country. Relevance of design is rated modest since design did not
make adequate provision for, inter alia, securing fuel supply and maintenance of the generators. The efficacy of
the objective related to the rapid restoration and improvement of electricity supply services in Bissau is rated
negligible, since both generators have been out-of-service after operating for two years, and there seems little
or no prospect of their being repaired in the foreseeable future. The achievement of the second objective of
rapid restoration and improvement of water services in Bissau is rated modest, due to ongoing problems related
to the water distribution network and unreliable electricity supply to operate the water pumps, which constitute
two major bottlenecks for the improvement of both the quality and the quantity of services. Efficiency is rated
negligible, reflecting the high negative IRR of the generator investment, which constituted 66 percent of the
actual project cost, and the operational inefficiencies during project implementation caused by problems faced in
the procurement of HFO to run the generators. Overall, these constitute major shortcomings, and outcome is
rated unsatisfactory.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Unsatisfactory


7. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)




The major risks to the project’s development outcome, which is largely limited to the modest results in the water
sector, are political. Despite a lower level of political instability in Guinea Bissau since the military cup in April
2012, the country is still prone to economic and political turbulence.

EAGB’s weak financial and commercial viability represents an additional risk. The utility does not have the
capacity to implement major reforms or investment programs, or attract private sector participation in the sector
with a long term perspective. Lack of funds also prevents the utility from properly maintaining the existing
infrastructure and from scheduling repair of the out-of-service generators financed by the project.

Overall, the risk to development outcome is rated high.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
    High




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  Preparation benefited from the Bank’s experience from the MIRP in identifying problems in electricity and
  water supply services. During appraisal, consultations with key stakeholders consisting of private sector,
  public sector, civil society and vulnerable groups, such as female-headed households, the elderly,
  disabled and youth, were conducted, and the scope of activities defined accordingly (PAD, p.11).
  Safeguards policies were adequately addressed (see Section 11 below). Likewise, financial management
  and disbursement and procurement arrangements were clearly defined, and fiduciary management
  benefited from the arrangements made under the MIRP. Close Bank supervision was imbedded in these
  arrangements.
  　
  However, there were a number of significant shortcomings. First, as noted in Section 3b above, design
  took insufficient account of the need to ensure fuel supply, maintain and repair generators, and focus on
  the poor condition of the distribution networks for both electricity and water. Second, the attempt to
  improve the financial and commercial viability of the utility through technical assistance was over-
  ambitious for an emergency project of this scale. Third, while the assumptions used in the economic and
  financial analysis were generally adequate, the possibility that the generators might require major repair
  was not addressed. Fourth, although the technology chosen for a rapid improvement in electricity
  services, which would also improve water supply services, was the least cost option, HFO supply
  constraints were not taken into consideration. Fifth, the exclusion of EAGB staff from the project
  implementation unit (PIU), weakened the utility’s ownership of the project. Sixth, fuel supply difficulties
  and cost overruns, both of which materialized, were not included in the extensive list of risks identified
  during appraisal.

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)




  Overall, shortcomings are considered significant, and Quality at Entry is assessed as moderately
  unsatisfactory.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  At least three supervision missions were conducted each year. These missions were continued during
  the period of political uncertainty following the military coup in April 2012, which made the resumption
  of implementation easier when disbursements were allowed to resume nine months later. Frequent
  missions allowed the Bank team to monitor closely the progress of project implementation, and support
  the project implementation unit and the EAGB. Supervision of fiduciary and safeguards aspects was
  adequate given the difficult political context during implementation. There was compliance with both
  safeguards and fiduciary polices (see Section 11 below).

  The Bank team was proactive in providing financing under the project to extend the maintenance contract
  of the HFO-fired generators beyond the guarantee period However, when the generators broke down in
  January 2015, not all necessary action to remedy the situation was taken, and the project closed with
  uncertainty about the future of the generators. This is considered a moderate shortcoming, and the
  Quality of Supervision is therefore rated moderately satisfactory.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

9. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance

  Prior to the military coup in April 2012, the government’s commitment to the project was high, as
  reflected in their efforts to address difficulties in procuring HFO. However, the government’s focus was
  restricted to short-term achievements. Measures to improve EAGB’s financial viability, such as adjusting
  electricity and water tariffs, could not be implemented due to the political situation in the country. The
  instability caused by the military coup in April 2012 weakened the government’s commitment to the
  project and its ability to take any measures to address the utility’s lack of financial viability. Although the
  ICR (p.27) gives credit to the government for expediting the negotiation of the 10 MW rental generation
  capacity to maintain electricity supply in Bissau, this was a more costly option. Moreover, the government


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)



  did not prepare a plan or provide funding for the repair of the generators, which remain out-of-service as
  of December, 2018.

  These shortcomings are considered major, and Government Performance is rated unsatisfactory.


  Government Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance

  Due to the weak institutional capacity of EAGB to implement investment projects, the Plan and
  Regional Integration Department of the Ministry of Economy was chosen as the implementing agency.
  The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) housed there already existed and was implementing the then
  ongoing MIRP. The PIU staff were experienced in Bank project implementation. The PIU’s commitment
  to project implementation was high. Project implementation proceeded faster than planned until the
  military coup in April 2012. The PIU’s handling of procurement and fiduciary aspects of the project, and
  implementation of environmental safeguards policies were adequate. Accounts and supporting
  documents were properly kept and all expenditures were recorded. The external auditors’ opinions on
  annual financial statements were unqualified. The PIU had a staff member responsible for procurement
  who was specialized in the Bank’s procurement guidelines. However, the ICR (p.27) states that the PIU
  did not efficiently manage the gains from exchange rate changes. Furthermore, reportedly neither the
  PIU nor the Ministry of Economy urged the repair of the HFO-fired generators (which were operated
  and maintained by the EAGB). Although beneficiary and stakeholder consultations were included in the
  project design, they were not carried out during implementation. Overall, the performance of the
  implementing agency is rated moderately satisfactory.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


10. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  Outcome indicators were restricted to the increases in the supply of electricity and water services,
  rather than the quality and reliability of these services and their impact on end-users. This mostly
  reflected the absence of data, since EAGB does not keep systemic records (EWESUP-PAD, p.3). Even
  for the restoration of, and increase in, service provision, EAGB’s data are not wholly reliable. For
  example, it is not clear how the number of water users increased by more than three times of the

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)



  target, as a result of the construction of a 700 m3 water storage. Institutional responsibility for M&E was
  assumed by the PIU.



b. M&E Implementation

  M&E was challenging, especially during the first three years of project implementation, due to the insufficient
  institutional capacity of EAGB, which could not produce reliable technical, commercial and financial data.
  There were some improvements after technical assistance started in December 2013, but M&E
  implementation still suffered from inaccurate energy meters at the power plants, non-existence of energy
  meters at substations, and an obsolete billing system (ICR, p.18). Measures to remedy M&E design
  weaknesses were not taken. Although "the implementation of a program to monitor and evaluate the carrying
  out of the project" was included in the fourth component, this appears to have been limited to the hiring of a
  technical assistant to help the EAGB in various areas, including M&E. Adequate



c. M&E Utilization

  M&E was largely used to monitor project outputs and there were no strategic or policy-related applications.
  Information gathered during implementation was used for the preparation of the EWESUP.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

11. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was classified as Category B under OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), and no other
  safeguards policy was triggered. The classification was based on the An Environmental and Social Impact
  Assessment of the then ongoing MIRP (ICR, p. 19).

  An Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet specific to the project was disclosed with the ESIA of the MIRP (ICR,
  p. 19). The ICR (p. 19) reports that an Environmental and Social Management Plan for the construction of
  the 700 m3 water storage was prepared and implemented, and a social and environmental specialist was
  hired. According to the ICR, the project was compliant with OP/BP 4.01 throughout implementation.




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)



b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial Management

  Financial management arrangements of the project were reported by the ICR to be adequate. The project
  implementation unit (PIU) was responsible for the financial management of the project under close Bank
  team supervision. The PIU was adequately staffed and benefited from the experience gained from the
  implementation of the MIRP. Financial audits were conducted on time and the external auditors’ opinions
  were unqualified. Interim un-audited reports were also submitted on time. IDA funds were fully accounted for
  at project closing. According to the ICR, there were no issues of corruption or misuse of funds associated
  with the project.

  Procurement

  All procurement of goods, works and services financed by the project followed Bank procurement guidelines
  (ICR, p. 18). There was a dedicated procurement specialist in the PIU, who was proficient in the Bank’s
  procurement procedures. There were few implementation delays related to procurement, other than those
  following the military coup in April 2013. When the tender for the procurement of HFO-fired generators
  resulted in a price higher than planned at appraisal, additional financing was provided to address the cost
  overrun. However, there were difficulties in procuring HFO, which led the utility to switch to more costly
  diesel. There were no reported cases of misprocurement.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None.



d. Other
  None.



12. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                      ICR                     IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               The project could not achieve
                                                                               the restoration and
                                                                               rehabilitation of electricity
                             Moderately
Outcome                                              Unsatisfactory            services beyond an initial two
                             Satisfactory
                                                                               years due to the breakdown of
                                                                               the generators. Hence, the
                                                                               attainment of the electricty-

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)



                                                                                    related development objective
                                                                                    is rated negligible. Efficiency
                                                                                    is also rated negligible.
Risk to Development
                               High                     High                        ---
Outcome
                                                                                    Quality at Entry had significant
                               Moderately               Moderately                  shortcomings, which
Bank Performance
                               Satisfactory             Unsatisfactory              contributed to the non-
                                                                                    achievement of the PDOs.
                                                                                    There were major
                                                                                    shortcomings in government
                                                                                    performance, including
                               Moderately               Moderately
Borrower Performance                                                                insufficient action to improve
                               Satisfactory             Unsatisfactory
                                                                                    the utility’s financial viability of
                                                                                    the utility and to fund the
                                                                                    repair of the generators.
Quality of ICR                                          Modest                      ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

13. Lessons


Four lessons are dawn by IEG based on the information in the ICR and that provided by the project team.

A full analysis of the obstacles to the securing of fuel to operate generators and the funding of
maintenance and repair of equipment is necessary to avoid jeopardizing the achievement and
sustainability of development outcomes. Although the proposed use of HFO to operate the generators was
the least cost solution and also less vulnerable to theft and embezzlement, Guinea Bissau was unable to
secure a reliable source of supply, and storage facilities were also lacking. Due to the weak financial viability of
the EAGB, a long-term HFO purchase agreement could not be concluded with the suppliers. Similarly, EAGB
could not draw up a plan or obtain funding to repair the project-financed generators.

Because of the poor state of the electricity and water distribution networks in fragile countries,
restoration of power supply alone is likely to be insufficient to attain the desired development
outcomes. Both the electricity and the water distribution networks in Bissau were in poor condition. Even
though power supply was temporarily improved after the installation of the generators financed under the
project, provision of service to consumers remained intermittent, with voltage variations and a high risk of water
contamination from worn-out and leaking pipes.




                                                                                                         Page 16 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)



Close supervision of the project by the Bank team and the presence of an adequately staffed project
implementation unit can facilitate the completion of project activities and the achievement of project
outputs and outcomes in fragile countries even during political instability. The project was intensively
supervised with at least three missions per year to the country to supervise project implementation and provide
assistance to the borrower. As a result, the project was able to resume its activities nine months after the
military coup and achieved intended outputs before the extended closing date.

Although the presence of an experienced and adequately staffed project implementation unit was
instrumental in the smooth implementation of the project, the exclusion of the main project
beneficiary's staff from project implementation can weaken the ownership of the project by that
beneficiary and pose a threat to the sustainability of development outcomes. As the electricity and water
utility, EAGB was the main recipient and beneficiary of the project outputs. However, the project implementing
unit existed under the Ministry of Economy had an exclusive authority in the implementation of Bank projects,
and did not include any staff members from EAGB. For example, the project implementing unit did not consult
the utility during the procurement of generators. This created resentment on the EAGB side and weakened the
utility's ownership of the project.




14. Assessment Recommended?

Yes

Please explain


A joint assessment of the Multisector Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project (P097975) and this project is
recommended. Both projects are rated in the unsatisfactory range for outcome. An assessment of both
projects would provide invaluable insights on how to improve emergency interventions in fragile countries for
the provision of fundamental utility services of electricity and water supply.



15. Comments on Quality of ICR


The overall narrative of the ICR is concise and candid. It is consistent in its argument. Analyses are
sufficiently supported by evidence. However, the ICR did not assess the achievement of the development of
objectives at project closure, but rather at an earlier point, when the generators were operational. The impact
of the breakdown of the generators is not, therefore, fully reflected. The ICR did not provide sufficient
information on the effect of the technical assistance activities implemented on the achievement of the
development outcomes. The lessons learned were mostly in the form of recommendations. The M&E
discussion could have been more detailed, especially utilization. There are calculation mistakes in "Annex 1
Project Costs and Financing." Moreover, the ICR was submitted more than three years after project closing.

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GW- Emergency Electricity & Water Rehab. (P120910)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Modest




                                                                                      Page 18 of 18
