     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation (P114204)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0021300

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P114204                                   ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                    Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-78840                                30-Jun-2015                                        215,102,317.36

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 03-Jun-2010                               29-Dec-2017

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          495,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           271,812,880.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       271,812,880.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Fernando Manibog           Dileep M. Wagle              Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   The project development objective (PDO) was “to improve the financial and operational performance and the
   commercial management of the six DisCos by reducing electricity losses, increasing bill collection rates, and
   improving quality of service.” (Loan Agreement dated February 24, 2011, Schedule 1, page 6). "DisCos"
   stand for distribution companies.

   The Project Appraisal Document (PAD, dated April 18, 2010) and the Implementation Completion and
   Results Report (ICR, dated June 29, 2018) both stated the same PDO.

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation (P114204)




   This ICR Review will assess the extent to which three related but separable objectives were achieved
   in following six DisCos: (1) Eletrobras Distribuição Alagoas (CEAL) Company in State of Alagoas; (2) Boa
   Vista Energia in Roraima State; (3) CEPISA in Piauí State; (4) Eletrobras Distribuição Rondônia (CERON) in
   Rondônia State; (5) Eletroacre in Acre State; and (5) Amazonas Energia in the State of Amazonas. Three
   objectives are:
   PDO1: To improve operational performance
   PDO2: To improve commercial management
   PDO3: To improve financial performance

   A split evaluation was not conducted because the lowering of the project scope was commensurate with the
   lower commitment size.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                        PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   The project had two main components:

   Component 1: Service Quality improvement and Loss Reduction
   (Appraisal estimate, US$675.3 million; actual US$259.6 million for IBRD funds only, as
   disaggregated figures on counterpart funding were not available)
   This component was intended to improve the quality of service, reduce electricity losses, and increase
   collection rates in electricity distribution. Goods, equipment, works and services was to be acquired for
   three main areas: (a) distribution network reinforcement (US$257.4 million); (b) implementation of
   Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) and other measures to maximize metered consumption (US$387.9
   million); and (c) modernization of the DisCos’ Management Information System (MIS) (US$30 million).

   Component 2: Institutional Strengthening
   (Appraisal estimate, US$34 million; US$10.99 million for IBRD funds only, as disaggregated figures on
   counterpart funding were not available) )
   This component was intended to strengthen the operational capacities of the six DisCos through technical
   assistance, training, studies, equipment and consulting services. The specific activities include: (a)
   performance-based management (US$13 million); (b) environmental and social impact management
   (US$2 million); (c) support to community outreach (US$9 million); and (d) support to selected programs at
   a sectoral training and research training center in the state of Acre.



                                                                                                            Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation (P114204)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Costs

  At appraisal in April 2010, the total project cost was estimated at US$709.3 million. Given the
  cancellations in the Bank loan and the Government counterpart at the June 2015 and March 2017
  restructuring, the total disbursement and actual project cost at the December 2017 closing date was
  US$419.7 million.

  Financing

  At appraisal in April 2010, the total project cost of US$709.3 million was to be financed by a Bank loan of
  US$495.0 million and the Borrower’s contribution of US$214.3 million. At the first Level 2 restructuring on
  June 30, 2015, US$143.81 million had been disbursed, leaving a balance of US$351.69 undisbursed. At
  the second restructuring on March 30, 2017 (9 months before the closing date), more than half of the
  Bank loan or US$271.81 million had been disbursed and US$223.19 remained undisbursed. This was
  also the amount disbursed when the project closed on December 31, 2017, representing 45 percent less
  than the originally approved amount.

  Borrower Contribution

  The Borrower’s aggregate actual contribution was US$147.9 million, or 31 percent less than the appraisal
  estimate of US$214.3 million, as indicated above. During the first project restructuring on June 2015,
  counterpart funds were cancelled. The Bank filled the financing gap by reallocating project savings that
  accrued due to the devaluation of the Brazilian Real and cost efficiency gains from successful
  international bidding. At the second restructuring on March 2017, activities that were added during the first
  restructuring (to take advantage of large savings due to devaluation of the Real and successful
  competitive bidding) were cancelled—following a decision by Electrobras shareholders not to disburse any
  new loan proceeds to the DisCos except for contracts signed before August 4, 2016.

  Dates

  The project was approved on June 30, 2010 and became effective on May 23, 2011. A midterm review
  was conducted two years later on May 28, 2013. There were two Level 2 restructurings. The first was on
  June 30, 2015, during which the financing plan, the implementation schedule, and the results framework
  were changed, and the closing date extended as a result. The second was on March 30, 2017, during
  which components and costs were changed, the results framework and implementation schedule were
  modified, both Bank and Borrower financing was cancelled while remaining funds were reallocated among
  disbursement categories, and the closing date was extended once again. The project, originally set to
  close on June 30, 2015, closed two and a half years later on December 29, 2017.


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation (P114204)




   3. Relevance of Objectives

       Rationale


       The relevance of the PDOs is high with respect to the current strategies of the government and the
       Bank. The PDOs are fully aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY18 to FY23. The
       Eletrobras project’s objective of improving electricity service quality and reducing service interruptions—in
       six of Brazil’s poorest states and mostly in urban areas—directly serve the CPF’s Focus Area 3 on
       “inclusive and sustainable development” by providing “inclusive and sustainable urban
       services.” Moreover, the project’s PDOs addressed one of the risks identified in the CPF related to “the
       difficulties in attracting private investors”, by supporting the Government in improving the technical capacity
       and financial position of the six DisCos with a view to their future privatization. In this specific regard, the
       recent actions taken by the Government further underline the high relevance of the project’s PDOs: (a)
       Early in 2018, the Government disclosed the draft bill proposing to privatize Eletrobras; and (b) In March
       2018, the Government formed a special congressional committee to analyze the proposed privatization
       bill. As recently as July 2018, Brazil’s planning minister announced the Government’s plans to auction off
       one of the units owned by Eletrobras in July and holding the auction of the other five units owned by
       Eletrobras until August.



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To improve operational performance

    Rationale

    Theory of Change

    The PAD does not discuss the project’s theory of change. It only refers briefly to the higher-level objective to
    which the project contributes, by stating that improvements in the quality of electricity services in the six
    states are “a means to improve the quality of life and foster economic growth.” (PAD, paragraph 19, page 7)
    The PAD’s Annex 3 present’s the project’s Results Framework, which contains the year-by-year targets for


                                                                                                           Page 4 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation (P114204)



intermediate and final outcome indicators in the six DisCos. Actions and specific percentages that
demonstrate institutional improvements are also delineated. While useful for monitoring purposes, the
Results Framework does not analyze causality and attribution aspects that a credible theory of change
would require.

The ICR (Figure 1) does present diagrammatically the project’s theory of change (Figure 1, page 7). It
makes a laudable effort (infrequently seen in recent ICRs) to delineate the critical assumptions that would
facilitate the progression of activities into outputs, and outputs into outcomes. As correctly represented,
many of these assumptions are institutional capacity factors and behavioral changes. However, the
accompanying text (ICR, paragraph 5, page 6) only briefly reiterated the PDOs and the key outcomes lifted
from the boxes in Figure 1. However, a rigorous theory of change would require an analysis of whether the
project’s activities were the right ones (e.g., other important activities were not neglected), and whether they
were also of an adequate scale and timing. The combined or joint effect of the diverse activities also need to
be shown as linked along a causal chain from outputs to outcomes. Finally, the attribution of those
outcomes to the project’s specific interventions needs to be analyzed based on a counter-factual. Reiteration
of the list of PDOs, outputs and outcomes does not achieve this analysis.

It is important to note that (a) the energy regulator ANEEL required some indicators to be adopted and (b)
PETROBRAS added its own indicators, hence there were 26 PDO-level outcome indicators and 42
intermediate output indicators. This seems to be an excessive number of indicators, particularly the 26
indicators meant to capture higher-level outcomes. The ICR (paragraph 93, page 27) indicates that "the
overly ambitious targets were not adequately adjusted because Eletrobras wanted them to be aligned with
the required indicators and targets from the regulator." However, it would have been advisable to reduce the
number of PDO-level indicators. (ICR, paragraph 89, page 26)

The outputs and outcomes presented below for the three PDOs were based on Annex 1: Results Framework
and Key Outputs of the ICR, pages 36 to 59.

PDO 1: To improve operational performance

Outputs

The following outputs were substantially achieved or exceeded:


  • New medium voltage (MV) lines - 1,032 kilometers were installed compared to 1,096 kilometers
  planned.
  • Automatic reclosers – 1,465 of the planned 966 reclosers were installed, thus exceeding the target.
  • Voltage regulators and banks of capacitors – 761 were installed compared to 772 planned. Amazonas,
  CEAL and Boa Vista exceeded their respective targets.
  • To mainstream socio-environmental guidelines, training and workshops were conducted, and the
  following were produced: (a) three manuals on Works, Hazardous Wastes, and Solid Wastes; (b) two


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation (P114204)



        informational handbooks; and (c) four executive reports. The following intermediate result was modestly
        achieved:

        • Rehabilitation of MV and low voltage (LV) lines and upgrading of circuits – 988 kilometers were
        rehabilitated compared to 2,066 kilometers planned.

    Outcomes

    The following key outcomes resulted from the upgrading of distribution networks in the sic DisCos (by
    rehabilitating LV and MV lines, and installing automated reclosers), the installation of voltage regulators and
    banks of capacitors, and the adoption of environmental and social guidelines:


        • Decrease in the frequency of service interruptions. Except for Amazonas and CEAL, the other four
        DisCos achieved their target reduction (CERON and CEPISA exceeded their respective targets. For
        CERON, the appraisal baseline for service interruptions was 43, the target was 28, and 19.5 was
        achieved. For CEPISA, the appraisal baseline for service interruptions was 33, the target was 21, and
        14.7 was achieved.)
        • Decrease in the duration of service interruptions. Except for Electroacre and CEAL, the other four
        DisCos achieved their target reduction (CEPISA and Boa Vista exceeded their respective targets.)
        • Institutional improvements through the adoption of sound social & environmental management practices
        and improved social action and communication programs.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     To improve commercial management

    Rationale
    Outputs

    The following outputs were substantially achieved:




                                                                                                        Page 6 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation (P114204)



        • Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) – 12,475 AMI meters were installed for the planned 7,060 MV
        consumer points, and 40,851 AMI meters were installed for the planned 103,000 LV consumer points.
        • Re-listing of consumers – 3,130,099 consumer points and 1,888,653 consumers were re-cadastered,
        based on the decision during implementation that the current Commercial Management System (CMS) did
        not need replacement, but the cadaster of consumers needed to be updated.
        • Environmental and social training and workshops --these were provided to improve commercial
        management, together with improving operational performance as indicated above in PDO 1. The
        following intermediate result was not achieved:

        • Full implementation of Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) across the six DisCos – Eletrobras opted for
        using SAP for the entire company instead of ERP. This goal was not achieved due to costs, conflict with
        procurement rules and time delays.

    Outcomes

    The main outcomes were the installation and adoption of AMI systems, the re-cadastering of consumer
    points and consumers, and the roll-out of environmental and social guidelines and training
    (although Eletrobras opting instead for SAP, hence the ERP was not implemented as planned). 100 percent
    of MV clients were included in the AMI system, which broke the culture of fraud. This was possible because
    the number of MV fraudsters was small (compared to LV users), whereas detection was instantaneous and
    corrective response was quick, thus making investments in fraud unprofitable. In Rondonia, for example, the
    number of recidivists (who were caught but tried to commit fraud again) were reduced from 28 to 3.


    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective

     To improve financial performance

    Rationale

    Outputs

    The intermediate results discussed under PDO 2 above—related to AMI installation and re-cadastering of
    consumers--and were assessed as substantially achieved, also support the achievement of PDO 3.

    Outcomes



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation (P114204)



             The PDO indicator of reducing total losses was not achieved. At the project’s December 2017 closing, the
             total losses for all the six DisCos were still significantly higher (i.e., ranging from 6 to 11 percentage points)
             than the lower targeted levels that were supposed to be attained after losses had been reduced. The actual
             levels achieved were near to the 2010 baselines, some showing only marginal improvements. At closing,
             Amazonas had a total loss level that was worse, i.e., higher than the appraisal baseline.

             The PDO indicator of increasing collection rates was also not achieved. With the exception of CEPISA, the
             other DisCos did not achieve their targets. At the project’s closing in 2017, CERON and CEAL remained at
             the original baseline level in 2010, showing no improvement. Electroacre and Boa Vista showed declines in
             collection rates.

             The ICR correctly indicates (paragraph 87, page 26) that the loss reduction and collection rate indicators
             mismatched the scope of the project activities: "They reflected the assumption that the package of
             measures to be implemented by the project was comprehensive enough to address all loss drivers, which
             turned out not to be true. Therefore, they were eventually too broad and thus too sensitive to exogenous
             factors to properly capture the contribution of the project..." Paragraph 89 also indicates that: "...the
             indicator measuring collection rates--already reasonably high--focused on a second order issue because
             their improvement would not lead to a game changer with respect to revenues." More direct measures of
             financial performance would have been more appropriate.



             Rating
      Modest
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

Taking into account the substantial achievements in operational performance (PDO 1) and commercial
management (PDO 2), as well as institutional improvements particularly the adoption of environmental & social
management practices, the overall project efficacy rating is Substantial. PDO 3 to improve financial performance
was achieved only to a modest extent, which according to the ICR (paragraph 50, page 17) was influenced
significantly by a combination of the severe economic recession, huge tariff hikes that led to higher levels of
payment defaults, and the migration of large industrial customers that left a larger base of poor paying customers.

As a counter-factual, the ICR further indicates that as a result of implementing the project’s activities, over 725
GWh were recovered and aggregated, without which losses would have been much greater by the time the
project closed.




Overall Efficacy Rating

                                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation (P114204)



Substantial

5. Efficiency


 At appraisal, the project's economic benefits were defined as savings that accrue from the reduction of
 electricity generation resulting from lower technical losses and reduction on resource use due to increased
 efficiency. The reduction in CO2 emissions were also indicated but was not included in the
 calculations. Over a 10-year benefit stream under a base case scenario, and using a 10 percent discount
 rate, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was 18.5 percent and the net present value (NPV) was
 US$260 million.

 For the ex-post economic analysis, the economic value of quality improvement (i.e., the reduction in electricity
 supply interruptions) was calculated similarly as in the PAD, by taking the consumed energy (in MWh) as well
 as the prevailing tariffs upon the reduction of the indicator related to electricity supply interruption. As in the
 PAD, it was assumed that the monetary value billed by the DisCos from the additional and constant electricity
 supply reflects an equivalent benefit extracted by the consumers. Based on this conservative assumption--
 which does not reflect the consumer surplus, the additional value generated by businesses, or the losses and
 damages that come with service interruptions--the EIRR is 13.1 percent using a 10 percent discount rate.

 There were shortcomings in administrative and implementation efficiency. The project's duration exceeded
 original plans (6.5 years instead of 5 years). The political and economic shocks during the project
 implementation led to the Brazilian Real’s rapid devaluation of over 50 percent. Out of 252 contracts, only
 eight were ICBs hence 244 contracts were to be bid in local currency. At the start of the devaluation, only
 US$ 21 million was disbursed but within a few months, the project doubled the currency available for project
 execution. At project closure, disbursements were in local currency, i.e., R$842 million out of the appraisal
 estimate of R$ 866 million. Moreover, with the Bank’s strong advocacy and support, the project achieved
 substantial price reductions through its competitive ICB processes. For example, the largest ICB contract
 was signed for US$94 million, instead of the estimated US$130 million. Taking these considerations into
 account, the project's efficiency is rated substantial.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation (P114204)



                                     Rate
                                                            Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                     Available?
                                                                                       95.00
Appraisal                                                  18.50
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                       95.00
ICR Estimate                                               13.10
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


The project's current relevance to the strategies of both the government and the Bank is high. The
achievement of PDO1 to improve operational performance is substantial, based on the decreases in the
frequency and duration of service interruptions in most of the DisCos, and their adoption of social and
environmental management practices. The achievement of PDO 2 to improve commercial management is also
substantial, based mainly on the installation of Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) systems and the re-
cadastering of consumer points and consumers. The achievement of PDO 3 is modest, mainly because the
DisCos did not achieve the targeted reduction in total losses. The overall efficacy rating is
substantial. Although there were implementation delays, efficiency is substantial, taking into account the price
reductions from ICB processes, and the doubling of the currency available for project execution as a result of
the significant devaluation of the Brazilian Real.

The overall outcome rating is moderately satisfactory (as in the ICR) in line with the Bank Guidance for ICR
Preparation dated September 27, 2018 (Appendix H, page 38), which indicates a moderately satisfactory rating
when “there are moderate shortcomings in the achievement in one or more of the objectives/outcomes use in
the assessment of the overall Efficacy.” For this project, this applies specifically to Objective 3 (“To improve
financial performance”), which has a modest rating for Efficacy. It is important to note that after the ICR’s
completion, the six DisCos that have benefitted from the project have been privatized. This was a significant
outcome since they were in very bad shape and considered unsuitable for privatization when Eletrobras took
control. While their privatization cannot be entirely attributed to the project, it did play a role in improving their
technical, financial and commercial performance thus making them more attractive to investors.




a.   Outcome Rating
     Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome




                                                                                                        Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation (P114204)



Complex and inter-related economic, socio-political and financial factors affect the operating environment for
the six DisCos, which could present moderate risks to the sustainability of project outcomes. For example, a
tariff increase--such as the large ones that occurred in 2015--could trigger higher non-technical losses and
lower collection rates that could directly impact the finances of the DisCos. A mitigating factor is that as of
January 2018, the government has passed national legislation that established a variable tariff rate that is
cheaper off-peak. Brazil's economy is also recovering from a severe recession with GDP growth rates
increasing in 2019, and unemployment and inflation also projected to decrease. These trends would positively
impact collection rates. The installation of smart meters (AMI) for big consumers, e.g., factories, hotels, schools,
hospitals, and businesses, have resulted in maintenance improvements, better management of voltage control,
and lower levels of theft. These taken together are likely to lead to additional loss reduction and improved
collection rates, which would help improve the financial performance of the DisCos. Nonetheless, Brazil's
uncertain medium-term prospects need to be watched carefully.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  The Bank adopted a strategically relevant approach of addressing operational, commercial and financial
  issues. Although already established elsewhere, the selection of the AMI system was considered
  innovative (by enabling distant oversight by Electrobras in Brasilia) and appropriate for Brazil as an upper-
  middle-income country. According to the ICR (paragraph 105, page 30), "the project pioneered the design
  and implementation of AMI at a large scale in developing countries." The project design's emphasis on
  integrating institutional improvements, including social and environmental management, was highly
  appropriate. The Bank team also identified risks effectively, including political and other interference
  risks, and proposed sufficient mitigation measures.

  There were, however, project design shortcomings. For four of the DisCos, the baselines were incorrectly
  defined initially. Also, the project design assumed that a new commercial management system was needed
  (CMS) but it was only during implementation when it was realized that the problems being encountered
  was not because of an inadequate system but resulted rather from the faulty quality of the input data. This
  led to the need for a full re-registration of the consumer base. There were also weaknesses in the initial
  procurement capacity assessment, which did not fully capture the large capacity requirements (for an
  actual 260 instead of the originally estimated 80 contracts) and the also did not address early enough the
  initial reluctance to use ICB procedures. More generally, there was inadequate emphasis on training
  and on advancing or completing change management processes at the project preparation stages, thus
  contributing implementation delays. Finally, the loss reduction targets and hence the financial performance
  PDO were over-ambitious and proved very difficult to achieve during implementation.

  In light of the significant design shortcomings and over-ambitious financial performance targets, the Bank's
  quality at entry is rated moderately satisfactory.


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation (P114204)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  The Bank project team conducted 14 missions to support implementation, but visited only two states on
  each mission due to budget constraints. After an initial period of slow disbursements and a Moderately
  Unsatisfactory rating for both the Development Impact (DI) and Implementation Progress (IP), a seasoned
  TTL moved in Brasilia and took over the project in July 2013, with support from a junior energy specialist in
  Washington D.C. The more intensive supervision resulted in an increase in the disbursement rate and an
  upgrading of both DP and IP to Moderately Satisfactory within a period of 18 months. Another evidence of
  proactivity during supervision was the involvement of a senior procurement specialist to provide intensive
  assistance to the client in its very first and highly complex ICB procurement process for the Advanced
  Metering Infrastructure (AMI), which was encountering many difficulties given the isolated, low-competition
  Amazonian market. The Bank's AMI expert also joined supervision missions, and a specialized, external
  consulting firm was contracted to augment the Bank's capacity in reviewing the AMI bid evaluation
  process. A special monitoring tool was developed to monitor the 254 contracting processes. According to
  the ICR (paragraph 106, page 30), "...the World Bank team went beyond usual supervision and teamed up
  with the central PIU team to find solutions and overcome obstacles...Before the project closed, the Bank
  team and PIU co-organized a series of evaluation workshops, three regional and one national to discuss
  difficulties and lessons learned, including the World Bank performance, which was unanimously praised by
  the participants."

  Taking into account the above positive steps, and the resulting increase in disbursements, the successful
  AMI procurement, and putting the project on track toward achievement of the PDOs, the quality of the
  Bank's supervision is rated satisfactory.

  In line with IEG Guidelines for Reviewing ICRs (page 56), the overall Bank Performance rating is
  moderately satisfactory when Bank Performance "was rated moderately satisfactory on one dimension and
  satisfactory or highly satisfactory on the other dimension", which is the present case given the moderately
  satisfactory Quality at Entry and satisfactory Quality of Supervision.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation (P114204)




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The M&E design was highly complex, with 26 PDO-level indicators and 42 intermediate indicators, which
  appeared excessive, potentially overlapping, and may not all be necessary. Additional indicators were
  developed by Electrobras during implementation. The Brazilian regulator--Electricity Regulatory Agency
  (ANEEL)--required many of the indicators, which did have its advantages. ANEEL has the strong incentive to
  be informed to help determine tariffs and penalties; moreover, ANEEL regularly improves the methodology and
  informs the DisCos of best practices. However, certain indicators mismatched the scope of project activities,
  such as the loss reduction and collection rate indicators, which were designed under the assumption that the
  project's activities alone were sufficient to address all of the drivers behind losses, which was not the
  case. Thus, those two indicators proved to be too broad and sensitive to exogenous factors such a political and
  economic crises. More specific indicators to measure financial performance would have been more appropriate.
  The institutional improvement indicators (such as "the adoption by DisCos of sound environmental
  management practices, improved M&E, and effectiveness of social action and communication programs") was
  not well formulated and proved difficult to measure particularly since it was ambiguous and did not have a
  baseline.



b. M&E Implementation

  M&E was implemented effectively, despite some moderate shortcomings. On the positive side, the fact that
  the energy regulator (ANEEL) itself required the indicators benefitted M&E implementation by giving the
  DisCos strong incentives to routinely collect and analyze performance data for subsequent verification by the
  regulatory agency. Eletrobras had sufficient staff and demonstrated strong commitment to monitor all the
  project activities through regular field visits and a close working relationship with the financial management
  team's inspections before payment installments were approved. The M&E process was in line with the
  performance-based management system under the project's Component 2. Data was entered into the MIS,
  analyzed, and included in semi-annual reports, which is the reporting frequency required by the Loan
  Agreement. According to the ICR, para 92 (page 27), the quality of the reports "was sound and data were
  well presented and analyzed." Some minor shortcomings include the following: (a) the six core technical
  indicators and four social indicators that were added during the 2-13 mid-term review were not incorporated in
  the Eletrobras Operational Manual or its Progress Reports, hence data for those indicators were not reported
  on a systematic basis; and (b) while full adoption of ANEEL's indicators had its advantages, mainly in terms of
  providing strong data collection and reporting incentives, it worked against proactively adjusting what was
  widely recognized as overly ambitious performance targets.



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation (P114204)



  During the monthly meetings between Eletrobras and the six DisCOs, M&E data was discussed and actions
  were proposed to improve implementation performance. Eletrobras management used M&E data to report
  on implementation progress, comply with mandatory regulatory indicators, and also to try to reduce penalties
  when those are levied. The regulatory indicators pre-existed the project, hence Electrobras was able to
  quickly detect the deterioration of the project's baselines once the exogenous shocks started to occur during
  the project's initial years. Eletrobras added its own indicators to the ones required by ANEEL. These
  indicators, which were related to performance-based management, were used extensively by the central PIU
  and also the PIUs of the individual DisCos. However, the M&E data could have been more actively utilized
  much earlier to adjust the overly ambitious target indicators.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was assigned an Environmental Category B at appraisal. The project triggered the following
  safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment (IOP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest
  Management (OP/BP 4.09), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), physical and Cultural Resources (OP/BP
  4.11), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The ICR (paragraph 100, page 28) briefly states,
  without much background discussion, that: "Overall, there were no safeguards compliance issues...There
  were no adverse impacts with physical and/or economic displacement and any interference with indigenous
  people." Except for one instance in 2012, the Bank supervision's ratings for safeguards compliance was all
  Satisfactory. The sole rating of Moderately Satisfactory was due to the need in 2012 for the DisCos to
  strengthen their social and environmental team.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial Management (FM). Fiduciary compliance during project implementation and Bank supervision had
  instances of Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU) ratings as well as Substantial Risk ratings. MU ratings resulted
  from errors and inconsistencies in the Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) which were being prepared manually,
  incomplete and inaccurate reports from the DisCos, and shortages in FM staff at the central and DisCo levels.
  Eletrobras never implementated the Bank's recommendation to use a specific system or software to
  consolidate the IFRs, opting instead for extra work to perform manual checks that could have been
  automated. All IFRs submitted during the project were considered acceptable but were generally submitted late
  (but within 30 days). Ineligible expenditures have not occurred. As of the ICR's preparation (June 2018), three
  of the five audit reports were received on time, and all the audit reports had unmodified (i.e., clean) opinions.

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation (P114204)



  Nonetheless, on a consistent basis, the Office of the Federal Controller General highlighted areas of
  improvement in internal controls, particularly in the DisCos.

  Procurement. Significant procurement delays occurred in 2013 due to exogenous shocks, leading to a
  Moderately Unsatisfactory rating. The delays were caused by limited procurement capacity, inability to prepare
  sound bidding documents, delays in attracting bidders, incompatibility of Bank and national procedures for
  International Competitive Bidding (ICB), and technical issues related to the complicated homologation process
  for the new smart meters. Moreover, Eletrobras wanted to support Brazilian companies and was reluctant to
  open the market to international companies, citing concerns about discontinuity of maintenance in remote
  regions. To surmount these bottlenecks, the Bank reinforced supervision and assigned a new, field-based TTL,
  which significantly facilitated procurement and implementation follow-up. A specialized engineering firm was
  also contracted to provide assistance with the highly complex procurement packages.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                       IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                              Moderately                Moderately
Outcome                                                                            ---
                              Satisfactory              Satisfactory
                                                                                   Quality at entry had
                                                                                   shortcomings related to
                                                                                   design flaws and over-
                                                                                   ambitious financial
                                                        Moderately                 performance targets. Quality
Bank Performance              Satisfactory
                                                        Satisfactory               of supervision is satisfactory.
                                                                                   In line with IEG guidelines
                                                                                   (see Section 8b), the overall
                                                                                   Bank Performance rating is
                                                                                   moderately satisfactory.
Quality of M&E                Substantial               Substantial                ---
Quality of ICR                                          Substantial                ---

12. Lessons



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation (P114204)




The Bank team conducted evaluation workshops in Brazil during the December 2017 ICR mission, wherein
the main lessons presented below (with some IEG paraphrasing) were identified and discussed. The ICR
(paragraphs 113 to 123, pages 33 to 35) provides a more extensive set of lessons and recommendations, with
some references to future sector outlook.

1. A sound database and the regularization of customers need to be included as part of the initial
project design and prioritized once implementation starts. The re-cadastering of customers is a crucial
step to addressing massive fraud in a systematic way, and can bring considerable benefits in terms of
improving commercial management and financial performance. However, regularization of customers is a costly
and lengthy process, hence the extensive relisting needs to be part of project design and given high priority at
the start-up of project implementation.

2. The capacity of distribution companies need to be strengthened so that they can adequately
and systematically detect and correct massive practices of fraud. While the Advanced Metering
Infrastructure (AMI) was able to break the culture of fraud among the relatively small number of large MV
clients, all of whom were included in the AMI system, it is much more difficult to address the huge numbers of
illegal connections on LV lines. The need to relist these led to a "tsunami" of cases that the DisCos were not
prepared to regularize in the short time required. A much scaled-up effort that includes regularizing and
shielding the billing of LV customers, as well as legal support to unlock interventions in invaded areas, seem to
be required to accelerate the response capacity of the DisCos.

3. Close supervision and intensive support are required to facilitate large, complex and innovative
procurement packages. Bank project teams need to conduct a comprehensive capacity assessment during
project preparation and appraisal, so that capacity gaps can be filled early on (such as appointing a field-based
TTL, a procurement expert, and/or a specialized engineering firm) and implementation delays can be minimized
or avoided. New bidding documents can also be developed and tailored to combine goods and information
technology services, as was done for the innovative AMI contract in this project.

4. The Results Framework and the performance indicators need to be adjusted in line with the realistic
factors that affect financial and operational performance. In this project, the indicator for "total loss
reduction" as a percentage of total energy was too broad. It proved to be highly sensitive to too many external
factors that were beyond the project's control, and thus was not accurately indicative of the project's
contribution.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ELETROBRAS Distribution Rehabilitation (P114204)




The ICR is well prepared. The ICR team clearly put a major effort in the preparation of the ICR, and the
extensive and quantitatively-based Annex 5: Borrower's Comments augments the ICR's high quality even
more. Annex 4 on the Efficacy and Efficiency analysis was very helpful in providing detailed tabular and
graphical data that could not all fit in the main text. The ICR is strong on accountability. It relies substantially on
evidence that is technically grounded in the electricity sector and is well-referenced, particular in terms of
documentation sources. The ICR's lessons and recommendations are solidly based on the project's own
implementation experience, and more specifically on evaluation workshops that were held in Brazil during the
December 2017 ICR preparation mission. The ICR's analysis is highly results-oriented and frequently uses the
project's Results Framework as a reference point. It is candid, internally consistent, and in line with the OPCS
guidelines for ICR preparation. However, the discussion of environmental and social safeguards seemed too
brief at 6 lines. Also Annex 3 seemed to confuse project costs with sources of financing. The ICR's main text
was also long at 35 pages, not counting the annexes, which is more than twice the length indicated by
OPCS. With the annexes, the ICR document amounts to 193 pages and could be more concise.




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                         Page 17 of 17
