     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0021439

1. Project Data



 Project ID                           Project Name
                                      ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC
 P107992
                                      BUILDINGS

 Country                              Practice Area(Lead)                         Additional Financing
 Montenegro                           Energy & Extractives                        P145399


 L/C/TF Number(s)                     Closing Date (Original)                    Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-76370,IBRD-83240                31-Dec-2012                                               13,816,293.40

 Bank Approval Date                   Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Dec-2008                          30-Mar-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            9,400,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            15,601,360.36                                               0.00

 Actual                                        13,816,293.40                                               0.00



 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Natsuko Toba               Fernando Manibog            Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   The original project objective (PDO) was to improve energy efficiency performance in targeted public sector
   buildings with a view to developing a sustainable energy efficiency improvement program in the Borrower’s
   public sector (Loan Agreement, December 30, 2008, page 5).

   The revised PDO was to improve energy efficiency performance in public sector buildings to provide a
   demonstrated basis to improve energy efficiency implementation practices and capacity in public institutions


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)



   and energy efficiency service providers in Montenegro (Additional Financing Loan Agreement, December 27,
   2013, page 5; Amendment to the Original Loan Agreement, December 27, 2013, page 1).

   The project documents (e.g., PAD, Additional Financing Project Paper, Restructuring Papers, etc.) reported
   currencies sometimes in Euro and other times in US dollars. When no values of exchange rates applied
   were available, an average exchange rate of US$1.25 per €1 applied for all disbursements during the project
   implementation for 2009-2018 was applied in reporting US$ or € equivalent in this ICR review.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  23-Dec-2013
                                                          PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components

   Component 1 - Energy Efficiency Improvement in Public Sector Buildings across Montenegro (appraisal
   US$8 million or €5.5 million; actual US$12.9 million or €9.6 million):

   This component focused on financing energy efficiency retrofitting in public sector buildings to demonstrate
   energy savings from improving heating systems, insulation, thermostatic valves and other installations in
   the buildings, as well as heat substations and networks. A list of buildings (six schools and six health
   centers) as candidates for financing (US$4.8 million or €3.3 million) during the first year of the project had
   been assessed. During project implementation further buildings were to be added for financing by the
   project.

   Component 2 - Technical Assistance for Project Implementation (appraisal US$0.7 million or €0.5 million;
   actual US$1.8 million or €1.5 million):

   The scope of this technical assistance (TA) included support to the Project Steering Committee (PSC), the
   Project Coordinator and the Technical Services Unit (TSU) in the implementation, monitoring and
   evaluation (M&E) of the project, through the provision of goods, consultants’ services and training, the
   project’s audits, surveys and energy audits.




                                                                                                              Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Project Cost

  At appraisal, the project cost estimate was US$9.4 million (€6.5 million). With the additional financing of
  US$6.8 million (€5 million), the revised cost estimate was US$16.2 million (€11.5 million). The actual
  project cost was US$13.8 million (€11.1 million), a 47 percent increase from the appraised cost due to the
  scale-up of the project scope.

  The original project cost estimate included a front-end fee of US$0.024 million (€0.016 million) and
  contingencies of US$0.7 million (€0.5 million) in addition to the costs of project components. The
  additional financing included a front-end fee of US$0.017 million (€0.013 million). The actual project cost
  included a total front-end fee of US$0.04 million (€0.03 million) including the first and second loans.

  Financing

  The first Euro denominated IBRD Flexible Loan approval was US$9.4 million (€6.5 million). The second
  Euro denominated IBRD Flexible Loan approval was US$6.8 million (€5 million). Total of the two loans
  was US$16.2 million (€11.5 million). The disbursed loans totaled US$13.8 million (€11.1 million). The total
  undisbursed amount of US$0.5 million (€0.4 million) was cancelled at closing of each loan. The
  undisbursed amount in the loan currency of Euro (€0.4 million) almost matched the difference (€0.4
  million) between the disbursed amount (€11.1 million) and loan amount (€11.5 million). However, the
  undisbursed amount in US dollar equivalent (US$0.5 million) did not match the difference (US$2.4 million)
  between the disbursed amount (US$13.8 million) and loan amount (US$16.2 million). This inconsistency
  in US dollar was due to varying exchange rates applied to record US$ equivalent of each Euro
  disbursement in the World Bank system. During the disbursement period of 2009-2018, the exchange
  rate oscillation of US dollar per one Euro ranged between 1.06 and 1.44. The first loan cancellation was
  US$0.4 million (€0.37 million), of which US$0.35 million (€0.32 million) was due to non-responsive bids
  after the tender documents were published twice and the rest was due to exchange rate fluctuations. The
  second loan cancellation was US$0.054 million (€0.047 million), which was a small residual (less than one
  percent of the appraisal) of the actual values of the energy efficiency investments.

  Borrower Contribution

  There was no borrower contribution.

  Dates

  The original loan was approved on December 9, 2008 and closed on December 20, 2014. The additional
  loan was approved on December 23, 2013 and closed on March 30, 2018. The additional financing was to
  scale up the original project and added a new feature to allow up to 10 percent of each subproject’s
  investment cost to be used for energy efficiency measures with very long payback periods or other
  ancillary measures to support implementation of the energy efficiency measures.

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)




   Amendment to the original Loan Agreement was signed on December 27, 2013 by the Bank and the
   Borrower to revise the PDO. At that time, 88 percent of the original loan was disbursed.

   The closing date of original loan on December 31, 2012 was extended three times: (i) to June 30, 2013,
   (ii) to March 31, 2014 and (iii) to December 20, 2014. The reasons for three extensions were due to the
   delays in (i) the largest subproject in the clinic center of Montenegro and (ii) technical M&E and end-user
   surveys. An additional factor also contributed to the first closing date extension. After the project had
   become effective, the start of implementation was delayed by about 12-18 months due to a lack of the
   government budget for the project and an inadequate procurement capacity in the TSU (Restructuring
   Paper 2012, page 2). By the time when the first closing date extension was requested, the government
   budget was available and the TSU improved the capacity (Restructuring Paper 2012, page 2). The delay
   in the clinic center was further exacerbated by the failures of the tender that was published twice due to
   the unqualified bids and was finally cancelled.

   The additional loan closing date of March 30, 2017 was extended once to March 30, 2018 to complete the
   remaining works, which were caused by procurement delays.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  Country and Sector Context

  At the first loan appraisal, Montenegro imported one third of its power needs. Recognizing the importance of
  efficient energy utilization in Montenegro, the Government adopted an Energy Efficiency Strategy in 2005.
  The energy sector in Montenegro was characterized by numerous irrationalities due to: no energy strategy in
  the past, energy intensive and obsolete technology, inadequate maintenance of assets, insufficient
  education on energy efficiency and inadequate energy pricing policy. The energy sector in Montenegro was
  characterized by high energy intensity in comparison with the European Union (EU) and other developed
  countries, which was primarily caused by the high consumption levels in the aluminum and steel industry. In
  2003, the energy intensity of gross consumption of electricity was 8.5 times higher than the value of EU-15
  (EU before 2004) and higher than almost all countries in the region. The intensity of total energy
  consumption in Montenegro was 5.6 times higher than the EU-15 average. At project completion, energy
  efficiency remained important for Montenegro due to its (i) high import dependence, (ii) high cost of energy
  and (iii) concerns about the security of energy supply and climate change.

  Strategic Relevance of the PDOs

  The PDO was relevant to the World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2016-2020 at the
  project closure. The project was to contribute to the CPF’s objective 1A: improved sustainability and


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)



       efficiency of public finances and objective 2D: enhanced environmental sustainability. The PDO was relevant
       at the first loan appraisal. The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY2007-2010’s priority 1: enhancing
       sustainable economic growth noted a planned project to improve energy efficiency in schools and health
       centers. The PDO remained relevant at the second loan appraisal. The CPS for FY2011-2014 included the
       project in the priority 2: Improving environmental management and reducing the costs of environmental
       problems.

       The PDO was relevant to the strategy of the Government of Montenegro at the project closure. The main
       priorities and key strategic commitments of “the Energy Policy of Montenegro until 2030” included energy
       efficiency as a priority for sustainable energy development and as a strategic commitment. Energy efficiency
       was a core content of “Action Plan 2016-2020 of the Energy Development Strategy of Montenegro by 2030”.
       At appraisal of the first loan, the PDO was relevant because the Government of Montenegro, through the
       Ministry of Education (MoEd) and Science and the Ministry of Health, Labor and Social Welfare (MoH),
       initiated an implementation of energy efficiency programs in public sector buildings (PAD, page 3). At the
       appraisals of first and second loans, the PDO was relevant to “the Energy Development Strategy of
       Montenegro by 2025”. Under the strategy, the energy policy objectives of Montenegro made energy
       efficiency a priority inasmuch as Montenegro was strategically committed to improving energy efficiency to
       the level of moderately developed EU countries.



       Rating
       Substantial
   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     Improve energy efficiency performance in public sector buildings.

    Rationale

    Theory of change: At appraisal, the project’s financing of energy efficiency retrofitting in public sector
    buildings and TA for the project implementation were expected to save energy in targeted buildings and
    increase end user satisfaction in those buildings. In turn, these activities were to result in improved energy
    efficiency performance in targeted public sector buildings (PAD, page 23). This appraisal’s logic of theory of
    change was reasonable because the causal links were credible and direct. At completion, the theory of
    change was similar to that of appraisal (ICR, page 7) and the project delivered the results of improved
    energy efficiency performance in the public sector buildings that were retrofitted with project financing.

    Outputs



                                                                                                        Page 5 of 18
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)



    • The project audits were performed, and project documents were prepared for 26 public sector facilities.
    The project achieved 96 percent of the target of 27 facilities. The baseline was zero. A lack of auditors and
    issues with the quality of technical designs resulted in some implementation delays at the beginning.

    • The project retrofitted 26 facilities with energy efficiency improvement schemes and achieved 96 percent
    of the target of 27 facilities. The baseline was zero. The limited capacity of the TSU and technical
    consultants to prepare bidding documents at the beginning and to carry out the tendering process delayed
    the project implementation and disbursement.

    • The buildings that the project retrofitted to improve energy efficiency achieved lifetime energy savings of
    118,880 megawatt-hour (MWh). The retrofitted buildings achieved about 79 percent of the target of 150,000
    MWh. The baseline was zero.

    • The buildings that the project retrofitted to improve energy efficiency achieved lifetime fuel savings of
    427,966 Giga-joules (GJ), which were 73 percent of the target of 590,000 GJ. The baseline was zero.

    • The buildings that the project retrofitted to improve energy efficiency achieved lifetime greenhouse gas
    savings of 41,504 metric tons of carbon dioxides (CO2), which were 68 percent of the target of 60,750 ton of
    CO2. The baseline was zero.

    The above absolute amount of savings of energy, fuel and CO2 fell short of the targets because fewer
    buildings than planned were renovated as the investments were more expensive than planned.

    Outcomes

    • The buildings that the project retrofitted to improve energy efficiency achieved a 34 percent energy
    savings, which exceeded the target of 25 percent by 36 percent (i.e., 34 percent minus 25 percent target
    (equal 9 percent) was divided by 25 percent target, which resulted in 36 percent). The baseline was zero.

    • Building users increased their satisfaction of the buildings that the project retrofitted. Their increased
    satisfaction ranged from 30 percent for medical staff to 75 percent (ICR, Annex 7) for teaching staff, which
    exceeded the target of 25 percent by 22-200 percent. The baseline was zero increase.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     Develop a sustainable energy efficiency improvement program in the Borrower’s public sector.


                                                                                                         Page 6 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)




Rationale

Theory of change: At the time of the project appraisal, the Government of Montenegro initiated energy
efficiency programs in the public sector buildings of schools and hospitals (PAD, page 3). Hence, the project
was expected to provide the pilot experience (PAD, page 7) and demonstrate the benefits of better energy
efficiency in the public health and educational sector buildings. Such successful experiences would provide
confidence and interest in the government, other public sector agencies and development partners in
investing in more energy efficiency improvements in the public sector, which would build up pipelines of the
programs. In parallel, other donors were expected to finance the development of energy efficiency policy,
regulatory framework and institutional structure. Both the project’s experience and the policy, regulatory and
institutional settings were expected to support the development of sustainable energy efficiency
improvement program in the public sector. The appraisal’s theory of change was reasonable with clear
stakeholders’ roles. The result framework in the PAD (page 23) succinctly articulated that the project-
financed energy efficiency improvements in the public sector buildings would provide a demonstrated basis
for development of a sustainable energy efficiency improvement program in the public sector in Montenegro.
At project completion, the following theory of change in the ICR was logical and causally linked: the project’s
demonstration activities contributed to developing energy efficiency standards and legislation and attracting
other international financers for energy efficiency improvements in public buildings, thus transforming the
demonstration phase into a programmatic approach (ICR, pages 14 and 15).

Outputs are the same as in Objective 1.

Outcomes

• Based on the experience of the project, the Ministry of Economy (MoE) established standards (e.g.
technical audits and designs, material standards, and commissioning protocols) for energy efficiency
investments.

• Under the Efficient Use of Energy Law (LoEE, 2010), the corresponding secondary legislation regarding
reconstruction of public buildings (article 5) and energy efficiency in public procurement (article 6) were
adopted.

• Other International Financial Institutions (IFIs) started financing the energy efficiency improvement in the
public sector, which indicated the continuity and scaling up of an energy efficiency program in the public
sector in Montenegro. For example, Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) provided US$45.3 million (€36.2
million) for schools (hence the Bank focused on supporting in the health sector at the additional financing)
and the government routinely incorporated energy efficiency investments as part of its capital building
works. The government demonstrated a strong commitment to energy efficiency, by requesting the Bank for
an US$7.39 million (€6 million) Montenegro Second Energy Efficiency Project, which was focused on the
public health sector and approved on June 4, 2018.




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)



 • At the project's completion, the Directorate for Energy Efficiency (DEE) of the MoE was funded by the
 government. However, the TSU was financed from all World Bank-financed projects in Montenegro because
 the TSU had fiduciary responsibilities for all World Bank projects as well as for the captured energy cost
 savings. With the IFIs’ support, the foundation of the energy efficiency program has been established; the
 next step is to initiate the IFIs’ exit strategy. To reduce the dependency in IFIs and address the sustainable
 financing of energy efficiency program, the Montenegro Second Energy Efficiency Project employs a
 sustainable financing mechanism to continue energy efficiency investments when IFI resources are fully
 disbursed. The mechanism allows energy cost savings to be used to finance additional energy efficiency
 investments.



 Rating
 Substantial
PHREVDELTBL
 PHINNERREVISEDTBL
 Objective 2 Revision 1
 Revised Objective

 Improve energy efficiency implementation practices and capacity in public institutions and energy efficiency
 service providers in Montenegro.

 Revised Rationale

 Theory of change: At the appraisal of additional financing, the TA activities (already in the first loan) to
 support the Project Steering Committee (PSC), the Technical Services Unit (TSU), the Project Coordinator,
 the Ministry of Health (MoH), and the Ministry of Education (MoEd), and the energy audits for project
 implementation, were expected to improve the capacity of public institutions and energy efficiency service
 providers to improve energy efficiency in Montenegro. The preceding causal chain was reasonably logical
 because the support and their experiences in implementing energy efficiency pilots under the project could
 help build their capacity. At project completion, the ICR’s elaboration of the following theory of change was
 also reasonably logical. The project financed training events for the MoE, the MOH and the MoEd and
 energy efficiency services providers and subprojects on energy efficiency improvement. Such experiences
 would improve their practices and capacity to implement energy efficiency. As a result, those ministries were
 able to implement energy efficiency improvement activities, and the number of certified energy auditors were
 increased.

 Outputs

 • Training events were provided to 30 service providers on preparation of technical documentation, and 15
 service providers on performing technical M&E. No target or baseline was set.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 18
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)



             • Six seminars and on-the-job training events were organized for the Directorate for Energy Efficiency (DEE)
             of the MoE, the MoH and the MoEd to learn about energy efficiency procurement, implementation and
             contract management. In total, 14 ministry staff members participated. No target or baseline was set.

             • The MoF through the TSU sent its representatives to a 4-day workshop in Sarajevo in April 2017 to learn
             energy efficiency financial management and procurement.

             • With the help of technical consultants, the MoE prepared the first technical design documentation, and the
             document guided developing technical design documents for other subprojects.


             Outcomes

             • The number of certified energy auditors was increased to 64, which exceeded the target of 50 by 28
             percent. The baseline was 10.

             • Energy efficiency service providers in Montenegro improved their skills to prepare, design, and implement
             specific works on sites, which was evident from their contributions to successful implementation of the
             project.

             • After the initial support, the rest of the technical design documents was prepared by local firms indicating
             improved capacity. The MoE (through the DEE) developed capacity to review the energy audits, technical
             designs, constructions plans, and supervise implementation of energy efficiency works.

             • The ministries achieved the target that the MoH and the MoEd have established in terms of capacity
             improvements and responsibilities for implementation of energy efficiency measures. The baseline was no
             capacity. The ministries developed capacity to supervise the preparation of energy audits and technical
             designs and the construction in their facilities. The ministries established the governance structures to
             implement the subprojects independently. The MoEd and the MoH have two designated staff members per
             ministry, responsible for implementation of energy efficiency projects.

             • MoE launched public events to promote the project, including a conference on energy efficient lighting, a
             two-day training workshop entitled "energy management", and an “energy tour” for students to visit
             elementary schools to learn energy efficiency.



             Revised Rating
             Substantial
PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale




                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 18
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)



 The first objective’s efficacy was substantial because the project exceeded the targets of energy savings and end
 user satisfaction (percentages) in targeted buildings. The original second objective’s efficacy is substantial
 because the project, together with other donors’ support for institutional development, contributed to developing
 an energy efficiency program in the public sector. Achieving the financial sustainability of the program was
 addressed by the Bank-financed second project. The revised second objective’s efficacy is substantial. The three
 implementing ministries improved capacity and implementation of the energy efficiency projects with their
 dedicated staff. The increased number of certified energy auditors was close to the target.




 Overall Efficacy Rating
 Substantial
PHREVISEDTBL



  5. Efficiency


  Ex-Ante Economic Analysis

  Six schools and six health centers, including their names, costs and energy efficiency improvement measures,
  were listed (PAD, pages 26-28). They were the project’s first year candidates for a total estimated cost of
  US$4.8 million (€3.3 million) (PAD, page 26). However, an ex-ante economic analysis was conducted for
  typical investment components of the project (pages 57-58). The costs, names of building and energy
  efficiency improvement measures for each building, which were covered by the ex-ante analysis, were not
  available.

  The ex-ante analysis assumed that without the project, none of the investments financed by the project would
  happen. The ex-ante analysis included energy savings as the benefits of the investments in energy efficiency
  improvement measures. The energy savings were limited to an average US$131/MWh (€90/MWh) as the price
  of electricity import to Montenegro. The information is unclear on whether the import price is a power purchase
  price at the border, or if it includes domestic transmission, distribution and supply costs within
  Montenegro. The simple payback period for different individual activities varied from about three years to eight
  years and the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) varied respectively from 34 percent to 11 percent. It
  resulted in an average simple payback period of about 7 years and an average EIRR of 13.1 percent.

  Ex-Ante Financial Analysis

  The financial energy prices for the schools and hospitals about US$292/MWh (€200/MWh) were used for the
  ex-ante financial analysis. The same investment package as in the ex-ante economic analysis was used for the
  ex-ante financial analysis. The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) was about 31 percent with a simple
  payback period of about 3.2 years, which provided a financial incentive for the ministries to invest in energy
  efficiency measures.

  Ex-Post Economic Analysis

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)




The ex-post economic (cost and benefit) analysis covered seven percent of the actual project cost, including
one school, one hospital and one health center as representative facilities from the 25 renovated facilities. The
baseline analysis was conducted in real prices in 2017 US$. The base year of net present value (NPV) was
2017. A discount rate of 4 percent was used for an NPV calculation. The economic benefits of energy
efficiency investments were the economic value of energy savings and CO2 emission reductions. The
economic value of the energy savings was calculated using the economic price of electricity or light fuel oil. The
economic costs considered for the analysis are the capital investment costs. The analysis assumed a 15-year
economic life of the investments, and low and high shadow prices of carbon as per 2017 Word Bank
guidelines. With a high shadow price of carbon, the total NPV of three subprojects was US$1.79 million (€1.61
million) with an EIRR of 24 percent. The EIRR per each subproject ranged 18-27 percent. The payback period
ranged 4-5 years. With low value of carbon, the total NPV of three subprojects was US$1.58 million (€1.42
million) with an EIRR of 22 percent. The EIRR per each subproject ranged 16-24 percent. The payback period
ranged 3-5 years. The midpoint of the EIRR of 23 percent (low and high carbon values) was used in an
evaluation table below.

With the social discount rate of 6 percent (ICR, page 19), net of 21 percent tax in investment and energy
savings (ICR, page 19) and a currency adjustment, the total NPV was US$1.66 million (€1.49 million) with an
EIRR of 31 percent under high carbon prices; the total NPV was US$1.47 million (€1.32 million) with an EIRR
of 28 percent under low carbon prices.

Ex-Post Financial Analysis

The ex-post financial analysis was the same as the ex-post economic analysis except that the ex-post financial
analysis did not include carbon prices and the discount rate for calculating the NPV was 12 percent. The
analysis was made from the perspective of a school, hospital or health center. The Bank team’s justification of
using 12 percent was that 12 percent had been in current use in the sector. The total NPV was US$0.33 million
(€0.3 million) with a financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of 20 percent. The FIRR of each subproject ranged
13-24 percent. The payback period ranged 4-6 years.

The cost of energy savings of 25 facilities (or 49 buildings) with total area of 112,478 m2 was US$0.1/kWh
(€0.08/kWh). This US$0.1/kWh (€0.08/kWh) was calculated from nominal prices during the project period of
2008-2018 during which the inflation was 24 percent. With this caveat of inconsistent price levels, this cost of
energy savings of US$0.1/kWh (€0.08/kWh) is comparable to the electricity tariff at US$0.14/kWh (€0.11/kWh)
and heat tariff at US$0.11/kWh (€0.09/kWh) in 2018 in Montenegro, and the average payback period of the
subprojects of 7.2 years is comparable to similar projects in Serbia and Armenia. Hence, the investment is
considered efficient.

Implementation efficiency

The first four-year loan was extended to a six-year loan. The 4.25-year second loan was extended to a 5.25-
year loan. As a result, the original 4-year project ended up as a 9.25-year project with a total of four project



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)



closing date extensions. The project was delayed mainly because the procurement capacity, qualified bidders
and technical capability of energy efficiency measurements were limited.



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                    Rate Available?        Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                 13.10
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                     7.00
ICR Estimate                                              23.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


Before and after the revision of PDO, the ratings of the relevance, efficacy and efficiency are the same, hence
split rating calculations were not deemed necessary. The relevance is substantial. The efficacy is substantial in
achieving objective 1, original objective 2 and revised objective 2. The efficiency is substantial. The outcome is
satisfactory.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


The technical risk is low because the project used proven measures applied in other countries. However, the
Government of Montenegro (GoM) needs to maintain an operation and maintenance program that includes
human behavioral practices to ensure doors are closed, lights turned off, etc. and technical operation and
maintenance are performed regularly to sustain the energy savings. All facilities in the program have
maintenance officers. The GoM was developing a US$3.5 million (€2.8 million) energy monitoring and
management program in collaboration with the Bank and Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) by the project
closing date.


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)




The political risk is low because the GoM supports policies to enhance energy efficiency. Energy efficiency
regulations were adopted. The financial risks to the energy efficiency program is moderate. As discussed in the
efficacy section 4 above, the Bank-financed Second Energy Efficiency Project (approved on June 4, 2018)
employs a sustainable financing mechanism by using energy cost savings to finance additional energy efficiency
investments.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  The project was strategically aligned with the CPS priority to support the South East Europe Energy
  Community Treaty that the Government of Montenegro ratified and that required the promotion and
  implementation of energy efficiency measures in Montenegro. The focus on educational and health
  buildings over other public sector buildings was justified by the strong demonstration and promotion
  impacts of schools and hospitals.

  Policy, institutional, technical, financial, and economic aspects were adequately assessed. Safeguards,
  fiduciary and implementation arrangements were adequate.

  Risk assessment and mitigation measures were reasonable except for the low risk rating of the
  procurement capacity of the TSU (PAD, page 49). The low procurement capacity contributed to the
  project's initial implementation delay of about 12-18 months. The project had three implementation
  agencies. The MoE was responsible for overall implementation while the MoEd and the MoH for
  implementation of their subprojects. The risk of weak implementation capacity of the MoEd and the MoH
  of energy efficiency projects were addressed by hiring a Project Coordinator who proved to be helpful.
  The risk of weak institutional capacity of the DEE of M&E was addressed by capacity building financed
  by the project and other donors. Although at the beginning of the project, there was limited capacity at
  the DEE (staffing, and misunderstandings of report contents, tendering etc.), the issues were resolved
  after the capacity building activities were completed.

  The project’s result framework and M&E system did not specify indicators to measure the achievement of
  the second part of the PDO related to “developing a sustainable energy efficiency improvement program
  in the Borrower’s public sector”. However, the Bank was working closely with the DEE and other donors
  to ensure that the project would be benefited from the assistance provided by various donors. As the
  Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) and the EU provided funds for developing
  regulations, the project did not need to finance it. The coordination facilitated sharing of lessons learned
  to expand the project’s positive impact to further promote energy efficiency programs in the country. The
  Bank team also ensured that the donors had a coordinated approach to the government. The lessons
  learned in relevant prior projects were incorporated in the project designs, such as development of
  energy efficiency subprojects during preparation, which was learned from the Serbia Energy Efficiency
  Project.

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  The Bank team worked closely with the government and the PSC to ensure successful implementation of
  the project. During the first year of the project, the Bank’s supervision mission was quarterly to ensure
  the implementation of the first year’s energy efficiency subprojects. After the first year, the Bank team
  conducted semi-annual missions. Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) were prepared in a
  candid and timely manner. When issues materialized, the Bank appropriately advised the client, and the
  project was restructured to resolve the issues. The Bank team supported identification, preparation of
  energy audits and design of subprojects. The project was in compliance with fiduciary and safeguard
  policies. No other risks emerged during project implementation.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The project's M&E had some shortcomings. There was no indicator to assess the second part of
  original PDO to “develop a sustainable energy efficiency improvement program in the Borrower’s public
  sector”. The main data sources for M&E included energy audit reports, technical measurement and
  verification reports of energy and cost savings, and social M&E reports.



b. M&E Implementation

  The indicators were improved when the PDO was restructured. The new indicators set the quantifiable targets
  of the energy savings, CO2 reductions, end user satisfaction and certified energy auditors. The Yes/No
  indicator for “Energy efficiency implementation practices and capacity in public institutions” did not have



                                                                                                 Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)



  specific criteria to qualify for a clear Yes or No. However, the restructured indicators did not capture capacity
  building well (ICR, page 28).

  The MoEd and the MoH, which were responsible for M&E, ensured effective M&E implementation. The
  ministries have dedicated staff for energy efficiency and the project provided capacity building, which could
  sustain the energy efficiency M&E. The frequency of semi-annual reporting was adequate. The PSC and the
  Bank monitored overall outcomes. The Project Coordinator prepared the monthly reports for the PSC and
  prepared the semi-annual progress reports for the Bank. The Bank team monitored the progress of the result
  indicators in M&E system and provided technical advice to the DEE and the PSC on safeguards, operations
  and technical aspects of project implementation.



c. M&E Utilization

  The M&E was utilized to (i) monitor and manage the project progress; (ii) identify areas where emerging
  issues might require attention and adjust their implementation plans to achieve the project’s objectives; and
  (iii) inform important decision-making, such as additional financing. The experience accumulated under the
  project would be valuable in the M&E of future World Bank and non-World Bank interventions in Montenegro.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  Except for Environmental Assessment (EA, OP/BP 4.01), no safeguard policy was triggered at the appraisals
  of the original project and additional financing. The project was classified as EA Category B according to the
  World Bank safeguard policy on EA (OP 4.01). An Environmental Management Framework including a
  sample Environmental Management Plan (EMP)/Checklist was prepared to provide mitigation measures for
  the minor potential adverse impacts that may occur during implementation of the energy efficiency
  subprojects in targeted buildings.

  Some delays were experienced in preparation of site-specific EMPs during first year of project
  implementation due to a lack of experienced staff in preparation of technical designs and bidding documents.
  However, the situation improved during the second year with the strengthened Project Coordinator,
  centralized environmental safeguards functions and additional trainings provided by the Bank. The
  environmental compliance thereafter was satisfactory, with no major issues encountered during the project
  implementation; there were also no hazardous materials encountered (ICR, the first paragraph of section B,
  page 28).


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial management (FM)

  The FM arrangements under the project (including planning and budgeting, accounting, reporting, funds flow,
  staffing and external audits) were rated as satisfactory during most of the project implementation. Despite
  the slow start, the TSU performed FM functions adequately for most of the project’s
  implementation. However, the FM functions were rated moderately satisfactory as the last ISR because
  financial statements (i.e., audit reports, and interim financial reports) were overdue. As of November 14,
  2018, all pending financial statements have been submitted and considered satisfactory. Audits were all
  unqualified. Covenants were all complied with.

  Procurement

  The procurement risk was assessed as moderate at appraisal and remained unchanged during the duration
  of the project. The TSU improved its procurement capacity. No mis-procurement or major issues occurred
  during project implementation.

  Disbursement

  No Bank funds were disbursed for ineligible expenditures.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Not applicable.



d. Other
  Not applicable.



11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                      ICR                     IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                      Satisfactory           Satisfactory              ---
                             Moderately
Bank Performance                                    Moderately Satisfactory   ---
                             Satisfactory


                                                                                                Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)



Quality of M&E                Modest                  Modest                     ---
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                ---

12. Lessons


Following are lessons from the ICR with some modifications.

1.      Alignment with government policy and regulatory objectives is important to the achievement of
the PDO. The project benefitted from being approved just a year after Montenegro signed the energy
community treaty. The objective of the project and that of the government were aligned. The project enabled
the government to demonstrate progress towards meeting its energy community treaty obligations. Policy and
regulations were developed and implemented during the course of the project. Other IFIs working in the sector
had the similar strategic objectives, which ensured the alignment with the Paris Declaration on Aid
Effectiveness and the Accra Agenda for Action.

2.      Budgeting energy efficiency investment costs may need to allow a portion for non-energy
efficiency measures. During the implementation of the original project, the government realized that ancillary
measures (e.g., painting, rewiring, replacing gutters, etc.) were necessary to complete building
renovations. This was important for two reasons: (i) improving facades of the buildings enabled the government
to gain political support for the project; (ii) some of the investments needed non-energy efficiency investments
(e.g., better toilets, structural support, etc.) to bring the buildings up to comfortable norms. As a result, the
additional finance allowed up to 10 percent of each subproject’s investment cost to carry out non- energy
efficiency works.

3.      Proactive capacity building for stakeholders is necessary for timely implementation. The project
was extended four times to finish works, and US$350,000 (€280,000) was canceled from the original project
because bidders had failed to meet technical requirements. These challenges could be traced to the limited
capacity of the TSU at the beginning, and the service providers’ limited capacity to work with international
financing institutions. Proactive capacity building would have trained both the TSU and service providers early
in the process to avoid the delays. While workshops were held, the counterparts needed on-the-job training as
well, which helped speed up the project implementation.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS (P107992)



The ICR is candid and evidences are analyzed to assess the causal chains, outcomes and impacts. The
Bank team clarified the two intermediate result indicators “Number of public sector buildings for which project
audits have been performed and project documents have been prepared” and “Number of buildings
retrofitted……” (Additional Financing Project Paper, 2013, page 15) were meant to be “facilities (the project
retrofitted 25 facilities)” and not “buildings (the project retrofitted 49 buildings”). The ICR states that the
economic analysis was net of tax and used a six percent discount rate. But the actual calculation was tax
inclusive and used a four percent discount rate. There was also a minor error in using Euro in calculating
energy saving although the rest of the calculation was in US$. In the sensitivity analysis, a nominal inflation
rate was used instead of a real rate. The ICR (page 19, footnote 10) used an economic discount rate derived
from a real gross domestic product per capita growth rate over “the next five years”, instead of “the project
life” as per the Bank guideline (OPSPQ 2016). Overall, while considering these inadvertent errors, the
updated economic analysis did not significantly change the results, which were still robust. The Bank team
clarified that Annex 3 showing the full disbursement of the project costs was an inadvertent error.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 18
