     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Finance Management TA Project (P122998)



                                                                               Report Number : ICRR0021270

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P122998                                   Public Finance Management TA Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Russian Federation                        Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82880                               31-Dec-2017                                         24,487,601.93

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Sep-2013                              31-Dec-2017

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          50,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           28,500,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       24,505,499.79                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Paul Holden                Robert Mark Lacey           Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) as described in the Loan Agreement (LA, p. 5) are to assist the
   Borrower in improving transparency and results focus in public financial management and building
   institutional foundations for improved budget efficiency, effectiveness and accountability.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Finance Management TA Project (P122998)



  No

                                                            PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   There were five components:

   Component 1: Improving the Economic Efficiency of Tax Policy and Administration: US$ 39.74
   million at appraisal. US$ 23.66 million at closure.
   Activities were to include: (i) modelling the fiscal regime for oil and gas, incorporating international
   experience, and preparing applicable legal and regulatory instruments (ii) developing guidelines and
   regulations, and enhancing staff skills to reduce the use of transfer pricing to avoid tax; (iii) developing an
   improved tax policy, strengthening the analysis of tax expenditures, and modernizing tax procedures; (iv)
   enhancing the design of tax regimes to increase compliance and reduce taxpayer abuse; (v) improving
   taxpayer services through strengthened tax literacy and better information; and (vi) developing a credible
   pre-court appeals system.

   Component 2: Improving Efficiency of Inter-Governmental Fiscal Relations and Sub-National Public
   Finance Management, US$ 24.84 million at appraisal. US$ 14.5 million at closure.
   This component was to include: (i) recommendations to increase the sub-national government revenue
   base and develop the capacity to analyze risk and risk mitigating measures; (ii) improving the system of
   targeted intergovernmental fiscal transfers, developing incentives to promote regional PFM reforms, and
   strengthening the equalization transfer system; (iii) improving sub-national PFM through better regulation,
   enhanced service delivery and introduction of measures to reduce corruption in the budget process; (iv)
   implementation of program budgeting for sub-national governments; and (v) strengthening the capacity of
   MoF staff at the regional and municipal levels.

   Component 3: Support for Development of the E-Budget System: US$ 39.15 million at appraisal;
   US$ 14.84 million at closure.
   Technical assistance would be provided to automate the budget and information system, expand the use
   of analytical and information management tools, provide training to staff, develop guidelines for
   implementing the e-budget system.

   Component 4: Enhancing Budget Efficiency; appraisal US$ 24.84 million; US$ 17.87 million at
   closure.
   Activities were to include:(i) improving budget preparation and planning; (ii) developing governance and
   accountability guidelines for autonomous agencies involved in service delivery; (iii) strengthening internal
   controls and audits throughout the public sector, including development of a set of public sector accounting
   standards at the federal level; and (iv) improving public procurement and contracting and budget
   processes related to international financial institutions.

   Component 5: Project Management: appraisal US$ 5 million; US$ 2.5 million at closure

                                                                                                                Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Finance Management TA Project (P122998)



   This component was to provide funding and technical support for the project implementation unit (PMU).




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

   Project cost and financing:
   Project cost at closure was US$ 66.37 million, compared to an appraisal estimate of US$ 133.57 million,
   while the actual IBRD contribution was US$ 24.51 million, less than half the appraisal estimate of US$50
   million. These large differences were the result of slow progress on many components and of the
   Borrower's decision to carry out a number of planned activities "in-house" rather than using the project
   resources. Although the World Bank team advocated extending the completion deadline by 2 years, (ICR,
   page 13), because of changing priorities and fiscal challenges, the Borrower decided against this. The
   outstanding amount of the IBRD loan at closure was canceled.　

   Borrower contribution: US$ 83.57 million at appraisal and US$ 41.865 million at closure.

   Dates: There were no extensions to the project closing date. The results indicators were revised as part of
   the mid-term review, which took place only 18 months before closing. A level 2 restructuring took place on
   November 9, 2017, less than 2 months before the December 31, 2017 closing date. Nearly all activities on
   which work had not yet started (whether contracted or not) were dropped. The results framework was
   revised to include only ongoing activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  The project objectives at appraisal were well-aligned with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership
  Strategy (CPS) for 2012 – 2016, in particular with Strategic Themes 1 and 4. Strategic Theme 1 focused on
  increasing growth and diversification through better management of public finances, improved investment
  climate and innovation, stronger financial sector, better infrastructure and more effective protection of the
  environment. They were in accordance with government strategies referred to in the 2012 – 2016 CPS.
  Strategic Theme 4: related to improving governance and transparency. In addition, the Systematic Country
  Diagnostic (2017) identified as priorities an improved investment climate, increased productivity through
  (among other things) better public investment management, and the improvement of the efficiency and
  effectiveness of spending.

  The project objectives were relevant to the government’s commitment to reforming the public financial
  management systems (ICR, p. 23) – government strategy documents (for example, Main Directions of Tax


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Public Finance Management TA Project (P122998)



       Policy of the Russian Federation for the Medium Term) reference the need for this reform, which has also
       been reaffirmed in the speeches of the President of the Russian Federation.

       The PDO was ambitious in its broad scope, covering not only the central administration, but many sub-
       national government units, some geographically remote. Furthermore, the project also covered a broad
       range of topics – PFM, the investment climate and innovation, financial sector reform, infrastructure and
       environmental protection. Very little appears to have been left out. A stronger focus on a smaller number of
       topics could have improved implementation.



       Rating
       Substantial

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     Improved transparency of public financial management

    Rationale

    The objective was to be achieved primarily through technical assistance in strengthening analytical capacity,
    the implementation of electronic management and monitoring of budgets at all levels of government, and the
    application of international best practice as measured by the Open Budget Index (OBI) score. Together with
    efficiency enhancements, it was expected that these measures would lead to improved transparency of
    PFM. However, better analytical capacity and electronic management do not necessarily lead to more
    budget transparency – subjecting budget data to public scrutiny and even criticism brings more daylight into
    the process.

    Outputs:


        • The development of normative legal acts that provide guidelines for budget preparation at all levels of
        government.
        • The presentation of client friendly versions of the main clauses of the normative legal acts;
        • Recommendations to the Ministry of Finance regarding the transparency and accountability of the
        municipal finance system, including e-disclosure requirements;
        • The preparation of methodological guidelines regarding open data on public finance information at
        different levels of government;
        • The electronic publication of the Federal Budget Law for 2018, with the same planned for 2019-2020;




                                                                                                         Page 4 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Public Finance Management TA Project (P122998)



        •   The development of 25 application programming interfaces and 34 machine readable databases.


    Outcomes:

    The PDO indicator for this objective was an improvement in the Open Budget Index (OBI) score from a 2012
    baseline of 74 to a target of 76 by the fifth year of the project. The actual achieved score was 72, although
    the methodology used in calculating the scores changed in 2015. An improved questionnaire was
    introduced, increasing the number of questions from 95 to 140. The decline in 2017 largely reflects a delay in
    publication of the Pre-Budget Statement in 2016. According to the MoF, this delay was, in turn, the result of
    the complexities involved in Russia’s return to three-year budgeting after a temporary return to one year
    budgets in 2015-2016 (ICR, p. 19).


    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     An improved results focus in PFM

    Rationale
    The activities related to this objective were targeted at improving the planning, control and monitoring of
    expenditures through revamping budget processes, supporting program-based budgeting, and implementing
    better techniques for program evaluation. The primary instrument was the use of program budgeting, with
    supporting activities consisting of plans and recommendations. It was expected that the adoption of program
    budgeting would lead to a greater focus on results in the preparation and implementation of budgets at both
    the national and the subnational level.
    　
    There was a partial transition to program budgeting, which included improved methodologies and a stronger
    budget framework. The single outcome target was a 90% coverage of federal budget appropriations by year
    5 (2017), from a baseline of 1.3% in 2013, representing a major expansion in the use of program budgeting
    across major government departments. This target was not achieved. However, by the end of the project, 95
    per cent of state government programs had been approved, and the percentage of expenditures of
    consolidated budgets also exceeded 90 per cent.

    The coverage of program budgeting in 2017 excludes expenditure on Pensions and Defense, which account
    for 40% of expenditure, and where draft programs were still being prepared at project closure. Actual
    achievement was 55%, well below the target. There is no indication in the PAD or elsewhere in the project
    documentation of the intention to exclude these two programs. However, the project team subsequently
    reported that the defense government program was approved in 2018, after the completion of the project, .


                                                                                                      Page 5 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Public Finance Management TA Project (P122998)



    The team also reported that the Pension program, while still under discussion at end 2018, was expected to
    be approved in 2019.
    　
    In addition to the introduction of program budgeting, the ICR (p. 20) states that there were innovations in
    service delivery and improvements in contract management.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective

     Build institutional foundations for improved budget efficiency

    Rationale
    This objective was to be achieved through developing recommendations, proposals, guidelines and
    diagnostics for improving budget systems at the national and sub-national levels, and the introduction of e-
    budgeting. However, the relationship between the inputs and the outcome target is tenuous, since little
    evidence is provided on actual implementation of the plans and recommendations and their impact on
    budget processes and efficiency.
    　
    The single outcome target for this objective was an increase in the number of regions with PFM quality
    satisfactory to the MoF from a baseline of 71 to 76 by closure. The actual number achieved was 70 in year 5
    (end-2017). This decline from the baseline reflected a change in the methodology used by the MoF. While
    the ICR (p. 23) states that if the methodology had remained unchanged, the actual number would have been
    78, the fact that over the life of the project, the MoF reduced the number of regions that it rated as
    satisfactory indicates that the objective was not achieved in terms of the criteria set out in the PAD.
    　
    No information is provided about the changes in methodology beyond saying that the assessment criteria
    were tightened, nor what the MoF hoped to achieve by using the modified criteria rather than the original
    ones. The ICR does, however, indicate (p. 23) that every case of non-compliance would result in a 5-
    percentage point downgrading, which was a change from the original methodology. Furthermore, regional
    fiscal deficits declined over the period of the project (ICR, 23) although the extent to which this can be
    attributed to project-supported activities is unclear. The World Bank Russia Economic Report 38 (November
    2017) demonstrates that regional fiscal deficits fell between 2016 and 2017. The Report states (p. 21) "The
    Ministry of Finance continued to ease the regional debt burden, increasing budgetary loans with lower
    interest rates to regions."




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Public Finance Management TA Project (P122998)




    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 4
    Objective

     Build institutional foundations for improved budget effectiveness

    Rationale

    This objective was to be achieved through reforming the tax regime for oil and gas extraction, reducing the
    possibilities for transfer pricing by oil and gas companies, utilizing tax expenditure calculations, improving tax
    payer services, including appeal procedures, limiting special tax regimes and reforming the tax code, all of
    which was to improve the efficiency of the tax regime and provide additional tax resources for the budget.

    Progress was made in a number of these areas. The rollout of a new tax regime was partially achieved
    through the introduction of a Draft Law, prepared with the support of the project, at the end of December
    2017, which was approved in March 2018, after the project had closed. The number of tax appeals settled
    through pre-court procedures was noted in the Restructuring Paper (RP, p. 5) to have increased. In 2017,
    the Federal Tax Service reported an 11 percent reduction in complaints related to tax inspections and a 15
    percent reduction in the number of tax-related court cases filed by businesses. At the restructuring, a new
    sub-objective was introduced: the "ratio of tax declarations sent electronically through the created IT
    infrastructure" (RP p. 5), the end target for which was 72%. This ratio was achieved by closure. However, the
    target had been put in place only a few months earlier, and it is unclear what project-supported activities
    were carried out in order to meet it.

    The single outcome target was a reduction in time spent by SMEs on tax calculations and payments (it is
    unclear why only SMEs were included in the tax preparation time calculations) from a baseline of 290 hours
    at the start of the project to 160 hours by year 5 (2017). Achievement was to be monitored by relying on the
    relevant World Bank Doing Business Indicator. By March 2018, it was estimated that the time was 168
    hours, implying that the target was close to having been achieved. The ICR states (p. 74) that almost three
    million SMEs saved a significant amount of time preparing tax returns and that tax revenue had risen by a
    cumulative US$ 2.4 billion by project closing, although the basis for these calculations relies on assumptions
    related to travel time, the use of a peer-to-peer ride sharing taxi service to get to the tax office, and hourly
    rates for tax preparers.

    No evidence is presented, nor were there any indicators, related to the effectiveness of budget expenditures.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

                                                                                                          Page 7 of 15
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Public Finance Management TA Project (P122998)




PHEFFICACYTBL


              Objective 5
              Objective

                   Objective 5: Build institutional foundations for improved budget accountability

              Rationale

              This objective was to be achieved by improving accounting and auditing standards that would strengthen
              internal controls, leading to better budget accountability through developing requirements for how accounting
              and auditing methodologies are undertaken. There was no outcome indicator related to this objective. The
              ICR ( p. 27) lists the following achievements as having been supported by the project:


                     • Development of a conceptual framework for accounting and reporting standards for the public sector at
                     different levels of government;
                     • Development of 28, approval of 13, and enforcement of five, Federal Accounting and Reporting Norms in
                     the public sector in accordance with International Public Sector Accounting Standards.
                     • Drafting and implementing guidelines on internal financial controls and audits;
                     • Amending the new version of the Budget Code regarding internal financial controls and the use of
                     budget funds;
                     • Establishing standards for the qualifications required for the hiring of staff.




              The ICR (p. 27) states that these achievements laid the foundation for improved budget accountability as a
              result of the introduction of internal audits. However, it is not possible to verify this in the absence of outcome
              indicators.


              Rating
       Modest
      PHREVDELTBL


 PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




 Rationale

 One outcome target was fully achieved (based on a revised target introduced shortly before closure), and two
 were close to being achieved. Efficacy for three out five objectives is rated substantial and two modest. There
 were significant undisbursed resources at project closure, which could either imply that implementation of the
 project was particularly efficient, or that there was no need for IBRD support in some areas, since a number of
 key tasks were performed in-house without direct assistance from the project. The overall efficacy rating is
 substantial.


                                                                                                                     Page 8 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Public Finance Management TA Project (P122998)




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

5. Efficiency


 There was no quantitative economic analysis at appraisal. The PAD (p. 24) states that "The benefits of this
 project have multiple dimensions …. [but they] are difficult to quantify in economic or financial terms".

 The ICR (p. 29) identified quantifiable benefits as:


   • Lower transactions costs for SMEs arising from lower tax preparation costs and fewer tax office visits,
   estimated to be worth US$1.2 billion annually and a cumulative US$2.4 billion by the closing of the project.
   This is based on the assumption that SMEs visited the tax office to submit returns in person and spent less
   time preparing tax returns. This is based on estimates in the World Bank Doing Business reports;
   • Gains from new laws and regulations developed for the oil, minerals and gas amounting to US$7.3 billion
   annually, although these are tentative and were not used in the calculation of the economic rate of return
   (ERR);
   • Increased revenue partially attributed to the project for an estimated US$4.1 billion; and
   • The investment of US$12.5 million in hardware and software for the provision of electronic information
   services for taxpayers is estimated to have saved at least US$22.6 million annually in preparing tax returns.


 The economic rate of return (ERR) is estimated to be 87.4%. Due to data accuracy concerns and problems of
 attribution, the calculation is confined to investment in computer hardware and software and savings on the
 cost of staff visits by SMEs. Project activities related to these benefits represented 19% of disbursements.

 There were a number of operational inefficiencies. The start of the project was delayed by a year, partly
 because key MOF counterparts were preoccupied with the exigencies of an economic crisis, so that its
 effective duration was four years, rather than the five specified in the PAD. Furthermore, problems were
 experienced in attracting international bidders for several components. At the restructuring, 43 contracts,
 which had either not yet been awarded, or on which work had not yet started, were cancelled. The ICR (p.14)
 states that 28 of these "were not critical to achieving the PDO," thereby begging the question as to why they
 were included in the first place.


Efficiency Rating
Modest



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 15
          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          Public Finance Management TA Project (P122998)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                       Rate
                                                             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                       Available?
                                                                                        0
Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                        19.50
ICR Estimate                                                87.40
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


The projective objectives, while relevant to the Russian Federation and consistent with World Bank Group and
government strategy, were highly ambitious in terms of both institutional scope and range of topics covered.
Relevance is rated substantial. Efficacy is assessed as substantial, with achievement of three out of five
objectives substantial and two modest. Efficiency is rated modest, reflecting a lack of quantitative analysis for
80% of project costs and of clarity on the methodology for calculating the ERR for the remaining 20%. There
were serious initial delays and difficulties in attracting international bidders, leading to the cancellation of 43
contracts. Overall, these constitute moderate shortcomings, leading to an outcome assessment of Moderately
Satisfactory.
.




a.       Outcome Rating
         Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


Since the PDOs were aligned with the government supported PFM reforms, they have the support and
commitment of the government as evidenced by the continuation of reform following the closing of the project.
Nevertheless, two associated risks are evident:


     •  The internal audit functions, implementing public sector accounting and reporting require significant civil
     service capacity, which is not widely available in the Russian Federation, particularly at the sub-national level.
     It will require investment in training and capacity building that is ongoing but can no longer be financed by the
     project.


                                                                                                        Page 10 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Finance Management TA Project (P122998)



  • The prospects for "innovative solutions for public procurement" (ICR p. 34) are uncertain. This risk can be
  mitigated through ongoing World Bank dialogue and engagement to assist with identifying and implementing
  solutions.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  The project reflected the strategic priorities of the government and the World Bank Group. The government
  had implemented PFM reforms in the past and the PAD (p. 21) states that it had strong ownership of the
  objectives as evidenced by 14 years of previous TA projects, of which this project was perceived as a
  continuation.
  　
  Preparation embodied robust fiduciary arrangements in the Project Implementation Unit, which was located
  in the Agency for Economic Restructuring that had long term experience in overseeing the fiduciary
  arrangements for IBRD projects.
  　
  The PAD contains an extensive analysis of risk identification and mitigation measures (PAD Appendix 4),
  which recognized key risks in the project, particularly in the capacity of the counterparts.
  　
  There were significant shortcomings in Quality at Entry. The project design was complex. The large
  number of project activities were of inconsistent importance, with some key to the success of the project,
  while others were more of a procedural nature. The fact that many of the activities were eventually
  undertaken "in-house" suggests that the project design and the role of the various actors in the project had
  not been delineated carefully.
  　
  No attempt was made during preparation to quantify the benefits which might arise from the project (PAD
  p. 24). There was little diagnostic or analytical work on which to base project design (PAD p. 25). Sound
  analytical underpinnings could have enabled a more robust relationship between inputs and targeted
  outcomes. M&E design was weak and insufficient to monitor and evaluate the numerous interventions that
  were financed by the project (see Section 9a below). The choice of some outcome indicators undermines
  the relationship between the PDO and the outcomes. For example, utilizing SME taxation preparation time
  as the only outcome indicator for "[building] institutional foundations for improved budget effectiveness",
  and use of the Open Budget Index score as the single outcome measure of budget transparency does not
  allow a clear delineation of the relationship between inputs and outcomes.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Finance Management TA Project (P122998)



  There was extensive hands-on supervision over the life of the project, with numerous missions. Teams were
  adequately staffed. There were, however, two moderate shortcomings. First, while potential barriers to the
  achievement of development outcomes were identified, this did not translate into necessary corrective
  action in order to resolve implementation delays and avoid cancellation of activities, although the
  government’s changing priorities would in any event have rendered　such action　difficult. Second, an
  earlier attempt could have been made to address serious weaknesses in the results framework through a
  restructuring. Although indicators were modified at the mid-term review, this took place only 18 months
  before project closure and was hence of limited effectiveness. A level 2 restructuring occurred less than
  months before project closure. This was a case of too little, too late. The issues with the indicators, which
  the ICR identified, called for a comprehensive Level 1 restructuring that would have reduced the necessity
  for the ICR to go beyond the analysis of the PDO, and to have relied instead on outcome indicators that had
  been generated in the restructuring itself. However, this issue was addressed only late in the project’s life
  and would have required an extension of the closing date to be effective. The Bank team’s recommendation
  of such an extension was not accepted by the Authorities.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  M&E design was inadequate for the effective monitoring and evaluation of this complex project. While the
  project had 5 components, there were 29 sub-components, which were to be tracked by 11 intermediate results
  indicators. The outcome indicators and the intermediate results indicators did not map effectively into activity
  focus areas. The PDO outcome indicators were directed at capturing results for a very limited sub-set of
  outcomes. For example, reduced time for SMEs to prepare tax returns captures only a small subset of the
  project outcome target of reforming the entire tax system, and beyond that the objective of building institutional
  foundations for improved budget effectiveness. The intermediate results indicators were frequently
  disconnected from the activity focus areas. For instance, more than half of the indicators referred to drafting of
  texts without any objective measure of quality or relevance or any consideration of implementation or actual
  impact. The MoF was to be responsible for managing and operating the M&E system.



b. M&E Implementation


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Finance Management TA Project (P122998)



  Data was collected and M&E results were documented periodically, including in the Bank’s supervision
  reports. An important shortcoming, however, was that design weaknesses were not addressed at an early
  enough stage through a level 2 restructuring. At the mid-term review (MTR), in June 2016, all 11 intermediate
  results indicators were modified in some way, and six were changed completely – for example, "user
  satisfaction with the e-budget system" was replaced by "reduction in time for processing documents due to
  the implementation of the e-budget system." An extension to the project’s closing date was also
  recommended at the MTR. However, the Authorities decided against such an extension. The remaining 18
  months before closure provided insufficient time for the modified results framework to become an effective
  feedback tool in project implementation.




c. M&E Utilization

  M&E utilization was regular but reactive rather than proactive. It did not lead to any changes in project
  design.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The ICR reports (p. 33) that the project was classified as category C for environmental assessment
  purposes, and that there were no activities that were expected to affect the environment either directly or
  indirectly. The ICR also notes that there were no activities that could cause any social risk or negatively
  affect the population.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  The ICR (p. 33) states that all procurement activities were carried out in a timely and satisfactory way. The
  procurement risk was lowered during implementation from substantial to moderate. Financial management was
  also reported to be satisfactory throughout the life of the project. The ICR states that "Audit reports were
  submitted by the due date, with the audit opinion unmodified and no issues raised for management attention."

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Finance Management TA Project (P122998)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

  None werereported



d. Other
    ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                       IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately               Moderately
Outcome                                                                            ---
                               Satisfactory             Satisfactory
                               Moderately               Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                   ---
                               Satisfactory             Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                   Modest                     ---
Quality of ICR                                          Substantial                ---

12. Lessons


Among the lessons presented in the ICR (pp. 35-37), two are of particular importance:

Over-complex project design can hamper both implementation and supervision. In this case, the large
number of activities and sub-components, and their varied criticality as means of attaining the objectives, not
only made monitoring implementation progress onerous, but also made it difficult to evaluate the project’s
achievements. The complexity of design was compounded by that of implementation arrangements.

It is important to undertake restructuring as early as possible. In this case, a restructuring involving major
modifications in the results framework was only undertaken 18 months prior to closure. Coupled with the
Authorities decision not to request an extension, this left insufficient time for the new framework to become an
effective monitoring and evaluation tool.

IEG adds one additional lesson:

Careful thought given to the adoption and use of appropriate outcome indicators can facilitate
supervision and evaluation. In this case, the indicators were inadequate. Four of the five PDOs were
assessed through single indicators and there was no PDO indicator for outcome area 5. The chosen indicators

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Public Finance Management TA Project (P122998)



could, therefore, provide at best only a partial measure of project achievements. Moreover, some of these
indicators were derived from exogenous sources, such as "Doing Business" or the Open Budget Index. The
data frequently becomes available with a significant time lag. Such gauges have a diminished usefulness as a
feedback tool unless accompanied by other indicators generated by the project itself, and by an in-depth
assessment of their relevance to country circumstances.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is of uneven quality. Parts are sound and provide insights into the strengths and weaknesses of the
project. The analysis of the theory of change throws light on some design issues. The detailed assessment
contained in the ICR provided context that was missing in the project design with respect to the weak M&E
framework and lack of comprehensive economic analysis. The unpacking of the PDO components was well
done.

However, the discussion of efficiency states that all of the project objectives were attained. This conclusion is
inconsistent with the final supervision report in December 2017, and indeed with the ICR’s own analysis of
efficacy (which acknowledges that several project development objectives were not met). The ICR attempts to
resolve this contradiction by judging outcome on the basis of criteria other than the PDO indicators. At 37 text
pages, and 104 overall pages the ICR is too long.




a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 15
