     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JUDICIAL REFORM SUPPORT (P089733)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0021386

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P089733                                   JUDICIAL REFORM SUPPORT

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Russian Federation                        Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-48490,TF-90655                       30-Mar-2012                                         51,798,445.49

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Feb-2007                               31-Dec-2017

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           50,000,000.00                                    1,896,800.00

 Revised Commitment                            51,895,592.01                                    1,895,592.01

 Actual                                        51,798,445.49                                    1,895,592.01




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judyth L. Twigg            Robert Mark Lacey            Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   According to the Loan Agreement (p. 5), the project's objective was to "assist the Borrower to strengthen
   judicial transparency and efficiency of selected courts through the implementation of information systems and
   judicial training."



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JUDICIAL REFORM SUPPORT (P089733)



  No

                                                           PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   The project contained four components:

   1. Institutionalizing transparency and accountability (appraisal: US$ 7.15 million; actual US$ 4.78
   million). This component was to finance: (a) periodic surveys of users of judicial services on access to,
   quality of, and satisfaction with, judicial services and enforcement of judicial decisions, and pubic
   dissemination of the survey results; (b) research and analysis on further development of transparency,
   publication, openness, and accessibility of judicial decisions, processes, and practices, including obligatory
   publication of judicial decisions; and analysis on the introduction of modern information and communication
   technologies in judicial systems and on the further integration of the judicial system; (c) the creation,
   implementation, and dissemination of common case management standards, guidelines, and processes;
   (d) the development and piloting of criteria, indicators, and a policy to assess and periodically report on the
   effectiveness of the judicial system, and related capacity building; and a needs assessment for human
   capital development in the judiciary to inform policy and strategy updates; and (e) development and
   implementation of communications and change management strategies to promote judicial reform.

   2. Harnessing information and communication technology (ICT) for judicial transparency and effectiveness
   (appraisal, US$ 146.1 million; actual US$ 168.76 million). This component was to improve judicial
   transparency through the public and public dissemination of judicial decisions at every level in the three
   branches of the judiciary; and improve judicial effectiveness through the implementation of shared (or
   standardized) ICT solutions for such key activities as case flow management, document flow management,
   facilitating access to justice in remote locations, and judicial electronic archiving. The component was to
   finance activities for the Constitutional Court (CC); the Supreme Court (SC) and Courts of General
   Jurisdiction (CGJ), all of which were under the oversight of the Judicial Department (JD); and the Supreme
   Arbitration Court (SAC, which oversaw commercial courts, abolished in 2014 with functions transferred to a
   newly-created Commercial Division in the SC), to: (i) modernize, develop, and deploy integrated
   information systems for courts to facilitate document flow, record management, information collection, and
   internal knowledge sharing; (ii) improve public access to and availability of judicial information through
   enabling the online publication of judicial decisions and other relevant information; and (iii) more effectively
   link courts, JD offices, and relevant entities/facilities through integrated information systems by enhancing
   mobile capabilities of access to electronic information and video conferencing.

   3. Strengthening human capital (appraisal: US$ 10.1 million; actual US$ 7.09 million). This component
   was to finance information technology-related education and training for judges and court personnel for the
   CC, CGJ, SAC, and JD; and knowledge exchange, including seminars, workshops, etc., for the
   judiciary. The training was to supplement a much larger outlay for judicial education and training
   envisaged under the government's National Project for Education and the state budget.


                                                                                                               Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    JUDICIAL REFORM SUPPORT (P089733)




  4. Project management and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) (appraisal, US$ 9.06 million; actual US$ 8.13
  million). This component was to finance logistical and secretarial support for the Inter-Agency Coordination
  Council (IACC) and operating costs of the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), which was responsible for
  project implementation; expert ICT support for the judiciary; and implementation of the project's results
  framework and M&E indicators.

  At a 2014 restructuring, the second component was revised to remove the JD and 900 CGJs as
  beneficiaries and to add instead the Moscow City Courts (MCC) and the Court of Intellectual Rights
  (CIR). This substitution followed from the difficulty that the CGJs were scattered across Russia's vast
  territory and mostly comprised small courts with three or fewer judges. Their total caseload represented
  less than 10% of the country's total caseload volume. From a supervision perspective, it was challenging
  to verify implementation across so many locations with a limited budget; in addition, the ICR made it clear
  (p. 40) that the ICT procurement for the CGJs was not proceeding smoothly. The MCC, on the other hand,
  was Russia's largest regional court system, annually handling more than twice the CGJ's caseload. The
  ICR (p. 18) argued that the shift of implementation focus from the CGJs to the MCC enhanced the project's
  impact and efficiency.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Project cost: Project cost at appraisal was US$ 172.41 million. Actual costs were US$ 188.76 million
  (ICR, p. 62).

  Financing: The project was initially to be financed by a US$ 50 million Specific Investment Loan from the
  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. US$ 49.9 million was disbursed by project
  closing.

  Borrower contribution: The government contributed US$ 138.86 million of a planned US$ 122.41 million,
  having added almost US$ 19 million in 2017. The project team explained that the Russian government
  frequently contributed additional funds in projects it perceived as proceeding effectively, and that this far
  into implementation, IT systems required further investment in modernization.

  Dates: The project was approved on February 15, 2007 and became effective on November 15, 2007. It
  was restructured seven times.

    • In September 2010, at the time of the mid-term review, the project was restructured to align the
    wording of the objectives in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) and the Loan Agreement (this
    alignment was undertaken at this time for all projects in the Bank's Russia portfolio).
    • In March and May of 2012, the project underwent a two-part restructuring. In the first part, the closing
    date was extended from March 30, 2012 to March 30, 2014 to allow time for preparation of the second
    part. In the second part, some indicators and baselines were revised; activities were added or deleted

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JUDICIAL REFORM SUPPORT (P089733)



     to conform with evolving judicial reorganization and modernization priorities and to address
     implementation challenges; and the Foundation for Enterprise Restructuring (FER) was designated as
     the new project implementation unit after the BEA ceased functioning.
     • In March and September of 2014, the project again underwent a two-part restructuring. The first part
     extended the closing date to allow time for the second part -- which involved ICT modernization of 900
     CGJs being replaced by similar activities in the Moscow City Courts (MCC) in order to cover institutions
     with higher and more geographically concentrated caseload volume (see Section 2d) -- to be prepared.
     • The closing date was again extended two more times, in October of 2016 and May of 2017. The
     project closed on December 31, 2017, over ten years after approval. The cumulative delay of five years
     and nine months amounted to 113 percent of the original schedule.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  At appraisal, annual case loads across all courts were growing rapidly. Information technology, however,
  was underused, court staff were underpaid, court premises were wholly unsatisfactory, and access to
  proceedings was severely limited. After Russia joined the Council of Europe, thousands of Russian citizens
  appealed to the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) concerning the lack of competence, integrity,
  and transparency in the judicial system -- a set of shortcomings openly acknowledged by the
  government. In 2005, only 20% of Russian firms thought that Russian courts were "honest and
  uncorrupted." Reform focus prior to the project had concentrated on legal modernization rather than
  capacity development and mindset change. The Government's approach at appraisal therefore called for a
  three-pronged strategy, supported by two successive Federal Targeted Programs (2002-2006 and 2007-
  2011) encompassing harnessing the power of information technology to improve the quality and
  accessibility of information (to strengthen transparency and efficiency and reduce opportunities for
  corruption), raising judicial competence and independence through education and training, and institutional
  development.

  The project was relevant to the World Bank Group's Country Partnership Strategy at appraisal (FY 2007-
  2009), which contained priorities for strengthening public sector governance and service delivery, as well as
  strengthening the business environment. There was no Country Partnership Strategy in effect at project
  closing. The objectives remained relevant to the government's 2016 anti-crisis plan, which included
  initiatives to strengthen judicial processes, as well as a May 2018 Presidential Decree on introduction of
  digital technology and platform solutions. The objectives supplemented the federal targeted program for
  development of Russia's judicial system for 2013-2020, which focused on judicial independence; the
  Ministry of Finance specifically commented (ICR, pp 79-80) that the project's objectives were intended to
  complement these other government efforts. The World Economic Forum's 2015 Global Networked
  Readiness Index identified inefficiency in the judicial system as an ongoing challenge. The Bank's 2017
  Systematic Country Diagnostic for Russia, which reviewed justice system achievements and constraints,

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            JUDICIAL REFORM SUPPORT (P089733)



       acknowledged the country's progress in improving judicial efficiency and transparency. It made the case
       (pp. 140-141) that these objectives were relevant as foundational building blocks toward the remaining (and
       even more challenging) goal of accountability and ridding courts of susceptibility to executive influence.



       Rating
       Substantial

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     Strengthen judicial transparency of selected courts

    Rationale

    The project's theory of change held that the implementation of information systems and related judicial
    training would help transform the judiciary into an institution that is more transparent and
    efficient. Transparency was to be strengthened through drafting of a law to mandate publication of all
    judicial decisions; location of information screens and kiosks in courts to enable citizens, litigants, and
    lawyers to access their cases and to obtain information about court functioning in general; and inclusion of
    transparency enhancing elements such a reporting on complaints received and resolved in ICT systems.

    The PAD (pp. 22-25) presented a lengthy list of other Bank projects and other donors active in Russia's
    judicial sector. Given this context, it should be noted that the ICR did not discuss issues of attribution of
    observed results to the interventions financed specifically by this project. The project team later explained
    that other partners, primarily the European Union and United States Agency for International Development,
    were primarily involved in training that was not financed by this Bank project, and that these donors had
    largely withdrawn from the country by 2011-2012. The Bank's emphasis on modernization of IT systems,
    leveraging a relatively small investment in a sector where the government was spending about a billion
    dollars annually, was intended to promote transparency of judicial decisions and support stakeholders within
    Russia's judicial system who were pursuing transparency goals.

    Outputs:

    The project provided examples of, and experts in, international good practice on transparency law. Federal
    Law 262 was passed in 2010, mandating publication of judicial decisions.

    The project supported modernization of the SC, CC, and CIR integrated systems for document storage
    and flow management, as well as development of electronic banks of court decisions, e-libraries, and
    internet portals. The SAC and commercial courts were provided with modern, secure corporate e-mail

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    JUDICIAL REFORM SUPPORT (P089733)



systems. Decisions and data files of the SC were retrospectively converted into electronic format. A publicly
accessible web portal for the commercial court system was designed and implemented. A functional and
secure data processing center serving the MCC was completed in 2016. The MCC integrated information
system now allows citizens and businesses to lodge complaints wit the court by electronic means and
remotely track the status of the complaint.

All of the SC, CC, commercial courts, and MCC, and half of all penitentiaries, were provided with functioning
videoconference facilities enabling remote participation in court proceedings by the end of the project period,
and the audio and video recordings were stored and made available for later review by judges, staff,
lawyers, and the public. Similarly, all courts covered by the project were provided with new information
kiosks giving electronic access to judicial decisions, available to all users. The project supported the
implementation of a modern system of taxonomy and classification of CC decisions to make them more
easily searchable and accessible by judges, researchers, lawyers, and the public.

7,703 judges and judicial staff of commercial courts, the MCC, arbitrazh courts, CGJ, the JD, and the SC
were trained on ICT systems under the project, exceeding the original target of 4,000 and the revised target
of 4,300. Knowledge exchange visits were made to Germany, Austria, Australia, Singapore, and South
Korea. Modern equipment was procured for 720 judicial workspaces. The project reached 39,760
beneficiaries, of whom 66.75% were female, exceeding the target of 32,000 beneficiaries (40%
female). Direct project beneficiaries included the judges and judicial staff of the SC, CC, SAC, commercial
courts, MCC, and CIR.

A study was conducted on interaction between the courts and the mass media. Its recommendations led to
joint trainings for court spokespersons and members of the media, as well as the development of a
communications strategy.

A study, emerging from a joint request from the CC and the SC, analyzed the high and increasing numbers
of Russian judicial decisions being appealed to the ECHR and the non-implementation of many ECHR
decisions. As a result, the courts pinpointed issues that could be addressed by the Russian authorities. The
ICR did not state whether any concrete outcomes resulted from this activity.

Outcomes:

The percentage of individuals believing that an ordinary Russian citizen could have their case considered
fairly and without prejudice increased from 46% in 2006 to 64% in 2010, 73% in 2012, and 76% in
2017. The change from 2006 to 2017 represents a 65% increase, approaching the target of a 75%
increase. These survey results were published by the Levada Center, a respected independent polling
agency, and the last two rounds were also published by the MCC on its website. The percentage reporting
that the public standing of courts in the community was very high or rather high increased from 41% in 2011
to 54% in 2017, and the percentage reporting that the courts' public standing was very low or rather low
decreased from 49% in 2011 to 37% in 2017. The percentage of businesses feeling that their property rights
were not protected decreased from 54% in 2010 to 44% in 2017. It should be noted, however, that these


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            JUDICIAL REFORM SUPPORT (P089733)



    indicators centered around general perceptions of fairness, public standing, and effectiveness, rather than
    around either of the specific project objectives of transparency and efficiency.

    Survey results were positive specifically for transparency (information availability) in the commercial
    courts. 63% of entrepreneurs responded in 2017 that they used the database of commercial court decisions,
    and 24% used templates of court documents. 47% of entrepreneurs in 2017 reported that it was not difficult,
    and 27% that it was rather easy, to get information on commercial court jurisprudence. 71% were satisfied
    with the amount of information on commercial court websites, 66% were satisfied with the search features,
    and 64% were satisfied with the regularity and timeliness of information updates. The percentage of
    entrepreneurs indicating that commercial court web sites were important sources of information increased
    from 32% in 2010 to 49% in 2017.

    However, some Levada Center surveys showed only small improvement across several direct
    measurements of transparency perceived by the general public in relation to the judicial system as a
    whole. Respondents stating that court proceedings are not sufficiently transparent for interested persons
    and relatives fell slightly from 31% in 2010 to 28% in 2017; those saying that proceedings are not sufficiently
    transparent for the mass media also declined by a small amount, from 41% in 2010 to 38% in 2017; and
    those saying proceedings are not sufficiently transparent for the public fell only from 48% in 2010 to 45% in
    2017. The percentage of respondents stating that information on court activities was fully accessible to
    citizens and the public at large remained low, at 3% in 2010 and 4% in 2017; those indicating that
    information was mostly accessible remained stable at 20% in 2010 and 2017; and those stating that
    information was limited fell only from 51% in 2010 to 44% in 2017.

    MCC surveys found that satisfaction with functioning of all MCC information systems increased by 10-20
    percentage points between 2014 and 2017. The number of cases challenging the minutes of court sessions
    was reduced by over 35% between 2014 and 2017, and the number of complaints from litigation participants
    on abuses of rights during court proceedings decreased by over 31% (not quite reaching the target of a 40%
    reduction). The ICR (p. 46) attributed the shortfall in reaching the target to delays in making the normative
    laws applicable and in completing interagency linkages with the MCC system.

    Based on survey results covering perceptions of transparency among actual users of the commercial courts
    and MCC, achievement of this objective is rated Substantial, though it should be noted that the project's
    impact on judicial transparency appears not yet to have become apparent to the general public. It should
    also be noted that the ICR did not provide information on the level or quality of use of many of the upgraded
    facilities.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL




                                                                                                        Page 7 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    JUDICIAL REFORM SUPPORT (P089733)




Objective 2
Objective

Strengthen judicial efficiency of selected courts

Rationale

Judicial efficiency was to be strengthened through streamlining of business processes and automation
through ICT systems in the courts at all levels.

Outputs are the same as under Objective 1, as the ICT systems that automated business processes and
digitized information on cases and court functioning also enhanced judicial efficiency.

Outcomes:

The percentage of survey respondents among the general public saying that red tape, delays, and/or lack of
productivity were "acute" issues in judges' work fell from 29% in 2010 to 20% in 2017. The percentage
criticizing the judicial system for unnecessary bureaucracy and poor management decreased from 22% in
2012 to 17% in 2017.

The percentage of decisions in MCC civil cases that were actually enforced increased from 24% in 2014 to
38% in 2017 and 39% in February of 2018, almost reaching the target of 40%. The ICR (p. 23) explained
that MCC decisions in civil cases had to be enforced by public bailiffs in order for the successful party to
obtain the benefit of the court decision, and that the new MCC ICT system, which was linked to the bailiff ICT
system, made it more difficult for bailiffs to delay or avoid enforcement. According to the ICR (p. 44),
achievement could have been higher absent implementation challenges related to the interface with
the bailiff ICT system. Attribution of observed results to the project is not clear, however, as the project did
not support the work of federal bailiffs. The extent to which the transparency of the MCC ICT system
provided incentives for bailiffs to increase enforcement of decisions is not known.

The number of days taken by MCC to respond to citizen applications decreased from 30 days in 2014 to 16
days in 2017, far exceeding the target of 24 days.

The amount of time taken by MCC to forward criminal and civil cases to courts of appeal decreased from two
months in 2014 to 1.5 months in 2017, meeting the target.

Specific information on response time was not provided for courts other than the MCC. In addition, the PAD
(Annex 1) prominently discussed a range of other possible indicators of efficiency such as case clearance
rate, case backlog, frequency and duration of cases from filing to disposition, and percent of cases that are
appealed. These indicators were not part of the results framework (see Section 9a).




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 16
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  JUDICIAL REFORM SUPPORT (P089733)



             Achievement of this objective is rated Modest. Achievements were significant with regard to the MCC and
             overall public perception, but outcome data were not reported on the other court systems supported by the
             project and on other indicators of efficiency.



             Rating
      Modest
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

Overall efficacy is rated Substantial, though barely so given the shortcomings noted under each specific objective.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

     5. Efficiency


            The PAD (pp. 12, 61) did not conduct a formal economic analysis. It stated that "it is difficult to quantify the
            economic benefits of the anticipated improvements," but that "a review of the current impact of the inefficient
            functioning of the system on the costs of doing business suggests that costs associated with a poorly
            functioning judiciary are significant." No details of that review were provided. The PAD postulated that
            improved delivery of judicial services would help lower business costs by accelerating and reducing the cost
            of litigation, maintaining a level playing field for all businesses, and accelerating resolution of disputes, all of
            which would help spur investment and promote economic growth.

            The ICR's economic analysis (pp. 63-78) found a Net Present Value of US$ 121.8 million equivalent (using
            the end-2017 exchange rate) and an economic internal rate of return of 63%. The Comprehensive Economic
            Effect (summing direct and indirect projected economic impacts) through 2022 was estimated at US$ 665.9
            million equivalent, a result that held under a sensitivity analysis that varied assumptions by plus or minus
            10%. Conceptually, benefits included savings on staff time of judges and other court officials; lowered
            transaction costs between courts, other government institutions, and users of courts such as citizens and
            businesses; and reduced costs of processing information and providing information to citizens, businesses,
            and government agencies. However, it should be noted that the actual calculation of the economic impact of
            judicial reforms was based on an extended series of assumptions regarding the validity of the Bank's Doing
            Business indicators as measures of economic impact; the relative impact of those indicators and their
            relationship to the judicial reforms supported by the project; the correlation between those indicators and
            internal lending interest rates; and the value of labor cost savings. Although the ICR is to be commended for


                                                                                                                     Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JUDICIAL REFORM SUPPORT (P089733)



making both the methodology and the assumptions underlying it explicit, the findings should be recognized as
estimates only, with the results highly subject to change under equally reasonable alternative assumptions
and approaches.

The ICR (pp. 36, 39) referred to some factors that hindered implementation efficiency, including performance
and governance issues at the BEA between 2008 and 2010, procurement challenges for the CGJ ICT
systems over the same period, and slowdowns prior to national elections in 2012 and due to the abolition of
the SAC. Positive markers of project efficiency (cost-effective use of project resources, compared to
alternatives) included the decision to remove the JD and CGJ from the project and to focus instead on the
higher-impact MCC system, and the replacement of the BEA with the FER as the implementing agency,
which was reported to have accelerated procurement and implementation (ICR, p. 30). The government
allocated budgetary resources for ICT modernization of small CGJs in 2014, further supporting the Bank's
decision to focus on MCCs (for which no government funds had been allocated for ICT modernization), an
efficient decision from a targeting perspective. Furthermore, MCCs' implementation of an integrated ICT
system was described as an "example of global good practice in design and implementation of complex ICT
systems," with a two-stage bidding process taking only seven months (ICR, p. 30). Nonetheless, there were
extensions amounting to over five years, while the initial implementation schedule was just over five years.

Project efficiency is rated Modest, given the questionable assumptions underpinning the economic analysis
and the lack of activity during 2007-2011 due to the performance, governance, and procurement challenges
noted in the previous paragraph.



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate
                                                        Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                   Available?
                                                                                  0
Appraisal                                               0
                                                                                  Not Applicable
                                                                                  100.00
ICR Estimate                                           63.00
                                                                                  Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 16
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        JUDICIAL REFORM SUPPORT (P089733)



The objectives were substantially relevant to country conditions, government strategy, and Bank
strategy. Achievement of the transparency objective is rated substantial, based on survey results covering
perceptions of transparency among actual users of the commercial courts and MCC. Achievement of the
efficiency objectives is rated modest, due to lack of information about efficiency in project-supported court
systems other than the MCC, and to the absence of most commonly used indicators of judicial
efficiency. Efficiency is rated modest based on questions about the assumptions and methodology used for the
economic analysis, and on extensive delays across the first four years of project implementation. Taken
together, these ratings indicate moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation, leading
to an Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a.    Outcome Rating
      Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


The SC, commercial courts, and MCC benefited from enhanced institutional capacity to design, tender,
contract, and implement sophisticated ICT systems. That capacity is likely to be sustained. During 2016-2017,
the SC and MCC designed a US$ 460 million follow-on judicial modernization project with the New
Development Bank (formerly the BRICS Development Bank), approved on August 31, 2017. This follow-on
project focuses on modernization of the MCC bailiff ICT system, a crucial next step toward judicial system
efficiency (see Section 4). ICT systems in the CC and SC are being further modernized with their own
budgets. A May 2018 Presidential Decree prioritizes progressive digitalization of all state functions and
services, including the courts.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

     The project's objectives were clearly and succinctly stated, supported by a well articulated theory of
     change. Project design was predicated on a series of assumptions that proved valid: that the courts had
     the capacity to design and implement technically and institutionally challenging ICT-based reforms; that the
     BEA had adequate implementation capacity; and that the courts would collaborate effectively with the
     Bank. Lessons learned from the implementation of similar projects in other countries and in Russia
     included the complexity and risk of judicial reform (and therefore the need to build solid political consensus
     with strong champions), the importance of clearly defined results indicators for the project as a whole and
     for each component, the imperative of integration and interoperability of information systems, and the
     critical role of transparent and competitive procurement. The project was recognized as high-risk, high-
     reward (PAD, p. 9), with the following risks rated High: political risk arising from the complex interplay and

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JUDICIAL REFORM SUPPORT (P089733)



  sometimes conflicting agendas of major actors; reputation risk around the Bank's ability to influence the
  overall modernization agenda; the differing priorities of multiple agencies involved; a lack of effective
  cooperation and communication among major entities involved in the project; and weak implementation
  capacity in beneficiary institutions. Proposed mitigation measures included consultative design, clear
  communications, explicit and transparent inter-agency agreements, appropriate stakeholder representation
  in the IACC, and clarity on the activities to be financed and implementation arrangements.

  The IACC, including representatives of all participating courts and the Ministry of Finance, was created to
  undertake high-level strategic project oversight and management. The BEA, a non-commercial foundation,
  was selected as the implementation unit. Although it was common practice at the time in the Region to
  avoid the use of stand-alone implementation entities in order to ensure ownership and accountability and to
  facilitate long-term capacity building, the BEA had accumulated over a decade of knowledge and
  experience in Bank procedures and processes. However, the BEA's ability to manage the procurement of
  a large ICT package for the JD/CGJs was overestimated; the failure to identify and mitigate this risk led to
  slowdowns and an eventual need to restructure the project. There were also weaknesses in M&E design
  (see Section 9a).


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  The Bank team was stable and had strong technical, operational, and fiduciary strengths. When the BEA
  proved unable to engage on issues of substance with courts' technical working groups, obtain results
  information from courts, or help courts prepare satisfactory terms of reference and technical specifications,
  the Bank team stepped in to play these roles. The Borrower's ICR (p. 143) specifically noted the Bank's
  flexibility in project management and the team's consideration of specific elements of national legislation
  that impacted the project. Candor in reporting on early challenges facilitated proactive restructurings,
  though the BEA's focus on process rather than outcomes during the project's first four years (see Section
  9b) limited available information on development outcomes.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JUDICIAL REFORM SUPPORT (P089733)



  The IACC and Ministry of Economic Development and Trade were responsible for overall project monitoring,
  with the BEA to consolidate information provided by various counterparts in order to track progress against the
  monitoring plan. Each beneficiary entity identified a technical team (usually with participation from that court's
  statistical unit and the unit responsible for project activities) to handle project-related data collection and
  reporting. The project's results framework contained project-specific indicators and actionable monitoring
  arrangements. Project results were also to be monitored in parallel with the results and indicators of the
  governments 2007-2011 Federal Targeted Program so as to provide a broader assessment of the achievement
  of key government judicial reform goals. The PAD (p. 9) stated that there would be a comprehensive annual
  evaluation of progress against project indicators, to be used for analyzing intermediate outcomes and making
  adjustments to project activities or priorities as needed. To the extent possible, the monitoring results were to
  be widely publicized to the judicial community and the general public.

  There were shortcomings, however, with the quality and adequacy of the project's output and outcome
  indicators. There were no output indicators measuring level or quality of use of many of the upgraded court
  facilities. Some efficiency indicators -- enforcement rate for MCC civil cases, and time taken by MCCs to
  respond to citizen applications -- were added at the 2014 restructuring. However, the PAD (Annex 1)
  prominently discussed a range of other indicators of efficiency such as case clearance rate, case backlog,
  frequency and duration of cases from filing to disposition, and percent of cases that are appealed. These
  indicators were not part of the results framework, nor were any efficiency measures for courts other than the
  MCCs. The project team later explained that, given the political sensitivity of interventions in Russia's judicial
  system and related procurements, it was decided to focus on a relatively narrow set of indicators around
  transparency rather than the more conventional set of efficiency measures related to speed and
  appeals. Nevertheless, it remains the case that achievement of the efficiency objective -- representing fully half
  of the project's objectives -- was not comprehensively measured.



b. M&E Implementation

  During 2007-2012, the BEA's reporting focused exclusively on process rather than results indicators. At the
  2012 restructuring, when the FER replaced the BEA as the project's implementation unit, M&E arrangements
  were strengthened, and results reporting began to improve. The FER enhanced processes of support for the
  M&E units of each beneficiary entity.



c. M&E Utilization

  The ICR (p. 39) reported that the 2012 and 2014 restructurings were, in part, based on M&E findings and
  analysis. MCC, in particular, used project M&E to track results and adjust elements of its ICT system.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JUDICIAL REFORM SUPPORT (P089733)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was rated Environmental Assessment category C and did not trigger any safeguard
  policies. According to the ICR (p. 39), no safeguard issues arose during implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  According to the ICR (p. 39), project financial management was rated Satisfactory throughout
  implementation. Audit reports were received on time.

  There were delays in procurement across the project's first several years related to capacity issues at the BEA
  and technical and procurement issues around ICT activities for the 900 CGJs from 2007 through 2011. After
  the FER became the implementing agency, procurement improved significantly. The ICR (p. 39) cited the rapid
  (eight months from concept to contract signing) two-stage procurement for the US$ 42 million MCC ICT system
  as a noteworthy achievement.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                      ICR                       IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Achievement of the efficiency
                                                      Moderately                 objective is rated modest due
Outcome                      Satisfactory
                                                      Satisfactory               to inadequate measurement of
                                                                                 achievement. Project

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      JUDICIAL REFORM SUPPORT (P089733)



                                                                                   efficiency is rated modest
                                                                                   based on questions about the
                                                                                   assumptions and methodology
                                                                                   used for the economic
                                                                                   analysis, and on extensive
                                                                                   delays across the first four
                                                                                   years of project
                                                                                   implementation.
                               Moderately               Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                   ---
                               Satisfactory             Satisfactory
                                                                                   There were shortcomings in
                                                                                   the results framework that
Quality of M&E                 Substantial              Modest
                                                                                   were not addressed during
                                                                                   implementation.
Quality of ICR                                          Modest                     ---

12. Lessons


The ICR (pp. 41-42) offered insightful lessons, including:

Judicial reform projects require buy-in from both executive and judicial leadership, creating conditions
allowing the courts to proceed with appropriate sequencing of reform activities and restructuring where
necessary. Rushing significant institutional change in the courts, in a political economy environment as
complex as Russia's, could have led to a convergence of interests opposed to modernization. Instead, in this
case, careful addressing of both technical issues and institutional concerns beyond ICT led to positive and
sustainable results.

Relatively small loan amounts can bring significant value-added to middle-income countries. In this
case, project strategy aligned tightly with Russia's judicial modernization strategy, providing desired
implementation support, policy advice, technical feedback, and a menu of alternative approaches for
beneficiaries. The courts used the project as a vehicle to access Bank expertise for conceive, design, and
implement complex, high-risk, ICT-intensive systems.

Stable teams, on both the Bank and counterpart sides, can together address implementation risks and
challenges. In this case, the Bank team remained constant throughout the project's lifetime, an unusual
feature that contributed to a trusting relationship between the Bank and Russia's courts, the implementing
agencies, and the MOE. The quality of this relationship helped counterparts to identify shortcomings and turn
the project around with restructurings.




13. Assessment Recommended?



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      JUDICIAL REFORM SUPPORT (P089733)



No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR was insightful, candid, and results-oriented, with thorough assessments of the project's early
roadblocks, restructurings and adjustments, and achievements. Annex 6, which provided an overview of key
judicial and legal reforms in Russia, was useful in understanding the project's objectives and activities. The
economic analysis was highly detailed and drew from other Bank analytic work, though it relied on a series of
debatable assumptions in order to derive its findings. However, the ICR was far too long (with 34 pages of text,
and slides in annexes 9 and 10 were not readable), occasionally repetitive, and explanations of some of the
formal results indicators were not clear. The modest rating reflects the excessive length of the ICR.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Modest




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 16
