     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STATISTICS FOR RESULTS PROJECT (P129825)



                                                                                   Report Number : ICRR0021424

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P129825                                    STATISTICS FOR RESULTS PROJECT

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Lao People's Democratic Republic           Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-14613                                   30-Jun-2017                                             7,980,215.19

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 07-May-2013                                28-Feb-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              8,000,000.00                                      8,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               7,980,215.19                                      7,980,215.19

 Actual                                           7,980,215.19                                      7,980,215.19




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Paul Holden                 Robert Mark Lacey            Malathi S. Jayawickrama          IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   The objective of the project was to improve the capacity of the Recipient’s national statistical system to
   produce and disseminate reliable and timely macroeconomic and poverty statistics in accordance with
   international standards and in response to user needs (Grant Agreement p. 4).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   No

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STATISTICS FOR RESULTS PROJECT (P129825)




                                                          PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Improve the production and dissemination of reliable and timely macroeconomic
   statistics and data on poverty. Appraisal amount US$3.13 million; actual amount US$3.13 million:
   The aim of this component was to improve the quality, timeliness and coverage of macroeconomic and
   poverty statistics for use in planning, monitoring and evaluating development programs in Lao PDR.
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD p. 5), this involved:　improving national accounts by
   utilizing the expenditure approach; undertaking household poverty and gender-based surveys and
   analysis; and strengthening the modeling and research capacities of government ministries, including the
   Ministry of Finance, the Bank of Lao and the Ministry of Planning and Investment. All methodologies
   involved the adoption of internationally accepted standards of data collection and utilization.
   　
   Component 2:　Strengthening policies and implementation capacity related to the collection and
   dissemination of statistics. Appraisal amount US$1.155 million; actual amount US$1.16 million. The
   aim of this component was to　enhance the capacity of the Lao Statistics Bureau (LSB) and the statistical
   units of selected sectoral ministries and agencies　(SMAs) to implement Component 1. In addition, it
   aimed to enforce policies and regulations related to obtaining statistical information through the LSB as the
   principle coordinating institution,　to avoid duplication of responsibilities.
   　
   Component 3: Improving the sharing and access to data: Appraisal amount US$2.68 million; actual
   amount US$2.68 million. This component aimed to ensure that the LSB and collaborating statistical units
   of the participating ministries at the national and provincial levels implemented a data-sharing and access
   to information strategy through the following activities:


     • Developing and implementing a macroeconomic and poverty dissemination strategy;
     • Developing an information and communications technology (ICT) plan;
     • Strengthening ICT infrastructure and the capacity of the LSB and SMAs to utilize the infrastructure;
     and
     • Upgrading the LSB web portal to make availability and dissemination of data effective.


   　
   Component 4: Support project management. Appraised amount US$800,000, actual amount
   US$800,000. This component would finance equipment, consultant services, training and operating cost of
   the project. It involved support to the project steering committee and the statistical working group. The LSB
   was the implementing agency for the project.
   　




                                                                                                              Page 2 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            STATISTICS FOR RESULTS PROJECT (P129825)



   e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
         Project cost. The original planned project cost was US$8,000,000. The actual cost was US$7,980,215.

         Financing: The project was financed through a US$8 million TA grant fully funded by the Statistics for
         Results Facility Catalytic Fund. There was no contribution from the Lao PDR, nor from other donors.

         Dates: The project was approved on May 7, 2013 and became effective, July 5, 2013. Its originally
         scheduled closing date was June 30, 2017. It was restructured on June 6, 2017 to extend the closing
         dated to February 28, 2018 in order to complete some outputs that had been delayed, and there was
         some reallocation of spending between disbursement categories. There were no other changes.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

       Rationale
       The PDO was well-aligned to the policy priorities of the government, and, in particular,　to the 2011-2020
       Strategy for the Development of the National Statistical System (SDNSS). This strategy was developed to
       meet the needs of government policymakers and other users of statistics, in particular, those developing
       macroeconomic policy. It also aligned with the priorities and action plans contained in the government’s
       Seventh National Socio-Economic Development Plan (2011-2015) that focused on poverty reduction. The
       improved statistics would allow poverty alleviation interventions to be more focused and would also improve
       the system for monitoring and evaluating results. It would provide the basis for the "planning of a wide
       variety of social and economic development programs" (ICR p. 11) by providing better information on which
       to base the design of policy. Key elements were the strengthening of staff capacity within the national
       statistical system, the standardization of methodology, and the upgrading of technology.
       　
       At appraisal, the project was consistent with the World Bank Group's Country Partnership Strategy 2011-
       2015. At closing it was aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF FY2017 - FY2021), which
       refers specifically to the　project's importance in　strengthening the national statistical system, in particular
       with regard to the collection and dissemination of poverty data and　gender disaggregated indicators (CPF
       p. 56).




       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1

                                                                                                          Page 3 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      STATISTICS FOR RESULTS PROJECT (P129825)




Objective
To produce reliable and timely macroeconomic and poverty statistics in accordance with international
standards

Rationale

The theory of change underlying this objective was that adopting international standards　for the production
of macroeconomic and poverty statistics would result in more reliable and useful data.

　
The inputs for this objective was training to improve the capacity to produce macroeconomic and poverty
statistics such as how to gather more comprehensive data and undertake household surveys on poverty and
related information, including gender distribution. The outputs would be　survey tools, better methodology
for producing the national accounts, training of statisticians, and macroeconomic modeling. The outcome
would be the production of more reliable and more timely macroeconomic and poverty statistics.

　
The key outcome indicators were user satisfaction (users were government officials, private sector
forecasters, think tanks and universities) with the statistics produced, that resulted in improved
macroeconomic and poverty related statistical capacity and the development of a comprehensive
macroeconomic framework.

　
However, the results chain is not fully clear as to how the project activities would ensure timely,
comprehensive and high quality　macroeconomic statistics. The same applies to the poverty statistics. The
PDO indicators　relied upon　a "statistical capacity index" (ICR p. 12) constructed by the World Bank and
other international organizations, employing a statistical score based on a 1 – 100-point scale that rated
methodology, source data, periodicity and timeliness. Only the target score for periodicity and timeliness was
achieved, and it is difficult　to assess what the scores actually mean in terms of achievement of the PDO.
　
In addition, user satisfaction surveys were not undertaken at the beginning of the project to establish a
baseline and to set a target. The first survey was　carried out　in 2015 after the project was underway, with
another survey being conducted in 2017. Furthermore, none of the satisfaction　target values was achieved.
The percentage of satisfaction between the 2015 and　2017 surveys increased only from 33% to 34% (well
within the margin of error), and the 2017 survey only became available in early 2018, one month before the
project’s closing date. There were also methodological issues, which　are discussed in Section 9 below.
　
According to the　ICR (p. 13), many of the intended outcomes were nonetheless achieved through the　
realization of the project's outputs and intermediate outcomes, including:


  •   Improvement in the "dimension, periodicity and timeliness of statistics" (ICR p. 12);
  •   The production of a National Accounts manual;


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            STATISTICS FOR RESULTS PROJECT (P129825)



        • The production of Supply and Use tables;
        • A rebasing of GDP statistics to 2012;
        • Collection of International investment data;
        • Improved　consumer price index　statistics and an updated basket composition to reflect changed
        consumption patterns;
        • Improved poverty data and analysis;
        • A strategy for ongoing upgrading of the National Accounts;
        • A human resource strategy and capacity building program for the LSB;
        • A capacity building program for the LSB;
        • A capacity building strategy for the sectorial statistical agencies;
        • A comprehensive macroeconomic framework for forecasting and modelling, although the ICR (p. 15)
        points out that quarterly updates to macroeconomic projections faced significant challenges because of
        limited quarterly data availability and insufficient funds for conducting quarterly surveys.

    　
    The ICR describes these achievements as "significant" and in some cases "remarkable", although user
    satisfaction surveys to not corroborate the improvements. Moreover, there is little direct evidence that the
    statistics produced as a result of project-supported activities are more reliable, more timely and in
    accordance with international standards.


    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     Disseminate macroeconomic and poverty statistics in response to user needs.

    Rationale
    The theory of change underlying this PDO was that improving the physical and digital infrastructure would
    lead to wider data dissemination of macroeconomic and poverty statistics to support policymaking, poverty
    analysis and research. Efficiency and consistency of statistics and resources would be saved by avoiding
    duplication of effort in gathering statistics. The dissemination of statistics would be a precondition for
    improved M&E of programs.
    　
    The outputs related to this PDO were the construction of a new building to house the LSB needed to
    accommodate increased staff numbers, electronic data processing equipment and improved security, the
    upgrading of online data access, the improvement in the production and dissemination of paper-based
    macro and poverty statistics, and the building of a comprehensive website to facilitate data sharing. In
    addition, plans for further expansion of ICT services, a strategy for metadata development, a strategy for



                                                                                                        Page 5 of 13
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  STATISTICS FOR RESULTS PROJECT (P129825)



             upgrading the microdata management system, and a comprehensive data dissemination strategy were
             developed.
             　
             The intended outcome of disseminating macroeconomic and poverty statistics in response to user needs
             was　partially achieved (ICR, p. 15). There were delays in the construction of the LSB office building, which
             was only completed at the end of 2017. Because the building was not completed, staff were housed in a
             number of different locations, making coordination and capacity building more challenging. There were also
             challenges in upgrading the data base infrastructure because of the limited IT capacity of LSB staff. The
             upgrading of ICT services, the development of the metadata development strategy, the microdata
             management strategy and the data dissemination strategy were all hampered by uncertainty　regarding
             budget allocations and, once again,　by capacity limitations. The ICR (p. 16)　states that there was,
             nonetheless,　a significant improvement in the production and dissemination of paper-based macro and
             poverty statistics, but no evidence is provided to support this.
             　
             In summary, the provision of online access to data was much more limited than anticipated; there is no
             evidence　of an improvement in the production and dissemination of paper based statistics; and it was not
             clear that upgrading strategies would go forward. However, the interview with the TTL revealed that outputs
             began to be produced after the closing date of the project.



             Rating
      Modest
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale
The efficacy of both objectives is rated modest. While the quantity of statistics increased, there is little evidence
available concerning their timeliness, reliability and compliance with international standards., Dissemination was
weak (although some progress was evident following the project closure), and there was no apparent
improvement in user satisfaction.




Overall Efficacy Rating                                              Primary reason
Modest

     5. Efficiency

            .
            The PAD argues (p. 12) that no revenue flows would accrue to the LSB as a result of the project and that it
            was therefore not amenable to cost benefit analysis. The ICR, however,　does undertake such an analysis
            (p. 38). It bases this on the calculation of the benefits that arose from the cost savings to the LSB compared

                                                                                                                Page 6 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STATISTICS FOR RESULTS PROJECT (P129825)



to what would have been incurred without the project. It derives the economic benefits from　three sources;
(i) the timely production of statistics on macroeconomic variables and poverty; (ii) enhanced policy making
and program evaluation; and (iii) more efficient resource allocation and effective program implementation.
These would translate into cost savings for the LSB and for the users of statistics, who would have a single
source for obtaining data. The ICR assumes benefits continuing from 2013 to 2021 and a growth rate for GDP
of 7% annually. The benefits are incremental savings in administrative costs of the LSB; incremental savings
to the value of time saved by the LSB; and incremental savings for the value of time saved in the overall
economy. The savings relate to the decline in staff months for the LSB, the reduction in waiting time between
the production and release of the various macroeconomic, poverty and census statistics, and the reduction in
time to access the statistics.　The analysis used a 5% discount rate. The Net Present Value of the savings is
estimated at US$6.15 million and　　the economic rate of return (ERR) at 6%. The savings are cumulative
for the 2013-2021 period.
　
There are several methodological issues. While the ICR provides actual data on the decline in waiting times,
it does not provide details on how these savings are monetized. Furthermore, the choice of the discount rate
of 5% is not explained. An additional problem is the lack of clarity (which remained unresolved after
discussions with the project team) concerning whether the calculations are based on real or nominal values,　
since no information is provided on the assumptions regarding the GDP deflator. Furthermore, Table 1 of
Annex 4 (p. 39), shows that although the time taken between production and release of statistics fell, the time
taken to access the statistics showed little improvement.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate
                                                        Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                   Available?
                                                                                  0
Appraisal                                               0
                                                                                  Not Applicable
                                                                                  100.00
ICR Estimate                                           6.00
                                                                                  Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 13
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        STATISTICS FOR RESULTS PROJECT (P129825)




The project's objectives were highly relevant to country conditions and to both the government’s and the World
Bank Group's priorities at appraisal and at closure.　Overall　efficacy is rated modest, reflecting improvements
in the quantity of statistics but with little evidence of enhanced timeliness, reliability or compliance with
international standards. Moreover, dissemination, remained problematic throughout implementation, and at
closure still required considerable work to ensure that the statistics produced become available in a timelier
fashion to users. This was reflected in persistent user dissatisfaction. Efficiency is ratedmodest since the
methodology for calculating the ex post economic rate of return is less than fully convincing. Shortcomings are
considered significant, and outcome is assessed as moderately unsatisfactory.


a.    Outcome Rating
      Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (p. 23) identifies several risks to development outcome, which revolve around the limited capacity of
LSB personnel and the absence of data with which to monitor their performance. Several issues contributed to
the risks. First, there is a shortage within the LSB of qualified statisticians who are capable of applying
international standards to produce national accounting and poverty statistics. As a result, those who do have
the qualifications have excessive workloads that may not be sustainable. This compromises the timely
production of statistics. Furthermore, the　less than satisfactory　outcome regarding electronic dissemination
of statistics was also the result of the limited ICT capacity of the LSB. This applied to the installation of the
appropriate hardware and software, as well as the ability of LSB staff to maintain and update these statistical
systems. The ICR (p. 23) points out that although the operation of the facility was supported by the project "the
risk that such facilities may not be used in the future is high." Furthermore, neither a disaster recovery center
that provides backup of the data platform, nor backup power systems　had been　installed by closure. The
interview with the TTL revealed that following project closure, other donors continued to assist with improving
capacity, which should reduce the risks that the project will not be sustainalble. In particular, the Korea
Statistics Agency (Statistics Korea) provided TA to continue the upgrading of online statistics and assisted with
further LSB staff training.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     Design was based on several pieces of analytical work that diagnosed issues with the national statistics
     framework. The Swedish International Development Agency provided an evaluation report on steps
     necessary to enhance the capacity of the LSB, including the need for staff training. The Asian
     Development Bank provided technical support on macroeconomic supply and use tables, and the IMF had
     an ongoing assessment of statistical issues, all of which provided inputs to the project design. This
     contributed to the adoption of international standards and methodology under the project, which

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STATISTICS FOR RESULTS PROJECT (P129825)



  concentrated on improving the core capacity of the LSB to produce and disseminate macroeconomic and
  poverty statistics that were more accurate and timely than previously. The Swedish International
  Development Agency had provided assistance in building statistical capacity over the 1991-2009 period.
  The PAD (p.3, 7) indicates that the project incorporated lessons from this experience, in particular, the low
  capacity of the LSB and in the various other government agencies producing statistics, the difficulties of
  coordinating and producing good quality data if the statistical system is fragmented and if capacity building
  by the donor community is not coordinated.

  　
  The project focused on ensuring that processes were coordinated centrally, but appears to have
  underestimated the difficulties arising from limited LSB staff capacity, which constituted an important
  constraint throughout implementation and an ongoing risk to development outcome. Although identified as
  a substantial risk, capacity shortcomings could have been more thoroughly addressed during project
  preparation. The PAD (p. 2) points out the deficiencies of the 18-year involvement of the Swedish
  International Development Agency in building statistical capacity and acknowledges　LSB's "very limited
  technical capacity." The PAD points out that the government passed a Statistical Law that provides
  guidance for the LSB and gives it a global mandate over other statistics gathering institutions, but implies
  doubt concerning the institution's ability to exercise this mandate effectively. A stronger set of interventions
  to enhance capacity from the outset would have been advantageous and less ambitious project
  specifications would have produced more realistic demands on LSB personnel.
  　
  Furthermore, the design of the M&E framework (See Section 9, below) did not allow the impact of these
  weaknesses to be identified early in the project because the indicators were not designed to monitor
  progress in the area where known shortcomings had already been flagged.　

  These are considered significant shortcomings, and Quality at Entry is rated moderately unsatisfactory.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The ICR (p. 23) indicates that there were only 4 project implementation support missions over the 5-year life
  of the project that produced formal Aide Mémoires that were submitted to the LSB, an unusually low
  number. Offsetting this was the fact that the World Bank task team was based in Laos, which provided
  technical support on an ongoing basis, although this was not sufficient to acquaint LSB officials with Bank
  fiduciary issues in a timely manner. There were also individual support visits from World Bank experts and
  technical consultants. The project benefitted from having a single task team leader from inception to
  completion.
  　　
  The ICR (p. 22) points out several weaknesses in fiduciary issues that impinged on the performance of the
  project (see Section 10 below). The delays in recruiting a procurement officer resulted in serious delays that
  compromised obtaining the ICT software and the capacity building for LSB personnel. As a result, the



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STATISTICS FOR RESULTS PROJECT (P129825)



  framework for electronic dissemination of the statistics was not put in place. This could have been identified
  and addressed earlier　in the supervision process.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  There were weaknesses in the design of the M&E framework. The three PDO indicators were:


    • The results of a satisfaction survey of users of the macroeconomic and poverty statistics produced by the
    LSB;
    • Scores on a statistical capacity index (SCI), which was an index produced by the World Bank and other
    international organizations, which purports to measure the capacity of the national statistical system to
    produce accurate and timely information;
    • The development of key statistical macro indicators that could be used for producing projections of GDP,
    inflation, budget data, balance of payments data and monetary statistics.

  　
  Regarding the first indicator, there was no baseline user survey undertaken at the start of the project. The first
  survey was completed in 2015, two years into implementation. Regarding the second indicator, the SCI was
  only updated with a lag, and the score for 2018 had not been published by the World Bank by the time the ICR
  was completed (ICR p. 18). The ICR also reports (p. 21) that "the process of updating the SCI has been
  complex and time consuming", suggesting that the choice of this indicator might not have been the best. The
  third indicator was overly broad, with limited means to verify progress, since it was qualitative in nature and
  therefore hard to track.

  The National Implementation and Coordination Team were responsible for Monitoring and Evaluation


b. M&E Implementation
  During implementation, the LSB faced significant challenges in keeping track of progressing and obtaining
  evidence regarding the achievement of the PDOs. There were difficulties with both the satisfaction surveys
  and the SCI. With　regard to the former, a further issue arose in that the results of the second survey only
  became available in early 2018, one month before closure, so that any information regarding progress could
  not be incorporated into implementation. There were delays and gaps in reporting in-country statistical

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STATISTICS FOR RESULTS PROJECT (P129825)



  improvements to the external partners performing the update of the SCI. Overall, the indicators provided little
  information with which to modify any shortcomings in project design or implementation issues as they arose.




c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p. 21) states that the PDO indicators "were useful not only to measure the achievements of the
  project targets, but that the LSB also used it to keep track of the overall capacity of the national statistical
  system". However, it is difficult to reconcile this statement with the design and implementation shortcomings
  described above.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as Category C, and no environment or social safeguard issues arose.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Fiduciary issues revolved around delays in employing an experienced procurement officer, which only occurred
  in mid 2014, resulting in delays in getting the project fully underway. There were also issues related to
  procuring software and ICT equipment, with the contract only being signed at the end of 2016, which goes a
  significant way towards explaining the relative lack of success in disseminating electronically the statistics that
  had been gathered. These delays compromised the success of the project and do not appear to have been
  addressed in a timely manner.
  　
  Financial management was also referred to as an issue – the ICR (p. 22) states that the LSB had little
  knowledge or experience of how to manage large projects, which led to problems in adhering to Bank
  procedures, even though the Task Team Leader was present in Lao for the duration of the project. The ICR
  refers to the possibility of a mismatch between the budget for the hiring of financial management consultants
  and the remuneration that suitably experienced and qualified local consultants commanded.
  　
  The ICR did not mention external audits of the project.



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 13
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        STATISTICS FOR RESULTS PROJECT (P129825)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  N/A



d. Other
      ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                       IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   Efficacy and efficiency are
                               Moderately               Moderately
Outcome                                                                            both rated modest (see
                               Satisfactory             Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   Sections 4 and 5 above)
                                                                                   Design did not take sufficient
                               Moderately               Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                   account of limited LSB
                               Satisfactory             Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   capacity
                                                                                   The choice of indicators was
                                                                                   poor and there was no means
Quality of M&E                 Modest                   Negligible
                                                                                   to monitor progress through
                                                                                   the M&E framework
Quality of ICR                                          Modest                     ---

12. Lessons

The following three lessons are taken from the ICR　with some adaptation of language:


  • If　the capacity of the implementing agency is not thoroughly addressed at the design stage, then
  implementation and achievement of intended results will likely not be realized. It is necessary to
  undertake a detailed assessment of the organizational and operational capacity of the agency. The
  experience of the project indicates that this was not adequately addressed in design. While this issue should
  have been learned from the experience of the Swedish International Development Agency, it is a sufficiently
  common failing in World Bank project design that it needs continuing emphasis.
  • When identifying and selecting project indicators, due consideration must be given to their
  availability, accessibility, and timeliness. Specifying user surveys without paying due attention to their
  cost and the capacity of country counterparts limits their sustainability. This applies, for example to the user
  satisfaction surveys in Laos. There were also difficulties and　delays in obtaining SCI scores. These
  problems compromised the ability to address issues at a sufficiently　early stage.



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       STATISTICS FOR RESULTS PROJECT (P129825)



  • Sustainability of the development outcomes can depend on the availability of further support to the
  implementing agency after closure. In this case any shortcomings still exist with respect to the ICT
  infrastructure, the capacity of those administering ICT systems, and to the ability to upgrade the same.　

　
IEG adds an additional lesson


  • Using international indices as outcome indicators is of limited usefulness for two reasons. First,
  such statistics usually only become available with significant delays and are therefore of limited or no use in
  monitoring the progress of the project. This was the case with this project. Second, by their nature, these
  statistics are rarely customized to the specific needs of the country in which the project is taking place so that
  local particularities are not taken into account.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a good analysis of the project, the reasons behind the various aspects of its performance
and provides a of the theory of change. There are however, four significant shortcomings. First, the discussion
between the various components of the M&E framework is inconsistent. The description of M&E design and
implementation notes important issues regarding the choice of indicators and the problems with using them for
implementation. The discussion of utilization, however, states that the indicators were useful in tracking
progress. Second, there was insufficient discussion of delays in getting the project underway. Third, the
discussion of the calculation of the IRR is inadequate in explaining the reasoning behind the assumptions and
the choice of discount rate. Fourth, the discussion of fiduciary compliance and the surrounding issues of
financial management is weak in that many important details appear to be missing, including discussion of
external audits.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 13
