     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO-Fiscal Management Programmatic DPL(P153243)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0021315

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P153243                                   AO-Fiscal Management Programmatic DPL

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Angola                                    Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-85260                                31-Dec-2016                                       450,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2015                               31-Dec-2016

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          450,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           450,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       450,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Paul Holden                Judyth L. Twigg              Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives

   The Project Development Objective (PDO) appears in the Program Document (PD p. 1) and was "to
   strengthen the country’s fiscal management to create the fiscal space needed to better protect the poor and
   vulnerable."

   The program objectives were not revised during implementation.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 15
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        AO-Fiscal Management Programmatic DPL(P153243)



   However, at the commencement of the program, the World Bank envisaged a two-loan series, with phased
   reform that would evolve from the first Development Policy Operation (DPO) into a second DPO. In addition, a
   policy-based guarantee of US$200 million was planned to cover a commercial loan.
   　
   During DPO1, it became apparent that falling oil prices were impacting the macroeconomic situation far
   beyond what had been anticipated in the PD. Both internal fiscal disequilibrium and the balance of payments
   situation were deteriorating rapidly. These unsustainable macro imbalances led to the cancellation of the
   second operation.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation
   of the series?
  ---


c. Pillars/Policy Areas

   There were 3 pillars under the first operation (PD1). They were:

   Pillar 1: Introducing fiscal rules for the utilization of the Oil Funds and modernizing tax
   administration and tax policy to increase non-oil revenue collection. This reform was to improve non-oil
   tax revenue collection in order to reduce the dependence of budget revenue on income from oil. The
   program aimed to consolidate three tax agencies into one in order to improve efficiency through the creation
   of a single tax authority, the General Tax Administration (AGT) and the revision of key laws governing
   taxation. However, DPO1 did not include the implementation of the AGT, which was to have occurred under
   DPO2 that was cancelled.
   　
   When the program was being designed, it anticipated that in the second DPO, there would be reforms to the
   Oil Price Differential account, a fiscal stabilization fund, to make it more transparent and less discretionary.
   　
   Pillar 2: Increasing value for money by enhancing the efficiency and efficacy of public investment
   management. The efficiency of public investment (through the Public Investment Program, or PIP) was low,
   so that the large public investment program, required for the development and maintenance of oil resources
   and to rebuild the country following the civil war, was obtaining a poor rate of return on investment. The need
   to improve efficiency was magnified by the need to cut the public investment program as a result of falling oil
   prices.
   　
   There were three initiatives under Pillar 2, to be supported by DPO1 (ICR p. 3).


        • Rationalizing the PIP by eliminating projects that were not ready for approval, while maintaining all social
        projects;



                                                                                                        Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO-Fiscal Management Programmatic DPL(P153243)



     • Introducing indicators to monitor the PIP more closely and also creating a manual for high-risk and high-
     profile projects;
     • Commencing integration of the information system of the budget and the PIP by establishing a joint
     committee and "implementing specific measures" (ICR p. 3).

   　
   Pillar 3: Moving from untargeted fuel price subsidies to targeted cash transfers and evidence-based
   policy-making.
   　
   This pillar supported three key policy initiatives that had already commenced:
   　

     • Phasing out the subsidies for fuel, which had consumed the equivalent of 6% of GDP between 2010 and
     2014 (ICR p. 4). Under DPO1 the subsidies were to be reduced, and it was envisaged that they would be
     eliminated by the second, subsequently cancelled DPO;
     • Expanding social protection through the provision of cash transfers to 50,000 families;
     • Improving the statistical information system, to support evidence-based policy making. DPO1 envisaged
     the approval by the Council of Ministers of a National Statistical Strategy. it was envisaged that the second
     subsequently cancelled DPO would obtain statistics on poverty.



d. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates

   DPO1 was approved and became effective on June 30, 2015 in the amount of US$450 million. A Policy
   Based Guarantee (PBG) of US$200 million was approved at the same time. DPO1 closed on schedule on
   December 31, 2016. Of the original loan commitment of US$450 million, all was disbursed. The PBG was
   extended to June 2017 to allow the Government to negotiate a Eurobond loan. Both DPO2 and the PBG
   were cancelled on November 13, 2017 due to the deteriorating macroeconomic situation and the poor
   policy response by the Government.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives


  At appraisal, the objective of DPO1, to create fiscal space to protect the poor and the vulnerable, was
  relevant. The poverty rate had declined from 77 per cent to 38 per cent between 2001 and 2014. However,
  poverty was still widespread, and social indicators such as life expectancy, maternal mortality and child
  malnutrition remained among the worst in Sub-Saharan Africa (PD p. 3).




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO-Fiscal Management Programmatic DPL(P153243)



  However, the PDO was only tangentially related to the Government’s long-term strategic development
  objectives, as set out in the National Development Plan (NDP), 2013-2017. These included the pursuit of
  development, improving the quality of life, promoting employment of youth, enhancing private sector
  development, preserving national unity and cohesion, and making Angola internationally competitive (the
  Republic of Angola Letter of Development Policy p. 3). The NDP did contain macroeconomic objectives
  related to sound fiscal accounts, and the Letter of Development Policy stated that the decline in oil prices
  resulted in challenges to achieving this.

  The PD (p. 32) stated that the DPO "fits under the third pillar of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS),
  aiming to build resilience to potential shocks from the global economy", although this is not directly related to
  the PDO. During the preparation of the DPO, its mandate was expanded to include social protection
  measures, in order to protect the poor and vulnerable from any adverse effects of the macroeconomic
  adjustment (ICR p. 11).

  However, this does not map directly into the objectives of either the NDP or the CPS, both of which focused
  on much broader development objectives. While the decline in oil prices did impose significant costs on the
  economy and required substantial adjustments to macroeconomic policy, it is difficult to associate the
  objectives of the NDP or the CPS with the objectives of the DPO. Nevertheless, the high poverty rate and
  poor social indicators existing in the country made the objectives relevant. At closing, the objectives remained
  relevant as little progress had been made in improving either poverty or social indicators.

  Although the poverty rate was a relevant target, the mismatch between the PDO and both the NDP and the
  CPS leads IEG to rate the relevance of objectives as Modest.



  Rating
  Modest

b. Relevance of Design


  The PD stated that the design of the program was based on extensive analytical work (p. 19), undertaken by
  the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the African Development Bank, and private sector
  consultants. Many of the results indicators in the PD were based on the expectation that there would be a
  second DPO and pertain to outcomes that were expected to be achieved in the second operation, which was
  cancelled.

  The theory of change underlying the DPO was that by improving the structure, administration, and
  implementation of tax and other revenue policies, more resources would be available to assist the poor
  through the provision of social services and transfers. Relating this to the pillars, higher revenue would come
  from better management of the oil stabilization fund (OPDA) and improvement in tax administration through
  the consolidation of the three tax agencies under pillar 1. Under pillar 3, the removal of oil subsidies would
  increase resources to devote to social transfers.


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AO-Fiscal Management Programmatic DPL(P153243)




A design issue from the outset was that for the program’s objectives to be realized, significant administrative
capacity was required to upgrade and modernize both the institutional framework for public investment and
the capacity of the agencies themselves.

Under Pillar 1, the PD (p. 22) described the problems with the management of oil revenues through the
OPDA, which had resources equivalent to only 1% of total government revenue. The PD stated that
supporting fiscal stabilization through the OPDA was a central objective of government policy (p. 22).
However, the PD (p. 22) also pointed out that the OPDA had no formal legal basis for performing any formal
stabilization function, although it does state that the World Bank was working with the Ministry of Finance to
develop fiscal rules for the OPDA, in order for a Presidential Decree to be enacted. The PD stated that the
results indicator would be that the fiscal rules linking the OPDA to the budget cycle would be in place by the
end of 2017, which related to the cancelled second DPO.

For DPO1, pillar 1 supported integrating the tax agencies and customs administration into a single agency
(the AGT) and providing it with a governance structure. This was the first prior action under pillar 1. The
second prior action was to streamline tax policy to support the modernization of tax administration. The
target indicator was for the share of non-oil tax revenue to increase from 13.4% of GDP in 2013, to 15.6% of
GDP in 2017. Given the urgency of improving the management of the Oil Funds, the primary focus in the
DPO on non-oil tax revenue did not address the fundamental issue identified in the PD and the CPS.

Under pillar 2, the efficiency of public investment management was to be improved, with the PD stating (p.
25) that "the quality of public investment management (PIM) is a key determinant of economic growth and
poverty reduction." The decline in oil prices necessitated a sharp decline in public investment, so that the PIP
needed to become more efficient in order to achieve its objectives. The performance indicator for this pillar
was the development and use of manuals and templates for the preparation of projects, particularly those
deemed high risk or high profile, with the expected outcome being to ensure better value for money from the
PIP. The PD stated that the Ministry of Planning and Territorial Development would proactively monitor the
2016 PIP through a new system of indicators (nearly 400 output indicators and 100 results indicators had
been defined). The results indicator for the program was that all projects in the 2017 PIP would be subjected
to the new PIM cycle, systems, and regulations (p. 27).
　
A shortcoming in the design of the DPO was the failure to included policy directed at reducing the drain of
state-owned enterprises (SOEs) on the budget. The most recent IMF Article IV report (May 2018, p 10)
pointed out that the public corporate sector is a burden on the Treasury, that insolvent SOEs should be
closed, and that economically viable but inefficient SOEs should be restructured and/or privatized. It is
therefore surprising that the DPO did not even mention this issue, especially since public investment
efficiency was identified as a key problem, and the IMF Article IV report for 2015 stated that "the authorities
remain committed to …strengthen the oversight of state owned enterprises" (p. 3).

　
The elimination of fuel price subsidies and transferring the realized savings to targeted cash transfers and
"evidence-based policy-making" was a focus of design (pillar 3). This was to be achieved by raising retail fuel
prices in order to start phasing out fuel subsidies, expanding social protection by finishing the registration of

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            AO-Fiscal Management Programmatic DPL(P153243)



       50,000 families in a pilot cash transfer program, approving a national strategy for upgrading statistical
       information, and preparing to launch a survey on "expenditure, revenue and employment of the population"
       (PD, p. 31). The indicator to validate reduced fuel price subsidies was that the subsidies would decline from
       5.2% of GDP in 2013 to 2.3% by December 2017. It is difficult to see how this could be a meaningful results
       indicator in practice, since subsidy and GDP data only become available with a significant lag.

       The full rollout of the cash transfer program was only expected to have occurred by 2018 during the second
       DPO. Although the reduction in fuel subsidies would negatively affect the poor, the design of the program
       was based on the assumption that this impact would be attenuated by the regressive nature of the subsidies.
       Together, the two policy actions were expected to reduce poverty by 2.5 percentage points by 2018. The
       data collected by the statistical survey would be the basis for measurement of the poverty rate. The results
       framework required that the percentage of households protected from negative income shocks rise from 3%
       of the population to 7% of the population by December 2017. The results framework also required that
       results from the 2015 household survey be published by December 2017.
       　
       While the design of the program targeted relevant development objectives, its relationship with the PDO was
       only indirect. The ICR (p. 11) criticized the design of the program for a combination of limited scope of some
       policy actions, and over-ambition of others. Under the latter, it includes the registry of program beneficiaries
       and the household survey and poverty map. While the ICR did not relate the PDO to the program design, the
       criticisms were valid. Limiting the beneficiaries of the program to 50,000 when the total population of Angola
       is over 30 million suggests that the goal was close to irrelevant.

       A further question related to design was the extent of the macroeconomic risks at the outset of the program.
       The PAD (p. 3) described these risks, as did the IMF Article IV report for both 2014 and 2015. They all
       flagged the possibility of a decline in the oil price, poor implementation of expenditure reduction, delays in
       structural reform, and failure to maintain exchange rate flexibility, as well as the need to be firmly committed
       to the program of public financial management reforms and economic diversification. Certainly, with the
       benefit of hindsight, it is possible to maintain that the World Bank program was overly optimistic in the face of
       these risks.



       Rating
       Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To strengthen the country’s fiscal management to create the fiscal space to better protect the poor and
     vulnerable.

                                                                                                          Page 6 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO-Fiscal Management Programmatic DPL(P153243)




Rationale

The problems of Angola’s heavy dependence on oil revenue became apparent as the oil price declined
between 2013 and 2017. It became clear that oil funds needed to be administered more efficiently and that
non-oil revenue needed to increase, a goal that was hampered by complex institutional arrangements for the
collection of taxes and inefficient tax policies.
　
During the first DPO, three tax agencies were merged, and the framework for a governance structure was
published in a series of Presidential Decrees. In addition, tax policies were streamlined to improve
compliance, simplify procedures and reduce distortions. A series of Laws and Decrees applied to this
objective. However, the implementation of many of the policy measures was envisaged to occur as part of
the second DPO, which was cancelled. As a result, the prior actions under the DPO that did occur were
primarily inputs.
　
The results indicator requiring fiscal rules that linked the oil price differential account to the budget cycle be
in place by end 2017 was achieved, although there is no information on what this meant for better budgetary
control.
　
The second results indicator specified that the ratio of non-oil tax revenue to GDP would increase from
13.4% in 2013 to 15.6% by 2017. Initially this target was met (by 2015), but an ensuing recession led to the
ratio declining to 10.8% of GDP. This implies that non-oil tax revenue declined proportionality more than did
GDP.

The substantial decline in oil prices necessitated a significant reduction in the PIP, the negative effects of
which could only be attenuated by improving the efficiency of the program. To do this, three actions were
undertaken: eliminating PIP projects that were not ready for approval; improving the monitoring of the PIP;
and integrating budget information with the PIP. The indicator to measure the success of the readjustment to
the PIP was that all (100%) new projects would be subject to the new PIM system by 2017, which would
have been part of the discontinued DPO2. This results indicator was not achieved, which the ICR (p. 14)
attributed to "the inability of the Bank or other development partners to provide more intensive technical
assistance." Although the government took some steps to improve the functioning of the PIM system,
regulations that had been drafted to improve it were never put in place, and as a result the PIP was still
being formulated and implemented under the previous rules.
　
Fuel subsidies constituted a substantial drain on the budget, and analytical work demonstrated (PD p. 29)
that the subsidies were regressive in that they benefited the well-off more than the poor, although their
removal would still have negative effects on poor households. In order to mitigate negative impact, the DPO
proposed that the subsidies be replaced by the expansion of the unconditional cash transfer program, with
targeted enrollment being increased in a phased way. Furthermore, this objective also required the
upgrading of statistical information, particularly through the development of a national household survey that
would provide information on the extent of poverty and allow the targeting of social programs.



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 15
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               AO-Fiscal Management Programmatic DPL(P153243)



    There were three results indicators:


        • Fuel price subsidies decline from 5.2% of GDP in 2013, to 2.3% by the end of 2017. This was achieved,
        with the actual outcome being 1.3% of GDP.
        • The percentage of households receiving cash transfers increase from less than 3% of the population, to
        7% by the end of 2017 (PD p. 31). This was not achieved, with the actual outcome being 1.4%.
        • By the end of 2017, the household survey would be completed and the results appear in government
        documents proposing policy actions. This was not achieved because of lack of funding and capacity to
        undertake the survey, which was postponed by the Government to the end of 2018. (The survey has
        commenced at the time of this Review, with funding being provided by a World Bank Technical Assistance
        Loan.)　

    　
    Because of the failure to achieve most of the program targets, and the reversal of macroeconomic
    policies that would have provided fiscal space for assisting the poor and the vulnerable, IEG rates
    efficacy as Negligible.


    Rating
   Negligible
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome


  The objectives of the Angola DPO were not closely related to either Angola’s National Development Plan or the
  World Bank Country Partnership Strategy. The original DPO series was directed at assisting Angola with
  adjustment to lower oil prices. While the aim of the adjustment was timely, it is difficult to discern how it fit with
  longer term goals. Furthermore, the operation depended heavily on appropriate macroeconomic adjustment,
  which in the event did not occur and resulted in the second DPO being cancelled.
  　
  The design of the operation did not focus on rapid adjustment to the decline in oil prices and improved uses of
  oil revenues. At the early stages of the operation the focus was on non-oil tax revenue, which accounted for less
  than 15% of GDP and over the course of the operation declined by over 20%. While improving the efficiency of
  non-oil tax collection was undoubtedly important in the medium term, the urgency of adjustment necessitated by
  the sharp decline in the oil price suggested a focus on the better and more efficient use of oil funds rather than a
  focus on non-oil tax revenue. There was also an urgent need to improve the efficiency of PIM, but severe delays
  in implementing a new system for investment meant that the old inefficient system continued. While the fuel



                                                                                                          Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AO-Fiscal Management Programmatic DPL(P153243)



subsidies were substantially reduced, the retargeting of savings to poor and vulnerable households was
delayed, with only 1.4% of all households receiving cash transfers by the end of 2017.
　
As a result of poorly focused objectives (a rating of Modest), design deficiencies (a rating of Modest) and a
rating of negligible for efficacy, the Outcome of the DPO is rated Unsatisfactory, indicating major shortcomings.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Unsatisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating


Achieving the desired development outcomes required substantial administrative capacity as well as strong
political support. The ICR (p. 8) pointed out that support for the program waned as the fiscal position
deteriorated, so that reform was delayed both by the need to address current crises and declining political buy-
in for the reforms, which led to the dismissal of the Minister of Finance, who had been a reform champion.
　
Outside the Ministry of Finance, weak institutional capacity continues to hamper the implementation of reforms,
particularly in the area of the public investment program. There was Insufficient technical assistance from
development partners. This issue impacted the social reform program as well as public investment. At this point,
these issues have not been addressed.
　
Presidential decrees have yet to be implemented for the PIP and for the OPDA, both of which are prerequisites
for sustainable reform to continue. Substantial uncertainty continues, and there is no obvious evidence that the
protection of the poor and vulnerable will increase.

A mitigating factor in the risk to the development outcome is the stated commitment of the Government that
assumed office in late 2017 to address macroeconomic imbalances. In addition, many of the reforms in
the development policy financing (DPF) have been resumed (ICR p. 10). The World Bank is also resuming
policy dialogue, and there is the possibility of a new DPF series. The ICR also stated (p. 17) that a contribution
of the DPF was promoting institutional change and improved capacity. The ICR expressed optimism that tax
reform, better fiscal policy, and the encouragement of evidence-based policy making would lead to improved
social policies.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
     Substantial

7. Assessment of Bank Performance




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO-Fiscal Management Programmatic DPL(P153243)



a. Quality-at-Entry

  The ICR (p. 19) noted that this was the first opportunity for policy-based lending in Angola and that there
  was a critical need for international support during a time of crisis for the country as a result of the sharp
  decline in oil prices in 2014. World Bank design of the DPO was informed by analysis and a focus on the
  need to protect the poor and vulnerable from the worst consequences of the crisis. Care was taken to
  ensure fiduciary compliance under circumstances where public financial management systems were weak
  and non-transparent.

  Nevertheless, overly optimistic targets for development outcomes were adopted. In particular, limited
  domestic capacity was a significant constraint to achieving targets. The necessary reforms of the public
  sector investment program required major systemic changes, which will require many years to be put in
  place. Furthermore, the ICR noted that some contemplated policies lacked full political support, which
  subsequently became a barrier to effective implementation, particularly given the weak institutions that
  existed in Angola at entry. These weaknesses were compounded by the geographic challenges arising
  from the remoteness of many communities that were to be helped.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  In the early stages of the program, there was close supervision and engagement with the Angolan
  authorities. However, as performance under the program deteriorated because of the increasingly
  problematic macroeconomic conditions, supervision intensity waned (ICR p 19). World Bank
  recommendations regarding strengthening macroeconomic management were increasingly ignored.
  Initially consultations had included preparation for the second DPO in the series, but as the macro
  conditions deteriorated, these were put on hold, and policy discussion were reduced. The ICR (p. 20)
  noted that this affected not only preparation for the second DPO, but also the intensity of supervision of
  the first DPO.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO-Fiscal Management Programmatic DPL(P153243)



  The Ministry of Finance (MoF) played a central role and was responsible for the execution of the DPO.
  The ICR reported that the MoF failed to ensure effective implementation of the program. It had
  responsibility for coordinating the various agencies involved in the operation. The agreed monitoring
  committee that was to be responsible for tracking the progress of implementation was never formed. The
  MoF did not develop the automatic fuel price adjustment mechanism. The MoF was also responsible for
  appropriating funding for the components of the program, but the ICR (p. 21) reported that these were
  not fully funded and as a result, implementation suffered from limited resources. Furthermore, several
  decrees that were critical in achieving the success of the program were never approved.

  Because of major shortcomings in the performance of the MoF, IEG rates Government Performance
  Unsatisfactory, compared with the Moderately Unsatisfactory rating in the ICR.


  Government Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance

  The ICR (p. 21) stated that many of the implementing agencies failed to implement the reforms critical to
  achieving the development objective. This was partly due to lack of sufficient resources and/or capacity.
  For example, the National Statistical Institute was unable to undertake the required poverty mapping and
  household survey, although the Bank provided "handholding" (ICR p. 21). The National Directorate for
  Public Investment contracted with consultants to draft policy reforms required under the program, but
  these were delayed and never implemented. The General Tax Administration, however, did undertake
  reforms and implement them in a timely fashion.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  Half of the six indicators selected to monitor progress under each pillar of the program were specifically
  quantitative (ICR p. 9), while the other three were related to documentation that measures required under the
  program had been implemented. The qualitative results indicators were:




                                                                                                 Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO-Fiscal Management Programmatic DPL(P153243)



    • Results indicator 1: The fiscal rules linking the operation of the oil equalization account would be in place
    by end 2017. This was a trigger for the cancelled DPO2;
    • Results indicator 3: 100% of all new projects in the 2017 Public Investment Plan would be subject to the
    new Public Investment Management cycle, systems and regulations. This results indicator was very
    similar to prior action 4 regarding strengthening the Public Investment Plan;
    • Results indicator 6: The results from the household survey would be published in at least one official
    government document by end 2017. This indicator was similar to prior action 9 and trigger 10 for the
    cancelled DPO2.


  If the indicators, prior actions and triggers are either the same, or similar, then the monitoring and evaluation
  framework, by definition, does not provide an independent measure of progress.

  The MoF was charged with monitoring and evaluating progress of the DPO. Although the PD (p. 41) stated
  that "to facilitate the coordination of the operation, the government will appoint, as soon as possible, a
  technical counterpart team, with a main DPF coordinator...(who) will be in charge of the monitoring and
  evaluation of the operation", the ICR (p. 10) stated that this did not occur. As a result, the various bodies
  involved in the program became responsible for their own monitoring of progress under the operation.


b. M&E Implementation

  The limited capacity and dispersion of the groups monitoring their own progress resulted in poor
  implementation of the M&E system, although World Bank teams became involved in monitoring
  developments and making recommendations for what was required in order to ensure the successful
  completion of the DPO.



c. M&E Utilization

  The ICR (p. 10) stated that, although numerical indicators became available and were reported in
  Government documents, and the World Bank team monitored the qualitative indicators during supervision
  missions, most of the indicators were not used for taking decisions, with the exception of progress on
  subsidies and non-oil revenue.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AO-Fiscal Management Programmatic DPL(P153243)




   There were no environmental effects. The focusing on social protection was expected to have positive social
   effects. The overall objective of the program was to increase resources to protect the poor and the
   vulnerable.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

There were no reported instances of fiduciary non-compliance.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
    ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                       Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory               ---
Risk to Development
                              Substantial             Substantial                  ---
Outcome
                              Moderately              Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                   ---
                              Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   Political commitment waned
                                                                                   and support for programs
                              Moderately                                           other than those related to the
Borrower Performance                                  Unsatisfactory
                              Unsatisfactory                                       budget was weak, to the
                                                                                   extent that these programs
                                                                                   were inadequately resourced.
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                  ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO-Fiscal Management Programmatic DPL(P153243)




12. Lessons


The ICR (pp. 21-22) offered a number of general lessons and recommendations, although some of them
pertaining to political commitment overlapped. The most important conclusions from the ICR were:

Targets for development outcomes should not be overly optimistic, and the time frame for achieving
results should be realistic. Many parts of the program were based on the assumption that results that were
unachievable, could be achieved. This arose from pressure to design a high-profile program that would garner
strong international buy-in. The program did not sufficiently take into account the political and institutional
realities in Angola.

In a complex operation with multiple pillars, the project team needs to be satisfied that political support
is strong and will be maintained through the life of the program. This manifested itself in insufficient
resources being provided to fulfill many parts of the program, in particular the cash transfer program.

In preparing and supervising a program such as this, strong buy-in and commitment from counterpart
agencies is essential. The commitment of the MoF was strong in the areas of its direct interest, such as the
subsidy and tax portions. It was much less so in other areas.

IEG adds two additional lessons.

IEG evaluations have revealed that a common issue related to DPOs is the over-estimation of the
capacity of counterparts to implement the program. Design should always take this into account. It is
better to have relatively modest goals that can be achieved, rather than an overly ambitious program that fails.

At the first indication that Government commitment to the program appears to be waning, intensive
consultations are necessary to decide on the program’s future. The ICR noted that as the macroeconomic
situation deteriorated, and the Government’s policy measures departed from World Bank recommendations,
the intensity of supervision declined. IEG suggests that this should have triggered more intensive consultations
and coordination with other development partners in an attempt either to reverse unsuitable policies or cancel
the operation at an earlier date.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AO-Fiscal Management Programmatic DPL(P153243)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR was clear and concise. It described and explained the challenges in the design and implementation of
the program, providing a clear story line regarding how these evolved and the reasons for the cancellation of
the second operation. While some of the lessons it drew overlap and apply generally to DPOs, they were
relevant and should be heeded.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                Page 15 of 15
