        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Fiji Post-Cyclone Winston Emergency DPO(P159774)



                                                                                   Report Number : ICRR0021272

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                                 Operation Name
 P159774                                      Fiji Post-Cyclone Winston Emergency DPO

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Fiji                                         Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-86320                                   30-Jun-2017                                       50,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2016                                  30-Jun-2017

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                          50,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof         Clay Wescott                 Malathi S. Jayawickrama       IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The development objective of the Post-Cyclone Winston Emergency Development Policy Loan (DPL)
   (Program Document [PD], page 2) was to (i) support Fiji’s recovery from the immediate impact of cyclone
   Winston through a prioritized and sequenced recovery plan; and (ii) cushion the immediate impact of cyclone
   Winston on the most vulnerable through the provision of disaster-responsive social protection.




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 11
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Fiji Post-Cyclone Winston Emergency DPO(P159774)



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation
   of the series?
  ---


c. Pillars/Policy Areas
   The pillars supported by the DPL were:
   Pillar 1: supporting recovery from the immediate impact of the cyclone, by reallocating budget funds to
   finance immediate relief and rehabilitation expenditures; and to strengthen the country’s resilience to natural
   disasters over the medium term;
   Pillar 2: supporting the provision of disaster-responsive social protection to cushion the impact of the
   disaster on the most vulnerable and strengthen their resilience against future shocks.


d. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   Project cost and financing. An IBRD loan of US$50 million was provided. It was fully disbursed.
   Dates. The loan was approved on June 30, 2016, less than five months after the cyclone struck. It became
   effective on July 21, 2016, and closed on June 30, 2017, the original closing date.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  The Post-Cyclone Winston Emergency DPL was a single-operation program aimed at enabling Fiji to recover
  from cyclone Winston that damaged or destroyed housing of 15 percent of the population, and led to loss of
  livelihoods (primarily farming and fishing) of some 55 percent of the population. The project sub-objectives
  were highly relevant both for the government and the Bank. They were aligned with the government’s
  objectives of a rapid recovery from the cyclone and increased resilience against future cyclones. Both sub-
  objectives remain relevant as the country considers appropriate precautionary strategies for the future. Bank
  participation is supported by its crisis risk platform, and its regional strategy for East Asia and the Pacific,
  where building resilience against natural disasters remains a major strategic direction for Bank interventions
  in the region. Bank participation also supports one of the two broad themes in the Bank’s country
  engagement note for Fiji (FY2015-FY2017) – i.e., protecting vulnerable populations. Under that theme, the
  Bank seeks to build resilience and protect vulnerable populations and resources against the impacts of
  natural disasters and other shocks.



  Rating
  High




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 11
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Fiji Post-Cyclone Winston Emergency DPO(P159774)




   b. Relevance of Design
       The design – policy areas and proposed actions – was consistent with the PDO. It focused on addressing
       immediate recovery needs, as well as defining measures for longer term resilience against natural disasters;
       and on providing disaster-responsive social protection to the most vulnerable groups. Recovery design was
       informed by a needs assessment undertaken collaboratively by the government of Fiji, the Asian
       Development Bank (ADB) and the Bank. The needs assessment informed a disaster recovery framework
       (DRF) which in turn functioned as a strategic planning and resource allocation tool that set out a prioritized
       and sequenced recovery plan for 2016-2018. Design was also backed up by studies carried out by the Bank
       on the resilience of social protection in Fiji and more broadly among the island nations in the South
       Pacific. The results framework as presented in the PD (a policy and results matrix, page 29) included a set
       of prior actions that could reasonably be expected to facilitate the achievement of intended outcomes, albeit
       within a period that exceeded the timetable for the operation - the DRF had a horizon of three years. A DPL
       was selected to allow for quick disbursement of funds and to ease pressures on the regular budget in
       FY2016/17.

       Two key aspects of design that may not have garnered all the necessary attention are a revised building
       code for reconstruction, and capacity constraints in the construction sector. The government is in the
       process of developing a plan for post-cyclone reconstruction - building back better - once the initial relief and
       rehabilitation phase is completed. A key element moving forward (“building back better”) is a revised
       national building code, but so far the government has not acted on it. The ICR gives no strong reason for
       this, but it may in part be due to capacity limitations in the construction sector, currently busy with relief and
       rehabilitation, which may have dispelled some of the immediate urgency surrounding the building code. A
       review of the code is now expected sometime in FY2018/19 with subsequent adoption the following year.

       Despite an uncertain outlook for the demand for Fiji’s main exports due to economic slowdown in
       China, tourism proved to be resilient after the cyclone. Public debt is expected to remain sustainable, and the
       macroeconomic policy framework was considered adequate.
       .



       Rating
       Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To support Fiji's recovery from the immediate impact of cyclone Winston


                                                                                                            Page 3 of 11
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Fiji Post-Cyclone Winston Emergency DPO(P159774)




    Rationale
    The objective was to be achieved by preparing a prioritized and sequenced recovery plan (the DRF) and
    drawing on the DRF to finance critical recovery activities during FY2016/17 (August 2016-July 2017).

    Outputs

    A post-disaster needs assessment of damage and losses from the cyclone was completed in May 2016 as a
    prior action for the DPL. A disaster recovery framework (DRF) was also completed in May 2016, again as a
    prior action for the DPL. The DRF sets out a prioritized and sequenced recovery plan for FY2016/2018, and
    its full implementation was to result in enhanced disaster resilience. Enhanced disaster resilience was to be
    guided by principles of “building back better”, “inclusiveness” and being “pro-poor”.
    Outcomes
    Implementation of the DRF is only partially on track. According to the policy and results matrix in the PD, at
    least 75 percent of the FY2016/2017 budget for Tropical Cyclone Winston recovery programs should have
    been spent. If the original and additional allocations and spending are taken into account, about 46 percent
    of the total allocation for DRF activities was spent (less than the 56 percent stated in the ICR). The reason
    for this low rate of budget execution seems to have been the overambitious targets set by the authorities for
    reconstruction of schools and additional transport infrastructure by mid-2017, and the inability of the Fiji
    construction sector to deliver on these targets (ICR, page 20). The ICR (page 7) further reports that school
    construction is scheduled to be fully completed by December 2018. The government had been unwilling to
    provide additional information to the Bank until after the November 2018 elections. They have since been
    completed but the government has not yet provided any further information on school construction.
    “Enhanced disaster resilience” – the aim of the DRF – was to be measured by revisions to the building code,
    notably by improving the robustness of standards and enhancing enforcement of regulations. However, by
    December 2018, no action had been taken on the building code.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     To cushion the immediate impact of cyclone Winston on the most vulnerable

    Rationale
    The objective was to be achieved by providing timely disaster-responsive social protection to beneficiaries of
    Fiji's core safety net programs

    Outputs


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 11
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Fiji Post-Cyclone Winston Emergency DPO(P159774)



    All eligible households/individuals registered in Fiji’s core social protection programs – a trio of safety net
    programs (a poverty benefit scheme, a social pension scheme, and a care and protection scheme targeted
    at children) - were provided with additional cash assistance (top-up payments) within a deadline of four
    weeks after the policy announcement (prior action).

    An evaluation of the disaster-responsive social protection programs was undertaken to assess the utility of
    timely disaster-responsive social protection and its eventual mainstreaming as part of a future disaster
    response.

    Outcomes
    A total of 96 percent of the eligible households/individuals received the additional benefits within the deadline
    of four weeks, compared to a target of 75 percent.

    The program evaluation found that 86.9 percent of top-up payments were spent on “essential
    items”. Essential items initially were not defined, but drawing on survey responses, beneficiaries spent the
    top-up funds on housing repairs, household goods, food, school supplies, and productive assets. Table 4 in
    the ICR (page 14) sets out a list of essential and non-essential spending items, all of which are household
    expenditures that can be expected when unconditional cash transfers are introduced.

    No evaluation was formally made by the government of mainstreaming social protection into a disaster
    framework . However, the ICR (page 15) indicates that recommendations relating to disaster-responsive
    social protection have been prepared within the Ministry of Social Welfare.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  Relevance of objectives and design were rated high and substantial, respectively. Objectives were aligned
  with government objectives of rapid recovery from the cyclone and building resilience against future cyclones;
  they were aligned with the Bank’s country engagement strategy of protecting vulnerable populations and
  building their resilience. Relevance of design was consistent with the PDO, except for a targeted action (the
  building code) requiring longer term implementation. Achievement of objective 1 was rated modest, as
  spending on recovery activities fell short of target; and disaster resilience as measured by the key indicator
  remained unchanged. Although spending expectations had an overambitious timeline, reconstruction of
  schools, the largest expenditure category for the DRF, is expected to have been completed by the end of
  2018. Achievement of objective 2 was rated substantial: while top-up social protection payments appear to


                                                                                                         Page 5 of 11
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Fiji Post-Cyclone Winston Emergency DPO(P159774)



have had a positive effect, there is no evidence that any disaster-related social protection strategy has been
mainstreamed.


a.     Outcome Rating
       Moderately Satisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

Risks listed in the PD included institutional capacity constraints to manage recovery, and economic shocks that
might arise from future climatic events. Performance during the DPL raises flags regarding capacity – the
shortfall in budget spending, and the relative absence of actions to improve disaster-responsive social
protection or overall resilience to disasters (building code). The economic challenges that were posed by the
cyclone remain, but here the government appears to be active in building public sector financial management
capabilities, as indicated in the PD (page 2).


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
       Substantial

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     The operation was put into place less than five months after the cyclone struck. Its design was developed
     in collaboration with the government and the ADB, and drew on the findings of the needs assessment and
     on previous Bank work on social protection in the island states. It aligned with government and Bank
     objectives. The results framework linked policy areas to objectives, albeit with goals that sometimes did
     not take implementation capacities or time horizons sufficiently into account. Evidence of stretched
     capacity at the national level is reflected in unfinished initiatives (social protection, building codes) and
     shortfalls in spending, reflecting both the scope of needs, lack of proper consideration of limitations in Fiji's
     construction sector, and overly ambitious planning by the Bank team as well as the government. The Bank
     should have given more support in matching the design of proposed initiatives with available capacity.


     Quality-at-Entry Rating
     Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
     The ICR indicates that the supervision of the social protection component was intense during the project
     period. A total of ten missions were undertaken to evaluate the effects of the top-up program and draw up
     a plan for mainstreaming a disaster-responsive social protection strategy. While the latter was not
     achieved during the operation, work is ongoing in the Ministry of Social Welfare with Bank help. The ICR

                                                                                                           Page 6 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fiji Post-Cyclone Winston Emergency DPO(P159774)



  (page 18) notes that interaction was less intense after the preparation stage of the first objective
  (addressing the immediate impact of the cyclone, and recovery and resilience objectives) as the focus of
  the team shifted towards other priorities including the preparation of a new DPL with little substantive
  engagement on the DRF. At the same time, the dialogue on this objective between the government and
  the Bank appears to have waned, and implementation progress was not regularly shared with the Bank.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  Government ownership was strong. It led the preparation of the needs assessment and developed the
  DRF both of which formed the core of the operation. It was closely engaged in implementing and
  monitoring progress on the relief and recovery effort, including indicators included in the results
  framework. However, collaboration appears to have faltered – the government did not appreciate the
  importance of the operation’s results framework, and progress in implementing the DRF was not shared
  publicly, nor with the Bank's supervision team until the ICR was being prepared. The low budget
  execution rate on DRF funds is a particular concern, resulting inter alia from an overly ambitious timeline
  that did not consider the limitations of Fiji's construction sector.



  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  Included in Section 8a.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fiji Post-Cyclone Winston Emergency DPO(P159774)



  The Ministry of Finance was responsible for coordinating the monitoring and evaluation of the results
  indicators for the operation. It was also in charge of tracking and measuring the implementation of the
  results indicators relating to the DRF. The Ministry of Welfare was responsible for monitoring and evaluating
  the results indicators relating to social protection. The five results indicators were selected based on readily
  available data. Of the five indicators, one was related to budget execution data, two were indicators of
  whether an output was prepared, and two were to be drawn from the administration, complemented with
  survey data. Most indicators were relevant to the PDO and its focus on the immediate situation and the
  subsequent two years. Only the building code indicator was of a longer-term nature, where the effects of a
  revised code were likely to be felt only after a period of time. As discussed in Section 8a, the government
  should have given more attention to the operation's results framework, and to sharing progress in
  implementing the DRF.




b. M&E Implementation
  Monitoring and evaluation relating to social protection was carried out by the Ministry of Social Welfare, and
  it provided necessary data for monitoring related outcome indicators. Information on budget execution of
  the DRF was being produced but collaboration between the government and the Bank appears to have
  faltered - the government did not appreciate the results framework, and progress in implementing the DRF
  was not shared.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR, information from the monitoring and evaluation was being used to monitor progress
  and influence decision-making. It is, however, not clear that this was done systematically and what was the
  impact of such monitoring.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  Neither the PD nor the ICR indicate if any safeguard policies were triggered. The PD (pages 23 and 24)
  discusses environmental aspects. It notes that the policy actions supported under the project were not
  expected to have a significant negative impact on the environment. None are noted in either the needs
  assessment or the DRF. The Bank’s project preparation team assesses Fiji’s systems for addressing
  environmental impacts as being relatively strong, albeit with limited implementation capacity.


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 11
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Fiji Post-Cyclone Winston Emergency DPO(P159774)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
Fiduciary aspects are not discussed in the ICR. The PD does signal that Fiji’s public financial management
system is reasonably strong and centered on a set of relatively advanced policies and procedures, a clear
legislative framework and well documented rules, and a set of financial manuals. A 2012 Public Expenditure
and Financial Accountability report by the Bank found that fiscal information is credible.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.



d. Other
   None noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                              Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory     ---
                              Satisfactory
Risk to Development                                                               IEG notes significant climatic
                              Modest                  Substantial
Outcome                                                                           risks and capacity constraints
                              Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory     ---
                              Satisfactory
                                                                                  IEG notes an imbalance in the
                                                                                  government's ambitions and
Borrower Performance          Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory     capacity; and deficiencies in
                                                                                  communications with the Bank
                                                                                  on progress
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                 ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 11
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fiji Post-Cyclone Winston Emergency DPO(P159774)



12. Lessons

 Rapid stock-taking, sequenced planning and targeted budget support are key elements of an emergency
intervention. The Fiji post-cyclone operation included all these elements: a rigorous needs assessment was
undertaken, it formed the basis for a sequenced, multi-year program of interventions, and domestic budget
resources were reallocated and complemented with donor funds in the form of budget support.

Development policy lending can facilitate rapid emergency interventions. Development policy lending can
rapidly mobilize financing for large national disaster recovery and reconstruction programs. This operation
allowed the transmission of much-needed resources to targeted households; and allowed interventions to be
based on rigorous field surveys.

Ambitious planning and the need for urgency may exceed implementation capacity on the ground. In
the immediate aftermath of a disaster, a realistic balance needs to be found between recovery and
reconstruction on the one hand, and implementation capacity on the other. The Bank needs to provide
adequate support in both design and implementation to help ensure a proper balance is found. In Fiji,
bottlenecks appeared early in the absence of such considerations: the budget execution rate for the disaster
relief framework was low; and capacity constraints in the construction sector quickly extended timeframes for
implementing some initiatives, e.g. implementation of a new building code.




13. Assessment Recommended?

Yes

Please explain
 Yes. Small island jurisdictions are increasingly at risk to climate related disasters. A better understanding
would be helpful to understand why in this instance the planned timing for reconstruction in Fiji was so out of
line with local capacity, what should have been done differently by the Bank and government to better mitigate
this shortcoming, why such things were not done, and how to better prepare for such disasters going forward.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a mainly adequate basis for assessing the operation and drawing up the ICRR. The
assessment of implementation and results is thorough, providing a reasonable balance between results-
orientation and narrative; it is internally consistent; and the main text is concise. Shortcomings include an error
in the calculation of the percentage of DRF expenditure to total allocation (ICR, page 11), and not enough
analysis on why the overambitious timing for reconstruction was accepted by both the Bank and government in
designing the operation.

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fiji Post-Cyclone Winston Emergency DPO(P159774)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                     Page 11 of 11
