     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Basic Education (P123151)



                                                                               Report Number : ICRR0021365

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P123151                                  PE Basic Education

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Peru                                     Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82260                               31-Mar-2018                                         25,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Jan-2013                              31-Mar-2018

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          25,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           25,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       25,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Susan Ann Caceres          Robert Mark Lacey           Joy Behrens                    IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   According to the Loan Agreement (p. 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 5), the objectives of
   the project were "to improve Ministry of Education (MINEDU)'s capacity to evaluate student learning,
   instructional practice, and school leadership in basic education".

   The project was restructured on September 17, 2015 and June 7, 2017 (level 2 on both occasions), and key
   associated outcome targets were revised downwards. At the time of the first restructuring, nothing had
   disbursed and 70% had disbursed by the second restructuring.

                                                                                                Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Basic Education (P123151)




   The September 2015 restructuring revised an outcome target for an indicator (Number of school
   management positions staffed through the school principal evaluation management system) and added two
   additional indicators (instructional practices analyzed, cycles of student assessment analyzed). Additional
   intermediate outcome indicators were included (teacher performance evaluation system designed,
   implemented, and results reported; evaluation instruments to determine entrance to and promotions within
   teaching career designed). Three indicators revised the scale from yes/no to a number. These changes do
   not affect ratings before and after restructuring, and therefore a split evaluation is not undertaken.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

                                                           PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   The operation was a sector-wide approach (SWAP) that co-financed selected activities within eligible
   budget activities. The Government's budgetary framework was linked to the financing of areas expected
   to improve student learning. Disbursements were based on achievement of agreed upon targets from
   specified indicators. There were three components:

   Evaluating Student Learning (appraisal US$25.25 million; actual, US$10.90 million) covered eligible budget
   activities related to: scale-up of second grade student assessment and additional grades in primary and
   secondary school; measurement of child development outcomes in preschool; and international
   assessment overseen by OECD and UNESCO.

   Evaluating Instructional Practice and School Leadership (appraisal, US$ 4.25 million; actual, US$13.87
   million) covered eligible budget activities related to the Ministry of Education's monitoring and evaluation of
   instructional practices at the classroom level and implementation of a competency-based system for
   selecting and training candidates to school management.

   Strengthening's the Ministry of Education's Implementation Capacity (appraisal, US$ 0.51 million; actual,
   US$0.23 million) covered eligible budget activities related to the Ministry of Education's education
   management and monitoring capacity of the activities supported by the program and carrying
   out independent technical, financial, and procurement reviews.




                                                                                                               Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Basic Education (P123151)



   Changes were made through project restructuring to better align with the Government's priorities such as:
   participation in an international assessment - International Civic and Citizenship Study (ICSS) - and
   implementation of the Teacher Reform Law (adopted in 2012), which revised teacher pay, promotion, and
   performance evaluation. Thus, the operation supported the design of the teacher performance evaluation
   system to bring merit into entrance and promotion in the teaching profession.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

   Project Costs: Project costs were US$ 25.28 million, 16 percent less than the appraisal estimate of
   US$30,01 million, . Substantially more was spent for Component 2 (evaluation of instructional practice
   and school leadership) than planned at appraisal (US$ 13. 9 million compared with US$ 4.3 million), due
   to the activities added during restructuring to implement the teacher performance evaluation
   system. Approximately half of the resources planned at appraisal were actually spent on Component one
   (Evaluation of Student Learning) and Component three (Strengthening Ministry of Education's
   Implementation Capacity). Disbursements were based on submission of actual budget execution of
   eligible budget activities and evidence of achievement of the disbursement linked indicators (DLIs). The
   DLIs were based on the proportion of project costs allocated to each component.

   Financing: The IBRD loan of US$ 25 million was fully disbursed. There were no other sources of external
   financing.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower contributed US$ 161 million, which was slightly higher than planned
   (US$ 158 million).

   Dates: The operation was approved by the Board on January 17, 2013 and became effective on May 20,
   2014. The delay in effectiveness was due to the time taken to approve the Operational Manual (ICR p.
   23), but this delay did not negatively impact implementation. The operation closed on schedule on March
   31, 2018. In September 2015, there was a level two restructuring which made changes to the results
   framework, implementation schedule, component cost, institutional arrangements, disbursement
   arrangements, and legal covenants. At the Government’s request, the scope of the project expanded in
   this restructuring to align with its priorities (ICR p. 5). A second level two restructuring was carried out in
   June 2017, which made some further changes in the results framework and disbursement and institutional
   arrangements.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PE Basic Education (P123151)



The objectives are well aligned with country conditions, with the Government's vision and focus (currently
implementing the third phase of its Education Strategy), and with the Bank's priorities throughout the life of
the operation.

The Government of Peru has made efforts to promote more inclusive and equitable human capital
accumulation to ensure broader poverty reduction and social and human well-being. Creating good quality
basic education is critical (as the education system had already attained universal coverage in primary and
high levels of pre-primary [80%]). Improving education quality is necessary for skill formation and
productivity, particularly for marginalized groups. For example, PISA results in 2011 revealed high numbers
of student completing primary level without mastery of basic mathematics and literacy skills. Skill deficits
were even higher among marginalized groups such as rural or indigenous students. Gender differences
were negligible.

The Government initiated a reform process known as the Learning Outcomes Education Program
(Programa Educativo Logros de Aprendizaje, PELA). The first phase of this program (2009-2011) paid
insufficient attention to rural students and bilingual education. The subsequent phase of the program (2013-
2016) was refined to address these issues and focused on three aspects: improving school conditions and
management; strengthening teaching and curriculum (including timely access to quality learning materials);
and establishing a robust national student assessment system (to support the program). Prior to this
operation, Peru's assessment system included: testing in grade two in mathematics and participation in
PISA (every three years). The Ministry of Education needed information on student learning at the end of
preschool and across primary and secondary grades to detect issues, inform teacher development
programs, and provide feedback to schools. Simultaneously, the Ministry of Education passed a Teacher
Reform Law that sought to create a performance-based career to raise the standards for entry into the
profession, regulate promotions based on competencies, and implement a teacher evaluation
system. Another aspect of the teacher reform was ensuring effective school leadership through
competency-based selection process and specialized training. Thus, the objectives of strengthening the
Ministry's capacity to evaluate student learning, instructional practices, and school leadership were highly
relevant to the Government's overall strategy. Enhancing the Ministry’s evaluation capacity underpinned
these three aspects.

The objectives also aligned with the World Bank Group's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the
fiscal years 2017-2021 that focuses on human capital in the workforce. The CPF describes the need for
education quality improvements as part of a long-term process to improve the skills of workers and hence
raise productivity and growth. The Country Partnership Strategy (FY12-16) at preparation focused on
increasing access and improving the quality of services, particularly for the poor. It noted the need for the
education system to become more results-oriented.



Rating
High


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            PE Basic Education (P123151)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     Improve Ministry of Education's capacity to evaluate student learning in basic education.

    Rationale

    The theory of change emphasized assessment of student learning as a tool to improve the education system
    and its quality. The Ministry (through UMC) previously conducted sample-based assessments of student
    learning. Expanding assessment- grades and subjects was needed to illustrate student performance for
    policy makers, teachers, principals, and the general public. The theory of change also emphasized
    international comparison as a means to motivate the actors in the education system by benchmarking its
    performance against other countries. The project reported student results at the national, regional, and
    school level. The assumption was that the availability of reliable, timely information on student learning
    outcomes, trends, and patterns across the school cycle would then be used to inform policy. The
    dissemination of the data would build accountability to improve education quality. However, as noted in the
    ICR (p. 46), assessments need to be coupled with incentives and/or sanctions to motivate teachers to teach
    better and schools to be more effective. Some, but not all, of these aspects were addressed in the other
    objectives. In IEG's learning engagement with the Education GP on student assessment, it was found that
    assessments do not automatically translate into utilization of the data by teachers, school leaders, parents,
    or Ministry personnel, as additional actions beyond dissemination are needed; these were missing from the
    project's theory of change. Even with a narrow objective, the theory of change could have considered steps
    that would be needed to translate the evaluation of student learning into utilization.

    Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) included: number of additional grades at primary and secondary
    education in which sound national assessments are administered in at least two subject areas; annual
    results of national student assessment at the primary and secondary level are reported at national, and
    regional and school level. The objective was also measured through the following additional indicators:
    yearly student assessments for selected grades of primary and secondary education validated in a pilot
    study; number of surveys carried out to evaluate child development progress and quality of public preschool
    education; and participation in international assessments of student learning outcomes.

    Four cycles of assessment were conducted at preschool, primary, and secondary grades (meeting the target
    of 4). The assessment in the new grades at primary and secondary levels were validated during a
    pilot. Three additional grades (4th, 6th, and 8th) - beyond the original grade (2nd) were developed for two
    subject areas. Results for the assessment were reported at the regional and school level (for 6th grade in
    2015, for 8th grade in 2016, and 4th grade in 2017) and shared with parents. The Ministry disseminated
    assessment findings to the media, policy makers, education officials, schools, and parents (ICR p.
    22). Census-based assessments were carried out in 2016 (and are planned for grades 4 and 8 in 2018).


                                                                                                      Page 5 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            PE Basic Education (P123151)



    The assessment data were analyzed, but the ICR does not discuss actions taken by the Ministry in
    response. The Bank team reported that the overall assessment trend and public school trend have improved
    between 2007 to 2016. Student learning assessment data were disaggregated (by gender, region,
    and urban/rural), but the data were not presented in the ICR, nor was there a discussion of how the data
    disaggregated by gender, spatial/geographical were used or what actions were proposed in response.

    Two national surveys were carried out in 2014 and 2017 to evaluate child development and quality of public
    preschool services. The first used the Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale. The second used the
    Measuring Early Learning Quality and Outcomes. The report and data were expected by October 2018. The
    Ministry plans to refine curriculum and training, based on findings and analysis from the report.

    Peru (and its students) participated in international assessments such as PISA ( in 2012, 2014, and a pilot in
    2017),Tercer Estudio Regional Comparative Explicative (TERCE) in mathematics (grade 3 and 6), reading
    (grade 3 and 6), writing (grade 3 and 6), and natural sciences (grade 6 only ) in 2013, and ICCS (in 2015)
    that assessed citizen preparation.

    The Ministry conducted a study of potential biases in tests administered to indigenous students. The ICR
    notes that the Ministry used this information to improve the tests (and their administration). For example, a
    radio campaign was conducted in four indigenous languages to inform parents of tests and their purpose.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     Improve Ministry of Education's capacity to evaluate instructional practices.

    Rationale

    The theory of change supported evaluation of instructional practices through classroom observational
    instruments and development of a teacher evaluation system as a means to improve teacher
    performance. The evaluation system can be a direct way of improving teachers' instructional practices and
    capacity, if the system is well designed and implemented. Additional steps are also needed that were not
    specified in the theory of change. For example, undertrained and low capacity teachers need structured
    teachers' guides, training in content and pedagogy (that models new teaching techniques) and follow-up
    support. (Villegas-Reimers 2003).




                                                                                                        Page 6 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Basic Education (P123151)



 The objective was measured through the indicator: annual results of national studies of instructional practice
 at the primary and secondary level reported at the national level.

 The results of four studies of classroom instruction were reviewed (met target). The Stallings Classroom
 Snapshot was deployed to measure teachers' use of instruction time in primary (2012 and 2014) and
 secondary (2013 and 2015) levels. Findings were distributed to the Ministry's Regional Education
 Directorates (met target). The Government noted that the teams in the Ministry analyzed results, which were
 published in a series of research papers and briefs detailing analysis of pedagogical practices (ICR, p. 63).
 An additional report was published related to preschool teachers’ pedagogical practices from the
 performance evaluation conducted by the Ministry in 2017. The ICR did not discuss the result (of the
 studies), nor planned actions.

 A teacher performance evaluation system was designed and implemented with preschool teachers (the
 target specified implementation of the system but not the scale of implementation). 6,000 pre-school
 teachers were assessed according to the Bank team. New teachers and those who could be promoted were
 part of the initial phase of the evaluation. The recruitment and promotion of pre-school teachers is merit-
 based, which is initiated by a process of regular performance evaluation and feedback. Implementation of
 the evaluation system was delayed- due to teacher opposition (including a strike). Additional outreach
 measures were taken with the Teachers Union, including providing information and training to teachers,
 disseminating the rubrics and instruments, and meeting with representatives of the Teachers Union to
 ensure the process was clear. If a teacher does not perform well on the classroom observation, he/she
 received professional development assistance and could participate in a subsequent evaluation. The Bank
 team reported that the evaluation focused on classroom management, rather than content knowledge.

 The promotion instrument was implemented in 2015, 2016, and 2017, resulting in promotion of 49,763 out of
 410,429 teachers who were evaluated. However, it is difficult to interpret these numbers as the ICR does not
 describe the previous promotion trend. Access to leadership positions and salary increases resulted from the
 promotion instrument, according to the Bank team. This instrument and the evaluation may provide
 incentives for teachers to perform better.

 The recruitment instrument was implemented in 2015 and 2017 and resulted in the recruitment of 19,069
 teachers out of a total of 400,423 candidates for both years. However, the ICR does not provide prior
 recruitment data to identify demand and supply and assess how the changes facilitated a merit-basis to the
 selection and hiring.

 The Ministry has made an effort to evaluate teachers in their mastery of indigenous languages in relevant
 classrooms.



 Rating
 Substantial
PHREVDELTBL

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            PE Basic Education (P123151)




PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective

     Improve the Ministry of Education's capacity to evaluate school leadership in basic education.

    Rationale

    The theory of change focused on selecting qualified principals and training school leaders and certifying
    them in school management. Instructional leaders are a crucial input to improve school management,
    education quality, and student outcomes. Effective principals are one of the important factors explaining
    education quality and student learning. The process to select principals includes: standardized assessment
    (reviewed centrally) and then the decentralized level applied an instrument to evaluate candidates. Training
    was implemented by selected universities in school management and pedagogical leadership.

    The objective was measured through indicators such as the number of principals staffed through the
    evaluation system.

    A principal evaluation system was designed and implemented. The first performance evaluation of school
    principals was initiated in 2014. The ICR does not discuss how many applicants applied to principal
    positions prior to 2014 to assess the relative attractiveness of the position, nor how this new
    process increased competition.

    18,477 school management positions were staffed through the school principal evaluation system. For
    example, positions were filled from 51,563 candidates for 20,000 positions in 2014. 12, 562 open positions
    selected from 13, 421 evaluated candidates, resulting in 9,113 filled positions. The ICR noted that a smaller
    number were staffed by Local Education Management Units because of evaluation requirements, imbalance
    in demand for positions; and legal disputes; several positions were not filled The competitive evaluation
    process reviewed 53,699 candidates for these positions. The target for the number of school management
    positions (staffed through the principal evaluation process) was revised from 25,000 to 18,000 due to factors
    beyond the control of the Ministry. The ICR broke down the indicator in two ways. The number of qualified
    candidates selected for open positions was 24, 584 and that of qualified candidates accepting offers was
    18,447. The Bank team clarified that the some appointments were not confirmed locally because some
    candidates preferred to remain in the local area (as the offer was for a school outside their home community)
    and some principals filed protective measures to keep their positions. The evaluation involved an initial
    selection stage, where candidates were given an examination. The process also included an assessment of
    candidates by the decentralized level of the Ministry. These aspects were not described in the ICR.

    The ICR notes that merit-based promotion increased the share of female teachers being promoted to
    management positions. There was an increase of 26 percent for school leaders and 107 percent for deputy
    director positions. Evidence of school leaders' performance; however, has not yet been generated.


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  PE Basic Education (P123151)



             A principal training course was designed and carried out by training institutes. The training program
             consisted of a one-year certification and a one-semester complementary second degree. The Bank team
             indicated that the training was originally planned to last four months, but was extended for 18
             months. 13,536 principals were certified in school management. (target 10,000) The Bank team indicated
             that the training program was evaluated. While no data were reported, the Bank team said beneficiaries
             found the training's focus on management and soft skills useful. 12,000 trained principals were able to
             evaluate the performance of their teachers- which reduced the need to hire an outside evaluator to conduct
             the teacher performance evaluation. Outside evaluators were needed when trained principals were not
             present.

             The Ministry has also developed a certification to demonstrate proficiency in indigenous languages, which is
             a prerequisite for appointing school principals that serve indigenous communities.

             The Ministry has launched a third process to staff 9,000 additional school management positions, which
             should be complete in 2018, showing sustainability of the implementation of the system. 50,000 teachers
             have registered for these positions.



             Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

The ICR reports the planned indicators which are output-orientated measures demonstrating implementation of
additional student assessment, evaluation of instructional practices and school leadership. It does not provide
evidence of the rigor or quality of these evaluations, which would demonstrate improved capacity of the
Ministry. The extent to which capacity has been enhanced is unclear. The project, through the implementation
of additional student assessments, and of expanded appraisal of teaching performance and training of additional
school managers, has laid the foundation for later outcomes. Therefore, efficacy is rated substantial, which is
indicative of minor shortcomings in the attainment of the operation's objectives.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

     5. Efficiency




                                                                                                              Page 9 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Basic Education (P123151)



An economic analysis prepared at appraisal calculated an internal rate of return of 10.1% and net present
value of US$ 417 million. These were estimated only from investment in the student learning evaluation
system, which may underestimate the overall benefit. The economic analysis was updated at closure and
found an internal rate of return between 10.7 percent and 13.8 percent (the lower bound being based on
conservative estimates of the impact of scaled-up student evaluations alone, and the upper bound including
that of better institutional practice and school management) . The project was expected to increase future
earnings of project beneficiaries- those exposed to the new student assessment system during their school
years and who complete secondary school (ICR. p. 50). This illustrates the value of the investment, as well as
education investments broadly.

The ICR (p. 17) discusses the potential impact on sector efficiency and service delivery of the quality
improvements financed by the operation, including improved data for design of education policies and
increased accountability for school performance, although it acknowledges that it is still too early to identify
concrete results." Thus, the ICR is not able to document improvements in efficiency of the service delivery.

Other qualitative aspects of efficiency include: low overhead costs (1.04% of total project cost), which is half
the anticipated amount at preparation. The low rate is the result of implementation by units within the Ministry
supported by consultants, consistent with on-budget financing by the Bank. There
was punctual implementation of contracts and payment, which established a good reputation among bidders
and providers, thereby attracting more competition and better candidates (ICR p. 61). The ICR states that
this resulted in reducing the cost of services that were contracted, but no data were provided to illustrate this.
The project closed without an extension. More activities were completed than originally planned, for example
extended specialized training for selected school principals, development of a new teacher evaluation system,
and participation in an additional international assessment.
There was delay in project effectiveness due to the time needed to approve the Operational Manual. The
Ministry implemented the project prior to effectiveness with its budget funding so that the delayed
effectiveness did not negatively affect implementation. The Bank paid the first disbursement in 2015.
There was a delay in activities at the beginning of each calendar year, as the project had to "prepare a plan
twice a year with incomplete or dated information" (ICR p.28) The ICR noted that "the project was challenged
by the different schedules of the Government’s budget cycle (preparation in April–May) and the preparation of
the Project’s Annual Operating Plan (AOP, November–January)".
Considering all of these aspects, project efficiency is rated substantial, consistent with minor shortcomings.



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                    Rate
                                                          Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                    Available?


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE Basic Education (P123151)



                                                                                      80.00
Appraisal                                                 10.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
ICR Estimate                                              14.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


Relevance of objectives is assessed across the entire project and is rated High. Efficacy is rated Substantial
overall (and for each of the objectives). Efficiency is also rated Substantial given the results of the quantitative
analysis and smooth implementation with minor delays. Outcome is therefore rated Satisfactory, indicative of
minor shortcomings in the operation’s achievement of its objectives.




a.   Outcome Rating
     Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


The project has likely enhanced the capacity of the Ministry of Education in relation to assessment of student
learning, instructional practices, and school leadership that are sustained. The Ministry continues to implement
the Teacher Reform law for recruitment, evaluation, and promotion. Lessons learned over the course of the
operation have remained with staff in the Ministry. The teacher evaluation system was implemented with
preschool teachers and will likely be expanded. The Ministry supported training two cohorts of school leaders. It
carried out student learning assessment in additional grades and subjects. It plans to continue international
assessment in 2018. The Ministry has plans to design and deploy an assessment for the last year of secondary
education (11th grade) (ICR p. 14-15).

The Bank continues to provide financial and technical resources to reform basic and secondary education. The
Government is participating in the Bank- financed Human Capital Project that should raise political awareness
of the importance in investing in education and improving education quality. The Bank is also targeting
improvements in human capital with a Deferred Drawdown Option employing indicators related to teachers,
school principals, and measurement of school learning.

However, political risks to the development outcome remain. These were already evident during
implementation - a teachers strike from June to September 2017 impeded the teacher evaluation and led to
cancelation of the student assessment scheduled for November 2017).

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Basic Education (P123151)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  This operation built upon lessons from the previous one. For example, there was insufficient attention paid
  in the latter to rural and bilingual education, and hence regressive education policies remained
  unaddressed. Additional lessons learned included: the need to focus on activities central to the
  Government’s strategy; emphasizing institutional capacity building and the use of data; and building public
  awareness and confidence. Integrating disbursement-linked indicators into the financing was appropriate
  and consistent with the Ministry of Finance's approach that prioritized sector resources through results-
  based budgeting (ICR p. 21).

  To complement the financing in this operation the Bank also supported evaluation of student learning,
  instructional practices and school leadership with technical assistance, trust funds, and learning resources
  to assist staff in the Ministry of Education. Design also provided for non-lending support to increase the
  impact of student assessment data to inform education policy, and to build awareness and confidence in
  the results. The project supported the development of performance evaluation systems for teachers and
  school leaders.

  Overall, preparation was sound. A clear and straightforward method of compliance with disbursement
  requirements was indicated. Design was simple, and the scope and number of activities aligned well with
  the implementation period. There was in-built flexibility, enabling the additional activities subsequently
  requested by the Borrower to be accommodated. The Bank brought considerable technical expertise and
  provided technical assistance as needed. The project was ready for implementation upon approval (as
  already noted, the Ministry was able to begin implementing with its own resources, while the required
  approval of the Operational Manual delayed effectiveness.

  There were some minor weaknesses, several of them pointed out by the Borrower. It would have been
  better to have selected a unit in the Ministry to coordinate the work that was hierarchically above those
  implementing the activities (ICR p. 58). The arrangement was later changed. The Government believed
  that market studies should have been part of preparation (ICR p. 61). M&E design could have been
  stronger, since indicators were output-oriented (see Section 9a below).


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Basic Education (P123151)



  The Bank was responsive to requests made by the Government. As a result, there was a change
  in governmental supervisory responsibility, which facilitated better coordination of project activities. As
  noted in the previous section, the new unit was hierarchically above all the directorates implementing
  activities, and was thus better placed to oversee and coordinate the activities. When the Minister prioritized
  implementation of the Teacher Reform Law, the Bank responded by financing the design of the new
  evaluation instruments and system for merit-based recruitment and promotion. The Bank supported the
  efforts of the Government in expanding its student assessment experience by facilitating international
  advisers with experience in student assessment and teacher evaluation.

  There was continuity in the supervision team, including the task team leader who was based in Peru. These
  factors aided in developing a good working relationship with the teams in the Ministry. The Bank was
  proactive in resolving potential problems. For example, the Bank’s team worked with the Government to
  identify expenditures that could be considered eligible (ICR p. 26). The midterm review, held in June 2016,
  resulted in additional interventions to ensure Indigenous People benefited from project activities.

  The team implemented two level two restructurings to align implementation to the strategies of the
  Government and its actual implementation. During the September 2015 restructuring: (i) the implementation
  schedule was modified to allow time to complete additional activities; (ii) the legal covenant was clarified to
  specify hiring of an independent verification agent, rather than “Agency”; (iii) disbursement arrangements
  and amounts were brought into line with revised cost estimates; (iv) the definitions of eligible budget
  activities, and of basic education were changed ; and the results framework was updated (while the ICR
  argues that there were improvements in the outcome indicators, the changes consisted essentially of
  revised targets to reflect actual implementation).

  However, the reimbursement process did not match up with the annual activity planning and budget
  preparation process. Thus, the majority of the activities in the project’s annual activity plan did not have a
  budget allocated to them at the beginning of the year, so that budget modifications were needed to begin
  the procurement process (ICR p. 59).


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The ICR suggests that the DLIs were the right ones to measure impact, stating “the Results Framework and
  DLIs provided a well-defined yet flexible framework with which to monitor implementation progress and

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Basic Education (P123151)



  disburse” (ICR p. 24). However, indicators were output-oriented and could monitor only implementation of
  activities; they did not provide evidence of the quality or rigor of the outputs (see Section 4 above). The unit in
  charge of coordinating project activities within the Ministry was responsible for supervision of monitoring and
  evaluation.



b. M&E Implementation

  The unit within the Ministry (Strategic Planning Secretariat) that coordinated overall project activities
  implemented the M&E responsibilities well and provided timely reporting of the indicators. Given that the loan
  disbursed annually based on eligible budget activities and disbursement-linked indicators, an independent
  verification agency carried out a review of progress of disbursement-linked indicators.

  At the restructuring in 2015, changes were made in responsibility for data collection, better to reflect the input
  of the line units which were responsible for project implementation. The restructuring also revised targets to
  be non-cumulative to be consistent with the disbursement-linked indicators. The number of intermediate
  results indicators was increased from five to ten to measure steps to track performance. Three indicators
  were revised from a yes/no scale to a number. Some targets were lowered to reflect actual implementation.
  According to the Government, this was justified since targets for some indicators were too ambitious (ICR p.
  59). The timeline for data collection was expanded to five years, given the additional activities and initial
  delay in effectiveness. The original time frame planned on data collection for only four years even though the
  length of the loan was five years.



c. M&E Utilization

  The ICR notes that data from the evaluation systems were used by the Ministry, but how they were used is
  not explained. The ICR states that dissemination of student assessment results brought public awareness
  and buy-in for the reforms. For example, public support increased for the teacher evaluation system, despite
  the teacher strike.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards



                                                                                                      Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Basic Education (P123151)



  The project was classified as Category C for environmental assessment purposes, as it did not include
  construction or infrastructure rehabilitation. The Indigenous Peoples safeguard (OP 4.10) was triggered. A
  Social Assessment and Indigenous People Planning Framework were prepared and disclosed ( ICR p.
  25). The Social Assessment recommended strategies to minimize bias against indigenous students in
  standardized tests- due to cultural and language differences, which were implemented. For example, it
  recommended that indigenous families and communities should have timely access to culturally appropriate
  reports of results, and that cultural and linguistic profiles of principal candidates should be considered when
  selecting school principals in relevant schools.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Fiduciary management was the responsibility of the Administrative Coordination Team within the Ministry
  experienced in handling prior World Bank operations. This team also handled projects financed by the Inter
  American Development Bank, thus making it well placed for fiduciary management. Compliance with financial
  management was reported to be satisfactory (ICR p. 25-26). Mitigation measure proposed at preparation such
  as specific arrangements, recruiting additional members to the technical team were adhered to by the
  Implementing Agency. The Legal Agreement required the Ministry to have an independent agency carry out
  technical reviews of agreed results during implementation. This was complied with.

  The Administrative Coordination Team hired procurement specialists to support the operation. Bank
  procurement policies were satisfactorily complied with (ICR p. 26). The ICR nonetheless notes that the Bank’s
  procurement policies and procedures placed a heavy burden on the implementing unit. Three ex post
  procurement reviews were performed (in 2015, 2016, and 2018), which, together with the Bank’s supervision
  missions, provided recommendations to improve procurement management; these recommendations were
  implemented. Procurement involved some learning, as the Bank's procedures expanded the pool of providers
  to make the process more competitive; this different from national procedures which defined service
  requirements more narrowly. The Government noted ongoing communication between the technical units
  (implementing activities) and the unit in charge of procurement.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other
   ---




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE Basic Education (P123151)



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                        IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                    A rating of Satisfactory is
                                                                                    indicative of minor
                                                                                    shortcomings in the design,
                                                                                    implementation, and
                                                                                    attainment of the objectives.
Outcome                        Highly Satisfactory       Satisfactory
                                                                                    The project has laid the
                                                                                    foundation for potential
                                                                                    outcomes, but evidence of
                                                                                    improved capacity was lacking
                                                                                    in the ICR.
Bank Performance               Satisfactory              Satisfactory               ---
                                                                                    M&E design provide evidence
                                                                                    of implementation of activities,
Quality of M&E                 High                      Substantial
                                                                                    but did not permit monitoring
                                                                                    of impact.
Quality of ICR                                           Substantial                ---

12. Lessons


The following lessons are taken from the ICR with some adaptation of language:

Government commitment is a necessary condition, particularly when implementing politically sensitive
reforms, but it is also necessary to build awareness for the changes and of the reasons for them. The
Government requested adding implementation of the Teacher Reform Law to the operation. It knew that
implementation of the Law would be politically difficult. Following a teacher strike and ministerial resignations, a
plan was put in place to address the concerns expressed by teachers, and the Ministry moved forward with the
performance evaluation of teachers. The plan involved consultation and outreach with teachers, unions, and
local authorities. It also involved training principals to be able to evaluate teachers in their schools. This
reinforced public awareness of the need for change and increased political support for reform.

Timely project restructuring can facilitate implementation and have impact on results. The
restructurings were important to increase the project's relevance to the borrower's priorities. They also helped to
increase the scope of the project and thus increase its impact.

Conditions of effectiveness should match the instrument and should be reserved for critical issues. In
this case, the Bank was financing eligible budget activities through a Sector-Wide Approach, which meant that
individual activities were not required to begin implementation. Yet, effectiveness was held up for the approval
of the Operational Manual, which required multiple levels of review. This process was made more difficult, as



                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE Basic Education (P123151)



there were changing administrations. Thus, effectiveness conditions should focus on the most critical
dimensions.

Implementing an effective teacher evaluation system needs to balance multiple aspects. Initially, the
evaluation of teachers was lenient with standards so that the majority could pass. However, an evaluation
system should not focus on removal of teachers. Rather, there is a need to ensure a critical mass of teachers in
the system. The evaluation aimed to identify training needs. Thus, when designing an evaluation system, it is
important to understand its goal. An evaluation system requires transparency to ensure teachers
understand the metric and process. A communication campaign was critical to build public awareness and gain
their support.




13. Assessment Recommended?

Yes

Please explain


A field-based assessment would help to bring out details not adequately discussed in ICR. Moreover, the
passing of time will help identify actual achievements realized by the operation.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR is concise and provides a thorough overview project preparation and implementation, including the
factors that facilitated and hindered implementation. It contained an updated economic analysis. It was
consistent with the guidelines. Yet, there was limited discussion and evidence related to efficacy. By focusing
only on output-oriented indicators without discussion of their quality and rigor, evidence of improved capacity
of the Ministry is obscured. The Borrower's completion report was excellent and provided helpful information.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
