     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0021487

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P122123                                    ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Zambia                                     Agriculture


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-50530                                  30-Jun-2018                                         46,942,985.57

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Feb-2012                                30-Jun-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            50,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         46,942,985.57                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                Fernando Manibog             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   The original Project Development Objective (PDO) stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 4 ) and
   the PDO in the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 5) were identical and aimed to:

   "improve the productivity of key livestock production systems for targeted female and male
   smallholder producers in selected areas of the Recipient's territory."



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



   In April 2017 the project was restructured and the original PDO was revised as follows:

   "to contribute to the improvement of livestock health and production of selected smallholder
   systems in targeted areas of the Recipient’s territory" (Restructuring Paper, para 6).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  17-Apr-2017
                                                            PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components

   The PDO was supported by three components:

   1. Livestock Services Provision (appraisal estimate: US$25.45 million, actual cost: US$29.70
   million). This component aimed to strengthen the zoonotic and contagious animal diseases surveillance
   and control systems, including laboratory diagnostic capacities; build institutional capacity within the
   Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock to improve service delivery; and improve the capacity to monitor food
   safety of facilities (slaughterhouses, milk collection centers) in the targeted project areas. It included three
   sub-components:

   1.1. Strengthening the Surveillance, Diagnostic and Control of Animal Diseases. This sub-component
   would support the strengthening of passive and active surveillance systems for zoonotic and major
   contagious animal diseases and would scale-up vaccination of major diseases. It would provide support to
   pre-defined disease control strategies including vaccination campaigns, progressive zoning approach and
   public awareness campaigns, in collaboration with the private sector. The main focus would be on major
   identified diseases of economic importance including Foot and Mouth disease (FMD), Contagious Bovine
   Pleuropneumonia (CBPP), East Coast Fever (ECF), Newcastle Disease (ND) and African Swine Fever
   (ASF). The sub-component would also provide short-term training, logistical support and equipment to
   decentralized Veterinary offices (Provincial and District Veterinary Camps), as well as develop and support
   mechanisms for establishing private veterinarians in rural areas. Support for laboratory capacity
   improvement would be provided through: laboratory infrastructure improvement; equipment, material and
   consumables; training of laboratory staff; and development and implementation of a quality management
   system to access accreditation for specific tests.



                                                                                                                Page 2 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



1.2. Support for Livestock Infrastructure and Access to Services. This sub-component would support
the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock and Local Authorities to establish or rehabilitate essential livestock
infrastructure (e.g., Livestock Service Centers, markets, slaughter facilities, etc.) in agreed locations
subject to an Infrastructure Inventory and Needs Assessment. Management of such publicly-owned
infrastructure would be covered under a contractual arrangement with the private sector as appropriate.

1.3. Institutional Support to the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock. The sub-component would
strengthen staff capacity in the Ministry to carry out its core responsibilities, including extension and
advisory services, disease control, sector monitoring and evaluation, sector analysis, policy preparation
and implementation. Specific support would also be provided to develop and implement key policy options,
institutional reforms and review of the legislative framework to build an environment for sustainable growth
of the livestock sector. Other support would be for priority food safety issues including the joint
development and implementation of surveillance plans to monitor residues, brucellosis or salmonellosis.
Finally, the sub-component would support the operationalization of the national “Emergency Animal
Diseases Control Fund” (EADCF) established under the Animal Health Act.

2. Productive On-Farm Investments (appraisal estimate: US$18.45 million, actual cost: US$11.14
million). This component aimed to improve productivity of identified production systems through grant
support to on-farm investments. In the smallholder sector, the priority would be to introduce technologies
that reduce livestock mortality particularly in young stock, improve reproductive efficiency and enable
animals to quickly reach optimum slaughter weight. This component would comprise three grant windows
for: productive on-farm investments; transfer of technology in the area of pasture management/forage
development; and strengthening the role of producer associations to provide services to farmers. It
includes three sub-components:
2.1. Support for the Livestock Improvement Grant Facility. A Livestock Improvement Grant Facility
(LIGF) would be created to allow eligible smallholder producers (groups or cooperatives) and other
livestock industry stakeholders to establish productive livestock investment packages. These packages
would include essential infrastructure (e.g., communal cattle handling facilities, milk collection centers,
feedlots, grass fodder production methods, etc.), enhanced genetic merit livestock (e.g., grade dairy cattle,
pigs, goats), access to improved services (e.g.veterinary, Artificial Insemination, Community
Livestock/Animal Health Worker training), marketing and value addition activities.

2.2. Pasture Management and Forage Development. This sub-component would offer small grants to
specialized institutions (i.e., NGOs, training and research institutions) with successful track records of
introducing to small-scale farmers techniques and technologies that aim at increasing feed availability
during the dry season.

2.3. Strengthening Capacities of Non-Public Service Providers. This sub-component would co-finance
activities proposed by non-public service providers aimed specifically at increasing the representation of,
and services to, small-scale producers and emergent farmers by reinforcing advisory, advocacy and
information services to these beneficiaries. Eligible organizations would include but would not be limited to
the Poultry Association of Zambia (PAZ), the Dairy Association of Zambia (DAZ), the Beef/Cattle
Association and the Pigs Commodity Committee of the Zambian National Farmers Union (ZNFU).


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



   3. Project Management (appraisal estimate: US$5.40 million, actual cost: US$4.18 million). This
   component would support the establishment, operation, equipment provision and training of project
   coordination offices at both national and provincial levels, as well as the operational costs of the national
   Project Steering Committee (PSC) and the project's Technical Committee. The component would also
   finance: implementation and administration of the Livestock Improvement Grant Facility; M&E activities
   including regular impact evaluation studies and audits; management and oversight of safeguards issues;
   and preparation and implementation of a communication strategy.

   Revised Components. The design of the components remained the same, however, the scope of some
   activities was slightly revised.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

   Project Cost. The total cost of the project was estimated at appraisal to be US$64.75 million. The actual
   cost reported by the ICR Annex was US$45.64 million. The difference is due to the reporting of IDA
   financing only in the ICR without including other financing sources.

   Financing. The project was financed through a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) composed of an IDA
   Credit worth US$50.00 million equivalent. Actual disbursement reported by the ICR Annex 3 was
   US$45.64 million.

   Borrower Contribution. The borrower was expected to contribute US$9.89 million equivalent, primarily
   in the form of foregone taxes. Beneficiary co-financing, comprising mainly of the private sector, service
   providers and producers, was expected to contribute US$4.86 million equivalent (PAD, p. 9, para 29). The
   ICR did not report on the actual amounts contributed by the borrower or the beneficiaries.

   Dates. The project was approved on February 28, 2012 and it became effective five months later on July
   31, 2012 - one month later than the expected date in the PAD. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was carried
   out on June 8, 2015. The PAD did not provide a specific date for the MTR but stated that it "will be
   conducted no later than three years after the first disbursement (p. 68, para 65)." The project closed on
   June 30, 2018 as planned.
   The project was restructured twice. The first was a Level 2 restructuring on December 17, 2015, when the
   amount disbursed was US$20.99 million, in order to introduce changes to the Results Framework and
   components. The second was Level 1 restructuring on April 11, 2017, when the amount disbursed was
   US$31.67 million, in order to change the PDO, revise the components and corresponding targets in the
   Results Framework; and reallocate funds among Disbursement Categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



Rationale


Livestock in Zambia plays a key role in contributing to rural incomes, diversification of sources of earnings
and risk management related to household-level financial risks. Livestock is also an important asset to
counter drought and fluctuations in the exchange rate, consumer prices and employment in the mines. The
livestock sector is relatively under exploited, but recognized as an increasingly dynamic part of the
agricultural economy. Low productivity is the most important challenge faced by the livestock sector and is
a result of underinvestment, poor animal husbandry, poor animal nutrition and severe losses due to animal
diseases. Other factors responsible for low productivity include: inadequate infrastructure for livestock
production, processing and marketing; weak extension and advisory services; and weak or absent producer
organizations.

At project appraisal, the original objectives were in line with the Government's priorities for the livestock
sector. The Government's Fifth National Development Plan (FNDP, 2006-10) aimed to promote rural
investment and accelerate poverty reduction, among other things. The project was expected to directly
contribute to increased rural incomes, accelerated and shared growth and rural poverty reduction.
Objectives were in line with Zambia's Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program
(CAADP) Pillars I (Land and Water Management) and III (Food security and Hunger). Objectives were
also in line with the World Bank's new Africa Strategy (March 2011) Pillars I (Competitiveness and
Employment) and II (Vulnerability and Resilience). Objectives were also in line with the Bank's Country
Assistance Strategy for Zambia (CAS, 2008-2011) which aimed to support governance, transparency,
business environment and agriculture development; as well as to increase employment opportunities, and
reduce income risks in rural areas. Since the livestock sector contributes approximately 39% to rural
incomes, the project was expected to contribute to the key CAS objectives of accelerated and shared
growth and hence lead to a reduction of rural poverty.

At project completion, both the original and revised objectives were in line with the Government's priorities
for the livestock sector. They were also in line with the first objective of the Bank's Country Partnership
Framework (CPF FY18-21-under preparation) which aimed to create a conducive enabling environment for
sustainable, competitive and diversified agro-food production, with deepened access to local, domestic and
export markets. The CPF emphasized that the twin challenges facing Zambia are to unlock its full range of
agricultural potential and elevate the incomes of the rural poor. The livestock sector contributes over 30% of
the agriculture GDP and offers huge opportunities for income growth and diversification.

The original statement of objectives was broad and lacked a connection with higher level objectives that the
project sought to achieve (i.e., increasing rural incomes and reducing rural poverty). The statement of the
revised objectives was also broad as the project was expected to "contribute to the improvement of
livestock health and production". It also lacked a connection to higher level objectives as previously
mentioned for the original PDO statement. Finally, the PDO statement could have referred to marketing and
value chain development since both are critical elements of improving productivity.

On this basis, the relevance of objectives is rated substantial for both the original and revised objectives.


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 22
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)




       Rating
       Substantial

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     PDO: to improve the productivity of key livestock production systems for targeted female and male
     smallholder producers in selected areas of the Recipient's territory.

    Rationale

    Theory of Change. To raise the productivity of smallholder livestock production systems, the project would
    provide support through two main and parallel approaches. First, support would be provided at the level of
    quality and efficiency of public and private livestock services, and secondly, support would directly target
    farm level activities by improving smallholders’ and small-scale processors’ access to knowledge,
    technologies, improved inputs, breeds and housing. The project was to target selected species including
    cattle, small ruminants (sheep and goats), pigs and poultry for smallholder producers in Eastern, Southern
    and Western provinces and the Disease-Free Zone comprising Central, Lusaka and parts of Copperbelt
    provinces. While improving the quality and efficiency of services, as well as access to knowledge, would lead
    causally and directly to increased productivity, the project could have benefitted from activities geared to
    strengthen livestock value chains and livestock marketing.

    Outputs

    Livestock Services Provision


        •  573,000 cattle were vaccinated against FMD (out of a target of 600,000) in 8 campaigns (out of a target
        of 11). The percentage achieved was 96%.
        • A cumulative total of 9,999,424 village chickens were vaccinated against Newcastle disease out of a
        target of 13,763,310. However, the ICR (footnote#10, p. 44) explained that although quarterly vaccinations
        were required to maintain immunity, but the project only conducted bi-annual vaccinations. Also, accurate
        data was not possible for short cycle species such as village chickens.
        • 9 livestock infrastructure units were constructed compared to an original target of 185 and a revised
        target of 11. The ICR (p. 41) reported that the infrastructure was completed, but not officially handed over
        by the contractors to the Ministry.
        • Two food safety surveillance and monitoring plans were developed (against a target of 3). However,
        according to the ICR (p. 38) these plans were still in draft form and not implemented.


                                                                                                         Page 6 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



  •   One action plan for genetic resources was developed, but was not implemented.


Productive On-Farm Investments


  • 587 grants were awarded out of 1,125 applications received. The disbursement rate was 73% for LIGF;
  12% for Pasture and Forage Grant Facility; and 13% for Non-Public Service Providers Grant Facility.
  • The average sub-project outputs in terms of production compared to standard results in similar
  production systems were:
     • 10 porkers/baconers per female per year against a target of 16 to 18,
     • 278,000 broilers were produced per year against a target of 335,000,
     • 109 eggs were produced per layer per year against a target of 183.
     • However, the number of young goats, number of chicks and number of yearlings/steers per female
     per year could not be determined because the project's value was outside the confidence level. Also,
     the amount of milk produced per cow per day (liters/day) could not be determined because the project's
     value was outside the confidence level.


Outcome

The expected outcome under the original objective was improved productivity of key smallholder production
systems (cattle, small ruminants such as sheep and goats), pigs and poultry in selected areas covered by
the project. This was assessed through two main PDO Indicators (disease incidence in the project areas and
increase in livestock production in project areas). Direct project beneficiaries reached 322,990 compared to
a revised target of 390,000 (83% achievement rate).

As a result of project's support to livestock service provision, the prevalence of Newcastle disease in poultry
was expected to drop from a baseline of 60% to and an end of project target of 40%, Foot and Mouth
disease from a baseline of 10% to an end of project target of 7%; and Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia
from a baseline of 15% to and an end of project target of 10%. The ICR did not provide clear information on
the achievement of this indicator, but it stated (Annex 1) that the indicator was considered not achieved. The
project failed to respond to the a new strain of Foot and Mouth Disease that broke out in 2015 despite the
availability of control measures under the project. By project completion 6 districts were cleared from
Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia compared to an original target of 13 and a revised target of 6. The ICR
(Annex 1) noted that the revision was carried out at the ICR mission stage.

As a result of the project support to productive on-farm investments, livestock productivity was expected to
increase in project areas. The ICR (p. 16, para 46) stated that the "original proxy indicators (mortalities) for
productivity in chicken and goats were never monitored, then dropped during the first restructuring and
replaced by the increase in number of village chickens and goats which, later, were monitored only once


                                                                                                       Page 7 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



 before the second restructuring. Proxy indicators for pigs and dairy were also monitored only once during
 project implementation." The average number of village chickens per smallholder reached 30 compared to
 an end target of 14 and a baseline of 11; the average number of goats per smallholder household reached
 16 compared to a target of 8 and a baseline of 6; and the average number of reared pigs per smallholder
 household reached 11 compared to a target of 11 and a baseline of 5. However, milk produced per
 smallholder household reached 2.1 liters per day compared to a baseline of 6 and a target of 8 liters per
 day. The ICR (Annex 1) candidly criticized the accuracy of the reported figures. It stated that "number of
 animals owned by smallholder household cannot specifically be attributed to project activities". Also, the end
 of project data were from the draft Beneficiary Assessment in project areas, however, baseline and target
 values were based on the “Rural Agricultural Livelihoods Survey" (RALS) 2012 and 2015 data which
 provided provincial values. The end of project values of the indicators were already or mostly achieved when
 target values were determined. Finally, the matching grant facility under component 2 achieved only 49%
 of the potential sub-projects financed in the six years of the project, while the operationalization rate
 (successful implementation of sub-projects) was estimated at about 55%.

 Based on the information mentioned above, outcome is rated modest due to the absence of reliable data to
 assess the project's impact on productivity. The figures provided for productivity increments suffered from
 methodological issues and according to the ICR (p. 17, para 47) "cannot reliably measure project’s
 achievement" due to comparability issues, attributability of the indicators; and choice of target values." The
 project also failed to respond to a disease outbreak despite control measures. There were also attribution
 issues where according to the ICR (Annex 1) "the determining factors of the number of animals
 per smallholder household are broader than the ones on which the project intervened."


 Rating
 Modest
PHREVDELTBL
 PHINNERREVISEDTBL
 Objective 1 Revision 1
 Revised Objective

 PDO: to contribute to the improvement of livestock health of selected smallholder systems in targeted areas
 of the Recipient’s territory.

 Revised Rationale
 T
 heory of Change. The project was expected to strengthen the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock's key
 functions, specifically in the areas of animal diseases surveillance and control and expansion of vaccination
 coverage for four major diseases; improvements in veterinary infrastructure; and enhancement of
 competencies of the Veterinary Services. These activities were expected to contribute to improving animal
 health, significantly reduced animal mortality and morbidity and consequently increased production and
 productivity in livestock products. However, achieving these results hinged on the ability of the Ministry of
 Fisheries and Livestock's to sustainably support the project and provide adequate capacity and committed



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



staff at all levels to deal with implementation bottlenecks and timely decide on strategic course correction
actions. This proved challenging during implementation and resulted in implementation shortcomiongs.

Outputs

Livestock Services Provision

Same outputs as under the original Objective 1:


  • 573,000 cattle were vaccinated against FMD (out of a target of 600,000) in 8 campaigns (out of a target
  of 11). The percentage achieved was 96%.
  • A cumulative total of 9,999,424 village chickens were vaccinated against Newcastle disease out of a
  target of 13,763,310. However, the ICR (footnote#10, p. 44) explained that although quarterly vaccinations
  were required to maintain immunity, but the project only conducted bi-annual vaccinations. Also, accurate
  data was not possible for short cycle species such as village chickens.
  • 9 Livestock infrastructure units were constructed compared to an original target of 185 and a revised
  target of 11. The ICR (p. 41) reported that the infrastructure was completed, but not officially handed over
  by the contractors to the Ministry.
  • Two food safety surveillance and monitoring plans were developed (against a target of 3). However,
  according to the ICR (p. 38) these plans were still in draft form and not implemented.
  • One action plan for genetic resources was developed, but was not implemented.




Incremental outputs under the revised Objective 1:


  •  363,000 animals were immunized against East Coast Fever (ECF) although this disease was not
  formally monitored by the project. Immunization which was done on young calves between 3 and 18
  months, which offers protection to the animal for life.
  • The Emergency Animal Disease Control Fund--which the project funded, contributed to controlling the
  outbreak in the African Swine Fever (ASF) in the Lusaka area in 2013.


Outcome

The project's support to vaccination programs could possibly have contributed to lower animal mortality,
particularly these resulting from Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) and Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia
(CBPP). Between 2012 and 2015, cattle mortality rate declined, and the herd population reached 2.8 million
from a baseline of 2.1 million in 2012. That said, the ICR (p. 13, para 32) acknowledged that "reduction in
mortality as a proxy indicator for productivity improvement was not considered as an accurate measure of
progress." A reduction in mortality could result from better management practices in general, for example.

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 22
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)




             On the other hand, the project failed to establish a sustainable veterinary system for animal diseases
             surveillance and control. This was critical to improve animal health in Zambia (ICR p. 19, para 59) and
             contribute to sustainable gains in animal productivity. This is a significant shortcoming that warrants a
             modest rating to this outcome.


             Revised Rating
             Modest
             PHINNERREVISEDTBL
             Objective 1 Revision 2
             Revised Objective

             PDO: to contribute to the improvement of livestock production of selected smallholder systems in targeted
             areas of the Recipient’s territory.

             Revised Rationale

             Theory of Change. Same as original objective. While improving the quality and efficiency of services, as
             well as access to knowledge, would lead causally and directly to increased productivity, the project could
             have benefitted from activities geared to strengthen livestock value chains and livestock marketing.

             Outputs

             Outputs mentioned under the original objective pertain to this one as well.

             Outcome

             Outcome is rated negligible for the same reasons mentioned under the original objective. In addition, the
             failure of the project to complete and operationalize the Livestock Service Centers combined with the
             delayed implementation of sub-projects severely undermined the achievement of results and outcomes of
             the project. Specifically, farmer access to improved technologies and better animal breeds was
             hindered. This negatively impacted the achievement of the production and productivity outcomes. Finally, the
             ICR (p. 19, para 59) stated that: "the paucity of results data on one major PDO indicator combined with the
             frequent revisions of some indicators meant that tracking of some results was inconsistent." Evidence on
             achievement of results was generally weak or absent.



             Revised Rating
             Negligible

PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale



                                                                                                                 Page 10 of 22
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



The original objective was rated modest because of methodological data issues that made accurate assessment
of outcomes difficult. The project also failed to respond to a disease outbreak despite the presence of control
measures in place.

The revised objective included two objectives:

The achievement of PDO 1 ("to contribute to the improvement of livestock health of selected smallholder systems
in targeted areas of the Recipient’s territory") was rated modest because the project failed to establish a
sustainable veterinary system for animal diseases surveillance and control. This was critical to improve animal
health in Zambia (ICR p. 19, para 59) and contribute to sustainable gains in animal productivity.

The achievement of PDO2 ("to contribute to the improvement of livestock production of selected smallholder
systems in targeted areas of the Recipient’s territory") was rated negligible for the same reasons mentioned for
the original objective. In addition, the failure of the project to complete and operationalize the Livestock Service
Centers combined with the delayed implementation of sub-projects severely undermined the achievement of
results and outcomes of the project.

Efficacy before and after restructuring is rated modest.

Overall Efficacy is therefore rated modest.




Overall Efficacy Rating                                      Primary reason
Modest                                                       Low achievement

5. Efficiency


 Economic and Financial Efficiency

 ex ante

    • The economic and financial analysis (EFA) at appraisal did not provide an estimated rate of return for the
    project as a whole. The EFA estimated the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) on productive
    investments under the proposed matching grant scheme to range between 15% and 31%, with
    interventions that support livestock marketing expected to provide the greatest returns.
    • The estimated aggregate Internal Rate of Return (IRR) for productive investments was about 27%
    percent (excluding milk collection centers due to higher initial cost). This was higher than the opportunity
    cost of capital (estimated at 12%), making most of these investments economically viable.
    • Preliminary analysis of the impact of disease control in Zambia implies that improved health services
    translate into: (i) lower mortalities (between 1 and 5%) and calving rates at 60% compared to 50% over a 3


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



  year period; and (ii) increased live weight of animals of 36 tons and increased milk production of 26,000
  liters over 20 years, combined with a reversal of the downward trend in livestock numbers.


ex post


  • An ex-post EFA was prepared that accounted for the benefits arising from animal disease control and
  productive on-farm investments. Overall, the project results are an EIRR of 11% and a Net Present Value
  (NPV) of the additional benefits of US$0.9 million, at 6% discount rate and over seven years
  • The EIRR on activities under the first component was 14% and the net present value (NPV) of the
  additional benefits was US$1.5 million (at 6% discount rate and over seven years). However, the first
  component suffered from cost overruns, which lowered the overall profitability indicators. Specifically, the
  outputs envisioned at the design stage were accomplished with about twice the inputs (ICR, p. 20, para
  63).
  • For the productive on-farm investments, the sub-projects had EIRRs ranging between 20% and 40%. The
  NPV of the additional benefits (at 8% and over 10 years) ranged from US$ 1,732 per hectare of forage
  production to US$7,734 for layer chicken units. All sub-projects have cost-benefit ratios higher than one.
  • However, the slow implementation of matching grants resulted in overall negative economic results. The
  animal disease control activities were negatively impacted by the underperformance of the second
  component (ICR, p. 20. para 65).
  • A revised EFA was not carried out because the proposed changes would result in the project’s results
  falling within the range of the original break-even sensitivity analysis (ICR, p. 19, para 62). IEG disagrees
  with this assessment because post restructuring the project had two distinct PDOs therefore a revised EFA
  was warranted to provide a comprehensive assessment of the project's investments post restructuring.
  • Finally, the accuracy of the ex post EFA is questionable given the poor M&E data.




Administrative and Institutional efficiency

The project closed on time. However, it suffered from implementation delays, particularly for the matching
grants, which negatively impacted the achievement of outcomes. Disbursement of grants took two years from
the closing of applications to the disbursement of the first tranche, followed by another 3 to 6 months for the
disbursement of the second tranche (ICR, p. 21, para 73). There were procurement delays due to a slow
approval process that required approval from multiple layers of government. In addition, the roles of the
approval committees (Ministry Procurement Committee and Evaluation/Contracts Award Committee) were
unclear. The situation was exacerbated by capacity weaknesses, poor coordination and inadequate
knowledge of World Bank procurement procedures (ICR, p. 24, para 83). Procurement delays
negatively impacted the quality of M&E where critical studies such as the mid-term and end project
Beneficiary Assessments were not delivered on time.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



Based on the above mentioned information efficiency is rated negligible due to significantly higher
expenditure on activities under component 1, weak administrative efficiency, and low overall economic
internal rate of return (ex post EIRR at 11% at 6% discount rate versus ex ante at 27% at 12% discount rate).


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate
                                                          Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                   Available?
                                                                                   0
Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                   100.00
ICR Estimate                                             11.00
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


Before Restructuring. Relevance of objectives was rated substantial. Efficacy was rated modest due to the
absence of reliable data to assess the project's impact on productivity. The project also failed to respond to a
disease outbreak despite control measures; failed to establish a sustainable veterinary system; and fell short on
a number of targets, most notable being the matching grants. Efficiency was rated negligible due to weak
administrative efficiency, and low overall economic internal rate of return.

Based on the combination of Substantial relevance, Negligible efficacy and Negligible efficiency, outcome is
rated Unsatisfactory.

After Restructuring. Relevance of objectives was rated substantial. Overall efficacy rating was modest. While
the project showed some success in improving animal health through vaccinations, it failed to establish a
sustainable veterinary system for animal diseases surveillance and control--a critical requirement to
sustainably improve animal health in Zambia. Also, the failure to complete and operationalize the Livestock
Service Centers combined with the delayed implementation of sub-projects severely undermined the
achievement of results and outcomes of the project pertaining to improvement of livestock production. In
addition, the data on livestock improvement was unreliable. Efficiency was rated negligible due to weak
administrative efficiency, and low overall economic internal rate of return.

Based on the combination of Substantial relevance, Modest efficacy and Negligible efficiency, outcome is
rated Unsatisfactory.

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)




Weighted outcome. On balance the overall outcome is determined by the average of ratings before and after
restructuring (indicated by scores from 1 to 6), weighted by the disbursements before and after the
restructuring. This calculation is as follows: [(31.67*2)+(15.27*2)]/46.94 = 2. This result is equivalent to a rating
of Unsatisfactory.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


Risk to the Development outcome is affected by two main risks discussed by the ICR (pages 26& 27, paras 94
and 95):

First, there is a concern that the animal disease control activities for the four diseases (CBPP, FMD,
ECF and ND) covered under the project will not be sustained due to budget constraints. The failure to
sustain these activities could result in rolling back any gains achieved and possibly a costly relapse in the
diseases. To minimize this risk, funds need to be secured from internal and external sources to sustain the
project supported activities and minimize the risk of disease resurgence. A longer term solution should include
support from the government's budget combined with a cost recovery mechanism.

Second, there could be inadequate institutional capacity to support the investment packages under the
matching grant facility. The sustainability of sub-projects post completion is at risk due to weak capacity of the
recipients, coupled with the limited support from public services, and the low rate of operationalization at project
closing. Also, there is a high risk that the advisory services to matching grants recipients will not be sustained
because of operational budget constraints is high.

A third risk is added by IEG:

Third, there could be impacts of climate change on the availability of animal feed. If the country
experiences a shift in rain patterns or extended periods of drought as a result of climate change; this could
negatively impact animal productivity. Extended periods of drought could hinder the regeneration of natural
grazing areas and/or hinder smallholders ability to cultivate animal feed necessary to support their herds.

Based on the afore mentioned risks, the Risk to Development Outcome is rated High.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance



                                                                                                       Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)




a. Quality-at-Entry

    •  Project preparation took slightly over one year (October 2010 - December 2011). Preparation
    benefitted from six consecutive missions to the country and support from the Investment Center of FAO.
    • Design was complex with two main components and many sub-components. It benefitted from the
    evaluation of the Performance of the Veterinary Services that was recommended by the World
    Organization for Animal Health (OIE) and subsequent Gap analysis, which was conducted prior to
    project preparation where national priorities were identified. A number of lessons from previous
    operations in the agricultural sector were reflected in the design, most notable were: ensuring the
    sustainability of investments, ensuring linkages and building on in-country livestock initiatives, and
    establishing a solid M&E system.
    • However, design suffered from a number of weaknesses including: inadequate focus on productivity
    enhancing investments such as improved genetics and animal nutrition; weaknesses of the matching
    grant scheme design; and herd health at the farmer level including herd registration and herd
    management plans. Also, design restricted the application of matching grants to farmer groups or
    registered cooperatives only, while the demand at individual farmer level was left unmet. There were
    problematic implementation arrangements as the government systems suffered from weak capacity, and
    systemic issues (ICR, p. 15, para 37). Design also could have benefitted from ensuring strong support to
    producer organizations, strengthening the producers’ access to markets and promoting improved animal
    feeding practices, and thoroughly assessing data availability. Finally, design overestimated the
    Borrower's capacity to successfully implement the project, which was a key assumption for the project
    success at the design stage.
    • Seven risks were identified at the preparation stage including fiduciary risks, elite capture, inadequate
    infrastructure development, lack of experience in administering matching grants, poor coordination
    between central and district levels, among others. While mitigation measures were relevant,
    implementation challenges hindered the project from following through on agreed mitigation actions
    (ICR, p. 25, para 87). Also, the government failed to follow through on mitigation actions to address
    weakness in financial management despite being flagged as a high risk. A notable risk that was not
    identified at the preparation stage was the reliance on government staff for project implementation and
    its implications. The implementation of activities that deviated from the core functions of the Ministry of
    Fisheries and Livestock, such as matching grants, was challenging because it required specific skills and
    capacity not available at the ministry (ICR, p. 26, para 88).
    • M&E suffered from design and implementation weaknesses that impacted the final assessment of the
    project's outcomes (see section 9 for more details).
    • Base on the aforementioned information, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory due to
    design shortcomings, inadequate consideration of the risks associated with project implementation using
    country systems, and M&E weaknesses.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  The Bank carried out 11 supervision missions (including the MTR) during the project implementation period.
  According to the ICR (p. 26, para 90) the missions benefitted from a mix of skills including technical,
  fiduciary, safeguards and financial and procurement specialists. Also, external consultants from the
  Investment Center of the FAO were used as needed. The Bank and project team were flexible to restructure
  or revise indicators when it was necessary to facilitate implementation. However, solving implementation
  bottlenecks was not always successful since the project team did not proactively "implement relevant
  recommendations made during supervision missions (ICR, p. 26 para 91)." In a further communication, the
  project team noted that there was one country based TTL throughout implementation.

  The project's M&E could have benefitted from more support from the supervision team to ensure timely data
  collection and adequate revision of indicators. However, only five supervision missions that included M&E
  experts were conducted during the project’s life. The project suffered from the lack of M&E
  data, weaknesses in the matching grant facility and overoptimistic expectations of borrower capacity. Other
  than the two restructurings, which did not remedy the implementation weaknesses, it was not clear in the
  ICR what was done by supervision team and the Bank to address the project’s shortcomings.

  Based on the above mentioned information, quality of supervision is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

  With Quality at Entry and Quality of Supervision both rated Moderately Unsatisfactory, the overall rating of
  Bank Performance is Moderately Unsatisfactory.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

    • The PAD did not include an explicit theory of change. Nonetheless, the ICR (Annex 7) included one that
    show the pathways among between inputs, outputs, and the expected outcomes.
    • The Project Coordination Office (PCO) would be responsible for overall M&E and complying with agreed
    reporting requirements. The PCO would establish, host and maintain within the Ministry of Agriculture and



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



    Livestock (later changed to Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock), a project- specific Management Information
    System (MIS) and M&E framework.
    • The original PDO was to be assessed through three outcome indicators (reduction in the prevalence rate of
    ND, CBPP and FMD in the project areas, increase in livestock productivity in project areas, and direct project
    beneficiaries). The first two are clearly outcome indicators, however, the third only provides a count of
    beneficiaries. The first outcome indicator while directly linked to the PDO was difficult to interpret because
    measuring disease prevalence was done by serology (ICR, p. 13, para 32). For example, for CBPP the
    varying prevalence values at District levels were likely to indicate the continued present of the infection, but
    provided little guidance to causal relationships. In the case of FMD, it was not possible to differentiate
    between vaccinated animals and those exposed to natural infections, and a better indicator would be the
    number of outbreaks, and the response to such outbreaks (ICR, p. 13, para 32) . Finally, measuring ND was
    difficult and "lacked scientific basis" according to the ICR (p. 12, par 23). The second outcome indicator was
    linked to the PDO, however, using reduction in "mortality as a proxy indicator for productivity improvement
    was not an accurate measure of progress (ICR, p. 13, para 32). The PAD did not provide enough details on
    the third outcome indicator on direct beneficiaries and whether these were intended at design to be
    individuals or households (ICR, p. 23, para 76).
    • The Results Framework included twelve intermediate outcome indicators. Most of these lacked
    baselines. During restructurings (see below for more detail) some were revised to better align with activities
    while others were dropped because the cost would outweigh the benefit of collecting them (ICR, p. 23. para
    77).
    • Overall, the M&E design was weak given the shortcomings (mentioned above) that were associated with
    the three outcome indicators used. Also, intermediate outcome indicators required a number of revisions
    during implementation. Design could have benefitted from a clear understanding on livestock productivity,
    including how best to measure it, and what indicators to use.



b. M&E Implementation

    • Data collection was weak due to the absence of close supervision, inadequate operational funds, and
    inherent complexities with tracking data in the livestock sector (ICR, p. 23, para 78 and footnote#8). There
    were also systemic challenges associated with collecting livestock data and inherent limitations associated
    with using country systems.
    • Data on PDO indicators was only collected at mid-term and at end of the project; either through a regular
    government funded household survey or a project beneficiary assessment survey. However, there were
    data issues regarding timing, representativeness, capture and the robustness of baselines and targets.
    • The M&E system also lacked a comprehensive up-to-date database serving as a one-stop-shop to help
    monitor performance. M&E reports were submitted late from the provinces due to delayed submissions
    from the district staff.




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



    • While the project had a dedicated M&E specialist, there was no follow-up on M&E during the last six
    months of the project because the specialist moved to another employment. Finally, the Rural Agricultural
    Livelihood survey due by the end of the project was postponed.

  Restructuring and RF revisions.

    • The PDO, the two main outcome indicators and some sub-indicators were revised during the two project
    restructurings. Revision of the PDO was necessary because the achievement of the original PDO was
    unlikely due to implementation delays; limitations on the quality and availability of data on the main PDO
    outcome of productivity; and absence of data to analyze productivity by gender of the smallholder
    household head (ICR, p.13, para 32).
    • While restructuring marginally improved clarity and measurability of PDO indicators, it did not improve
    data capture, nor the robustness of baselines and targets. For example, the indicator on matching grants
    utilization was constrained by the absence of steady supervision and reliable data collection; and baselines
    and targets for CBPP included districts that were not covered by the project intervention.
    • Overall, the two project restructurings and the accompanying revisions to the PDO and RF indicators did
    not remedy the weaknesses in the M&E system. The project results were undermined by vague indicator
    definitions combined with methodological shortcomings.
    • Finally, the ICR (p. 24, para 79) concluded that the project did not provide "evidence of a functioning M&E
    system generating reliable data periodically."




c. M&E Utilization
  Annual reports were generated by the project, but were not used actively in shaping management
  decisions. The livestock sector management information system was not harmonized as
  envisioned. Reporting on the project’s activities and results were not done to actively monitor performance,
  but rather to satisfy reporting needs on implementation support missions or for annual reports (ICR, p. 24,
  para 80).
  According to the ICR (p. 24, para 81) the "project M&E system did not actively demonstrate potential for
  being a monitoring tool where data was being actively used for decision."

  Overall, design suffered from weaknesses, implementation was poor, and utilization was limited. Therefore,
  M&E quality is rated Negligible.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible


                                                                                                  Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

    • The project was categorized as a category B. It triggered five safeguard policies: Environmental
    Assessment OP/BP 4.01, Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04, Pest Management OP 4.09, Physical Cultural
    Resources OP/BP 4.11, and Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 (PAD, p. vii). The ICR (p. 24, para 82)
    mentioned only three safeguard policies (Environmental Assessment OP 4.01, Physical Cultural
    Resources OP 4.11 and Involuntary Resettlement OP4.12).
    • The project sought to improve the productivity of key livestock production systems for targeted
    smallholder producers in identified areas. The project activities might have negative impact on the
    biophysical environment. Also, there was a risk of potential wildlife/livestock conflicts in some parts of the
    project area; and there are cultural resources or sites having archaeological (prehistoric), paleontological,
    historical, religious and unique natural values.
    • The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock prepared an Environmental and Social Management
    Framework (ESMF), which provides a unified approach for the identification, assessment, and mitigation
    of potential negative impacts. The ESMF was reviewed and cleared by the Bank as well as by the Zambia
    Environmental Management Agency (ZEMA). The Ministry also prepared a Pest Management Plan
    (PMP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
    • According to the ICR (p. 24 para 82) a qualified safeguards expert was hired by the project to manage
    environmental and social activities and provide safeguard training for grant recipients to ensure
    compliance with Bank safeguards policies. The Bank and the Zambia Environmental Management
    Agency (ZEMA) reviewed and approved Environmental Project Briefs (EPBs) and Environmental and
    Social Management Plans (ESMPs) prepared for all sub-projects likely to pose negative environmental
    and social impacts. Also, sub-project areas were screened for possible physical impacts and the
    application of alternative designs for flagged sub-projects resulted in no physical impacts being recorded
    on the project. Livestock infrastructure construction was mostly undertaken on existing Government
    agricultural institutions and for communal projects, land was allocated by local chiefs.
    • The ICR (p. 24, para 82) stated that the project was in full compliance with OP/BP 4.12. However, no
    information was provided on the compliance with other safeguard policies.
    • In a further communication, the project team stated that the project was in full compliance with the
    Bank's safeguards policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial Management. Financial management was handled by a qualified and experienced accountant for the
  duration of the project. Arrangements were adequate throughout the life of the project and were compliant with
  the Bank’s policies and procedures (ICR, p. 25, para 84). Interim financial reports were prepared and submitted

                                                                                                    Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



  to the Bank on time except in the final year of the project when the reports were submitted late. Audit reports
  were prepared and submitted on time and were unqualified with no major financial management issues.
  However, the project at times experienced liquidity problems due to a delay in the flow of funds from the
  Ministry of Finance to the project's account. The ICR (p. 25, para 84) reported that this issue was resolved
  during implementation.

  Procurement. Procurement was challenging over the life of the project. It suffered from capacity weaknesses,
  high turnover of procurement staff, slow approval process for contracts, and inadequate knowledge of the
  Bank's procurement procedures. Procurement planning was also poor due to limited coordination between the
  procurement staff and the user department. This situation resulted in significant delays in the procurement of
  some goods such as vaccines. One contract for the purchase of motorcycles was cancelled because it was
  improperly awarded, however, another contract was approved which resulted in double the number of
  motorcycles purchased. Also, "a few works contracts were recommended for cancellation for failure to perform"
  (ICR, p. 25, para 83). Procurement delays affected timely delivery of critical studies such as the mid-term and
  end of project Beneficiary Assessment.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                         IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                    Efficacy was rated modest
                                                                                    before restructuring and
                              Moderately                                            modest after restructuring.
Outcome                                                   Unsatisfactory
                              Unsatisfactory                                        Efficiency was negligible.
                                                                                    Weighted outcome rating was
                                                                                    Unsatisfactory.
                              Moderately                  Moderately                QAE shortcomings and
Bank Performance
                              Satisfactory                Unsatisfactory            supervision weaknesses.
Quality of M&E                Negligible                  Negligible                ---
Quality of ICR                                            Substantial               ---

12. Lessons




                                                                                                     Page 20 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



The ICR included five lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of language:


  •  A multipronged approach and a balanced attention are needed to establish the basis for longer term
  and higher impacts on livestock production and productivity. Failure to address one aspect has the
  potential to seriously undermine parallel efforts. Animal health, feed, genetics, and herd management, need
  to be embraced simultaneously to achieve optimal results. Projects supporting livestock development
  should address the weakest elements and follow a balanced attention to the main drivers/constraints for
  livestock production and productivity. The project was strong in animal health, but weak in complementary
  investments to raise productivity.
  • Institutional strengthening takes time and a project should not rely too heavily on expected reforms
  to achieve certain results. Development and adoption of new policies and strategies, legal reforms or
  significant changes in a system, may be required to improve performance and compliance with standards
  and best practices over time. However, a typical project timeframe may not allow them to materialize fully, if
  at all, considering the many constraints outside the project’s control. Therefore, while efforts should be
  pursued to maintain and accelerate reforms where needed, projects should avoid including activities
  dependent upon such reforms.
  • To capture the project's achievements, the M&E system needs to include clear baselines and
  measurable indicators that are aligned with activities. It is important to ensure clarity upfront on indicator
  definitions and scope to avoid ambiguities and minimize mid-term revisions to indicators unless the scope of
  the project has changed. Baselines and targets need to be carefully thought through with a suggested
  footnote in each instance on source and justification for choices made. A separate practical and handy M&E
  indicator definition handbook including methodologies to capture indicators should be developed
  consultatively with the client as early as possible before or at the onset of implementation. It is also crucial to
  manage the potential conflict between well intentioned design and actual capacity for implementation (on the
  ground) to get M&E right.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


While the ICR is well written, thorough reporting was hindered by poor M&E, which was beyond the control of
the ICR. Coverage of project activities was selective with some areas receiving minimal coverage such as
provision of infrastructure for production, processing and marketing, improving extension systems,
and improved policies. This was possibly due to poor data and/or limited reporting. That said, the ICR was
candid about project shortcomings and clearly stated the critical assumptions-such as reliance on country


                                                                                                      Page 21 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Livestock Develop & Animal Health Prj (P122123)



systems for implementation, and their impact on implementation and achievement of outcomes. Discussion of
outcomes was undermined by the lack of evidence on the achievements of the project. Also, the causal links
in the theory of change lacked an analytical discussion. The ICR included a number of important lessons that
would be useful for designing future livestock projects within the country and regionally.




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                Page 22 of 22
