     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthen SSN - Results (P120913)



                                                                               Report Number : ICRR0021343

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P120913                                   Strengthen SSN - Results

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Moldova                                   Social Protection & Labor


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-50010                                30-Jun-2016                                         33,407,837.37

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Jun-2011                              31-Dec-2017

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          37,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           36,546,969.60                                               0.00

 Actual                                       33,407,837.37                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Anahit Aghumian            Judyth L. Twigg             Joy Behrens                    IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   The project development objective (PDO) was to improve the efficiency and equity of Moldova's social safety
   net through a fiscally sustainable expansion and strengthening of the Ajutor Social Program. The
   Financing Agreement and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) have the same wording for the PDO.




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthen SSN - Results (P120913)



   The original PDO was not modified during the project’s restructuring, and there were no substantive changes
   to outcome targets. One target was updated as a result of new census data, but this change did not affect
   the project's ambition or scope. A split evaluation is therefore not warranted.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                         PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   Component 1. Sustainable Expansion of Ajutor Social (AS) Benefits and Targeted Heating
   Allowances (appraisal US$31 million; actual International Development Association (IDA) US$28.49
   million). This component was to support the interim transitional costs of expanding the poverty-targeted
   means-tested AS Program and the accompanying Heating Allowances, and the consolidation of the
   entitlement-based categorical benefits (Nominative Compensation, NC). The NC program had provided
   discounts on payments for gas, electricity, heating, child and disability benefits, and community services
   through entitlements to certain categories of people (e.g. disabled, veterans, single pensioners, Chernobyl
   victims, etc.) regardless of their welfare status (PAD, p. 3). This component was designed as a results-
   based financing where disbursements were triggered by achievement of specific results formulated as
   disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) that included interim outcomes, outputs, and actions critical for
   achieving outcome targets.

   Component 2. Institutional Strengthening for Benefits Administration (appraisal US$6 million; actual
   IDA US$4.90 million). This component was to support measures to strengthen the basic architecture of the
   social safety net, with a focus on the AS program. These measures included mainstreaming the functions
   of program management, oversight, and controls, and supporting the institutional structure of the Ministry
   of Labor, Social Protection, and Family (MLSPF); strengthening institutional roles and capacities, operating
   processes, and systems; and sustaining a communications campaign to promote increased awareness of
   the program and of the need for reforms. This component followed standard World Bank procedures for
   investment lending.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

   Project cost and financing: This was a Specific Investment loan. The original IDA loan was US$37
   million. The actual disbursed amount was US$33.4 million. According to ICR, about 9 percent of the loan
   was not used. The unused part had been intended to cover part of the technical assistance (TA) and
   training that did not take place because the newly created executive agency for social assistance (Social

                                                                                                             Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthen SSN - Results (P120913)



   Assistance Agency) could not absorb it. This amount was cancelled at the third restructuring in January
   2017.

   Borrower Contribution: The Government of Moldova was to provide approximately US$245 million
   equivalent co-financing to the first component. Actual government support to the program during 2010-
   2016 was MDL 3,116 million, which is approximately US$183 million using the exchange rate at
   closing. This contribution is approximately equal to US$270 million, if the exchange rate at appraisal were
   to be used (as required by the ICR guidelines).

   Dates: The project became effective in October 2011, five months after its approval. It closed on
   December 31, 2017, 18 months after its original closing date of June 30, 2016. The project underwent
   three formal restructurings:


     • 1st restructuring (June 22, 2015) made changes in the list of DLIs and extended the closing date
     for one year, from June 30, 2016, to June 30, 2017.
     • 2nd restructuring (June 20, 2017) extended the project for another six months until December 31,
     2017. The government requested this restructuring to approve legislation on consolidating some of the
     categorical benefits that would allow the project to (partially) meet one of the key DLIs and thus trigger
     the disbursement attached to that DLI.
     • 3rd restructuring (January 9, 2017) cancelled the undisbursed portion of the credit.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  The project’s PDO to improve the efficiency and equity of Moldova's social safety net remains highly
  relevant to the country context and to the World Bank Group's country program. The policy changes that the
  project aimed to pursue were relevant at the time of project appraisal. Since 2008, the government had
  committed to improving its social assistance system. Before starting the reforms, Moldova had one of the
  lowest levels of targeting accuracy in the region. Although social protection spending was high, social
  assistance efforts were fragmented and inefficient. Coverage of social assistance was modest as well,
  despite high spending levels. The objectives remain highly relevant to this country context.

  The project was designed to build on an earlier Bank-supported program (Health Services and Social
  Assistance Project (HSSAP, 2007-2014, US$ 17 million) that had an objective to improve the targeting of
  social transfers. This project's objectives were highly aligned with Moldova’s FY18-21 Country Partnership
  Framework, Focus Area 2, "Service governance - improving efficiency, quality, and inclusive access to



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Strengthen SSN - Results (P120913)



       public services," and they were relevant to one of the seven strategic priorities in Moldova's National
       Development Strategy, Moldova 2020, to improve social insurance and pensions.



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     Improve the efficiency of Moldova’s social safety net

    Rationale

        • The project defined six outcome indicators grouped under three result areas to track progress towards
        the PDO: 1) Improved equity by increasing Ajutor Social Program coverage and maintaining targeting
        accuracy; 2) Increased allocative efficiency by reducing spending on categorical benefits; and 3)
        Enhanced administrative efficiency, governance, and transparency of the social assistance system.


    According to the PAD, the PDO was to be achieved by supporting the interim costs of expanding the AS
    program and consolidating other benefits (NCs). Both measures were needed for fiscal sustainability of the
    social safety net.

    The program specifically aimed to improve efficiency through increasing the allocative efficiency and
    administrative efficiency, governance and transparency of the Ajutor Social and Heating Allowance
    programs.

    Outputs

        • The Heating Allowance, as a top up to the AS, was put in place.
        • A social inspection agency was established in 2011 and is functional.
        • Service delivery standards and a business model for Social Assistance Departments (SADs) to carry
        out administration of the AS program at the local level were developed and approved in 2015.



    Intermediate outcomes

        •   Disability and other categorical benefits (NCs) were consolidated, with the exception of child benefits.


                                                                                                            Page 4 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Strengthen SSN - Results (P120913)



        •The ICR (p. 33) stated that M&E capacity related to social assistance policy was strengthened in the
        MLSPF, but little detail was provided on this point.



    Outcomes

        • Allocative efficiency. Spending on categorical benefits was reduced by 2013 to 32% of the pre-reform
        (2010) level, meeting the target. However, this progress reversed in the subsequent years due to changes
        in the government’s political commitment. This outcome was therefore only partially achieved.
        • Administrative efficiency. The turnaround time for processing AS applications, including verification and
        eligibility decisions, was significantly reduced from the baseline of 30 days to 9.1 days. This surpassed the
        targeted 15 days.
        • Losses from irregularities in AS benefits were reduced. The original target (30%) was replaced by data
        from the new Social Inspection agency that used different methodology. As a result, the final estimates of
        the improvement (79% reduction) were significantly higher than anticipated earlier. This target was fully
        met.
        • Program Awareness. The percentage of Moldovan citizens who are aware of the AS program increased
        from 78% in 2010 to 97% in 2017, surpassing the target of 93%.


    The ICR reported that the project succeeded in strengthening the administration of social benefits through
    implementation of number of technical assistance activities, training and information system modernization.
    However, it did not provide evidence on a large number of outputs and intermediate outcomes planned to
    achieve administrative efficiency. For example, it is unclear whether a functional review of the MLSPF was
    carried out to support restructuring of the entity, how management information systems were used to
    streamline AS benefits processing by SADs, or exactly how the rate of detected benefits irregularities
    improved over time. The ICR (p. 21) noted that there still is insufficient capacity to improve and sustain the
    information system supporting social benefits administration, which puts the systematic and efficient use of
    this system at risk.

    Given demonstrated improvements in turnaround time and decreased losses due to irregularities (including
    fraud), which were key for improving the Ajutor Social’s efficiency, achievement of this objective is rated
    Substantial.


    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

                                                                                                          Page 5 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Strengthen SSN - Results (P120913)




Improve the equity of Moldova’s safety net

Rationale

The project aimed to improve the equity of Moldova’s safety net by increasing coverage and maintaining
targeting accuracy of the Ajutor Social program.

Outputs


  • The number of households receiving AS benefits grew from 32,000 in 2011 to 54,839 at the end of 2017,
  very close to the adjusted target of 55,000.
  • The policy rule to periodically review the guaranteed minimum income eligibility threshold (to promote
  expansion of AS benefits coverage) was adopted.



Outcomes


  • Coverage of the AS program increased from 14.3% of the household in the poorest quintile of the
  population in 2010 to 26.8% at project closure, surpassing the target of 20%.
  • 77.3% of AS transfers reached the poorest population quintile in the final year of the project. This
  coverage of the poor remained above 70% throughout the project period.



Targets were reached or exceeded for the equity-related outcome indicators, but because of limited evidence
on some dimensions, achievement of this objective is rated Substantial. There are some caveats in the data
presented in the ICR. For example, it did not take into consideration the results of the previous project, which
had a similar coverage target. The Moldova Health Services and Social Assistance Project (HSSAP) project
that was closed in 2014 claimed an increase of households that benefited from AS at least once during the
lifetime of the project from 151 households in 2008 to 57,000 households in 2014. The ICR failed to
recognize the efforts of the HHSAP in initiating the AS reforms (with the exception of the role of the project in
establishing the MIS) and early results. It also did not provide evidence on whether the program
implemented a number of important measures envisaged to improve the design and uptake of the AS
program (PAD, p. 38), such as refining the eligibility criteria by updating the proxy formula, streamlining the
methodology for entering cadaster income, refining the program exit threshold, or establishing work
requirements to reduce AS dependency and work disincentives. Furthermore, while coverage and
targeting improved, an external evaluation of the program carried out in 2016 recommended number of
additional steps to improve the program’s targeting and coverage methodology. Finally, no
detailed information is provided on the communications campaign.



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 15
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Strengthen SSN - Results (P120913)




             Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

The project largely succeeded in helping the Moldovan government to improve the efficiency and equity of
Moldova’s safety net by contributing to consolidating small and inefficient NCs into the AS and Heating Allowance
programs. Spending on categorical benefits was reduced from 1.2 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in
2010 to 0.7 percent in 2016 and further to 0.5 percent in 2018, which should contribute to fiscal sustainability of
Moldova’s social safety net. Spending on both the AS and Heating Allowances programs represented 0.5% of
GDP in 2018. The program also succeeded in improving coverage of the poorest segments of the population and
significantly improved targeting accuracy, although the methodology for targeting and coverage requires further
improvements in order to have wider impact. There are also some caveats around results reporting, such
as missing data on a number of outputs and intermediate outcomes related to improving AS program
administration and governance. These shortcomings, however, did not prevent the project from achieving its
PDO.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

     5. Efficiency


            Economic Analysis

            Improving the efficiency of Moldova’s social safety net was one of the outcomes supported by the project, and
            therefore sector efficiency is discussed in Section 4. No full-fledged cost-benefit analysis was carried out in
            the PAD because the project had a large results-linked disbursements component, but the project’s
            Operations Manual indicated that the co-financing linked to each DLI was carefully costed by the
            project team. Rather, the efficiency analyses in both the PAD and the ICR focused on the broader impact of
            improving social safety nets on poverty. The PAD used 2010 Household Baseline Survey data to simulate
            the net impact of AS and Heating Allowance transfers on poverty (poverty headcount rate and poverty gap)
            and income inequality (Gini coefficient) for the years 2011 and 2012. The model predicted modest gains from
            the program that would grow over the years as the AS program expands. According to the simulated model,
            in the case of full household consumption of both transfers, the net impact on the poverty rate would have
            been 1.1% and inequality would have been reduced by 0.6 percentage points. Under a scenario of 50%
            consumption of the transfers, the simulated result was a 0.4% reduction in the poverty rate and 0.3-point
            reduction in income inequality. In 2012, with further expansion of the program, the model predicted a slightly

                                                                                                               Page 7 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthen SSN - Results (P120913)



higher net impact on poverty and inequality. The model did not take into consideration other factors, such as
pensions and remittances, that could have had an impact.

The ICR did not update the economic analysis carried out in the PAD. Rather, it drew on the findings of an
external evaluation of the AS program (2017) and updated Household Baseline Surveys. The evaluation
demonstrated that, compared to the pre-program period (2006), the AS and Heating Allowance benefits in
2016 were better targeted, had higher coverage of the poorest quintile of the population, and represented
about one third of household consumption levels for that decile (table 4.1, ICR, p. 47). However, while the
living conditions of the main beneficiary group improved as a result of those benefits, they were still
significantly lower than those of the average household. The overall improvements in poverty and lowering of
inequality cannot be attributed to this social assistance program. The 2016 Moldova Poverty Assessment
suggested that more of these gains may be associated with pension transfers and remittances (ICR, p. 20).

Design and implementation
Use of DLIs: The ICR did not discuss the impact of DLIs on the project’s internal efficiency. According to
the ICR (p. 12), a large number of DLIs was applied to provide more flexibility during implementation, through
creating options for disbursements based on smaller, discrete steps of the policy agenda. The ICR did not
reflect on the transaction cost of having so many indicators that were to be monitored so frequently. The
project TTL indicated that monitoring and reporting on DLIs has not been difficult. However, use of DLIs in
social protection is still relatively new area, and it would have been useful to get the borrower’s feedback on
the use and reporting of DLIs for the learning purposes.

The project experienced significant delays at the design and implementation stages. It became effective in
October 2011, five months after its approval rather than the standard 90 days. It was extended twice and
closed 18 months after its original closing date of June 30, 2016. The three formal restructurings did not add
any new outcome indicators/targets or additional financing. According to ICR, the extensions were largely
due to country-specific political circumstances: gaps in the authorizing environment on the government’s side
between elections, and the need to reconfirm commitments with a new government to accomplish the policy
actions that were critical to meeting the DLIs and subsequently the PDOs. The ICR (p. 21) also noted some
moderate administrative and communications problems during implementation due to the restructuring of the
Ministry of Social Protection and the Ministry of Health, Labor and Social Protection. The project lasted six
and half years instead of the planned five years while achieving the same planned objectives and targets. The
time and resources spent on the additional 18 months of project implementation and supervision suggest
some inefficiencies.



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Strengthen SSN - Results (P120913)



                                   Rate
                                                         Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                   Available?
                                                                                   0
Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


The objective to improve the efficiency and equity of Moldova's social safety net through a fiscally sustainable
expansion and strengthening of the Ajutor Social Program remains highly relevant. The AS program has
become the largest social assistance program in Moldova. The project largely succeeded in helping the
Moldovan government to improve the efficiency and equity of Moldova’s safety net, although its administration
and coverage/targeting methodology require further improvements in order to sustain results. Its efficacy is
rated Substantial. Project efficiency is rated Modest due to shortcomings in operational efficiency. These
ratings indicate moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation, leading to an Outcome
rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


The risk to sustaining the development outcomes is High. One of the two critical assumptions made in the
theory of change of the project -- that the government maintains policy and reform direction -- is not fully in
place (ICR, p. 7). First, the government of Moldova reversed its position on eliminating some of the categorical
benefits during the implementation of the project. There is a risk that the number of and spending on categorical
benefits may increase, especially with the country entering another election cycle in February
2019. Second, recently the government introduced elements (pro bono community works in exchange for
receiving AS assistance by the unemployed) that the Bank and an external evaluation found unnecessary
and detrimental to the credibility of the program. Both the ICR and the external evaluation suggested that the
risk of creating “dependency on benefits” is low, and such a move may not support the program's key purpose
of improving targeting and coverage. The borrower, however, insisted on maintaining the community work
precondition as a useful addition to the program.




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthen SSN - Results (P120913)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  Overall, the project was well prepared. The project was designed to pursue further the achievements of the
  predecessor project (HSSAP), which points to strong synergies between the two. The Bank team prepared
  a detailed Project Operations Manual to help with implementation, including measures to prevent possible
  misuse of funds. The objectives and key outcome indicators were clear and realistic. The potential risks to
  project’s development outcomes, such as weak political commitment, possible resistance to the proposed
  reforms, and low institutional capacity, were identified, and some measures to mitigate the risks were
  highlighted (i.e. firm commitment of the government at the time of the project appraisal, a communications
  campaign, and backing from the International Monetary Fund's stabilization program (PAD, p.24), and
  provision of technical support to improve institutional capacity). Nevertheless, the political sensitivity of
  such reforms and the risk of policy reversal seem to have been underestimated, and the proposed
  mitigation measures were not sufficient. By and large, reduction or removal of categorical benefits in post-
  socialist countries have been challenging even in relatively stable political environments, let alone in a
  context of very frequent government changes. Wavering political support ultimately had an impact on
  outcomes (retention of the child benefit, for example). Better prior analysis of the political economy of
  reforms in a politically uncertain environment, including learning from similar reform experiences in
  comparator countries on how the progress in reforms can be sustained, would have been helpful. In
  addition, better understanding of country capacity to administer large safety net programs and, in that
  context, seeking synergies with the Moldova e-Transformation project (2011-2016, US$ 20 million) could
  have been useful in strengthening the management information system as well as building local capacity.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  The Bank provided solid implementation support. The project was implemented in a period when the
  country was going through frequent political changes (i.e. seven government changes in less than two
  years over the 2014-2016 period). The Bank was proactive and responsive to client needs and demands.
  The project restructurings were used to effectively navigate through those challenges and make sure the
  project was implemented as planned. However, none of the Implementation Status Reports discussed the
  more fundamental question of how the results-based approach was working in a politically unstable
  environment, especially from 2014 to 2016 when the governance situation was particularly challenging.
  Clearly, the results-based approach did not prevent delays or policy reversals.

  During implementation, the Bank team could have been proactive in seeking collaboration with another
  ongoing project, Moldova e-Transformation. The objective of that project was to transform delivery of
  selected public services using information and communication technologies. Better synergies with that

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthen SSN - Results (P120913)



  project could have helped to mitigate one of the key weaknesses the ICR identified regarding government
  capacity to maintain the management information system for social support.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The PAD was clear on how the project activities were to contribute to each outcome indicator and constructed
  results chains for each results area, but not for the entire project. The Project Operations Manual provided
  detailed guidelines on the sources of data, data collection methods, and expected results in each results area
  for both the results-based and traditional financing components. The results framework, however, had too many
  indicators at the output and intermediate outcome levels. At the design stage, perhaps, the team could have
  been more selective in the choice of indicators. The MLSPF was responsible for the implementation of the
  project and data collection and used a management information system to monitor the performance of the AS
  and Heating Allowance programs.



b. M&E Implementation

  The M&E framework was implemented effectively, and most of the key data were collected and reported as
  planned, especially for the results-based component. Because disbursements required verified evidence of
  achievement of the DLIs, the MLSPF was required to comprehensively monitor and report the results. The
  Project Operational Manual detailed the protocols for data collection and certification of each DLI. An external
  evaluation also was conducted to provide evidence on the program’s effectiveness. To collect data on most of
  the outcome indicators, the project used the nationally representative Household Baseline Survey run by the
  National Statistics Bureau.

  The reporting on few indicators in the ICR was inconsistent with that in the PAD. For example, the PAD
  defined “spending on categorical benefits reduced by 30% of the pre-reform level of MDL771 bn in 2010,"
  which assumes that the baseline was the share of categorical benefits in the total package of social benefits.
  The ICR, however, reported on the share as a percentage of GDP. There might have been issues of validity
  or measurability of this indicator, but the ICR did not discuss this issue.




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthen SSN - Results (P120913)



  Data collection and reporting on outputs and intermediate outcomes under the technical assistance
  component (component 2), which was structured as traditional financing, was weak. While the Project
  Operations Manual provided details on how each of those indicators should be monitored, the ICR provided
  no or incomplete information on many of the intermediate outcome indicators related to administrative and
  governance efficiency listed in the PAD, such as the percentage of inspectorates that received training,
  strengthening of social assistance policy M&E capacity in the MLSPF, conducting of a communications
  campaign, or the share of SADs compliant with service delivery standards (PAD, Annex 2, pp. 40-
  42). Instead, the ICR provided the list of procured services and goods only.



c. M&E Utilization

  The team used monitoring and reporting on key indicators when supervising the project. As planned, DLIs
  were used to trigger disbursements, and the team proactively adjusted some of those DLIs to improve
  project implementation. To provide evidence on the achievement of outcomes, the team used data from the
  National Statistics Bureau, as noted above.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  There were no environmental issues related to this project, and no safeguard policies were triggered. At
  appraisal, the project was classified as environmental category C, requiring no environmental assessment.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  The ICR reported that both procurement and financial management of the project were adequate and followed
  World Bank requirements. These functions were carried out by the MLSPF, which was appropriately staffed.
  The team prepared detailed financial management plans for each component. There was a minor issue related
  to financial accounting software that was promptly corrected by the implementing agency.

  The Project Operations Manual had a detailed procurement management plan. Most procurement activities
  were funded under the technical assistance component. The procurement and contracting procedures and



                                                                                                Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthen SSN - Results (P120913)



  processes followed by the project were periodically reviewed by the World Bank and were found to be in
  compliance with the provisions of the Financing Agreement and applicable guidelines.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

  The ICR relied on the AS program evaluation to explore unintended impacts. The external evaluation found a
  strong and significant impact of the AS in reducing the sale of assets, which is a negative coping strategy
  whereby people are forced to sell assets to meet their basic needs, thus compromising their future ability to
  escape from poverty. Moreover, the qualitative interviews also suggest that the AS may have helped reduce
  child abandonment.



d. Other

  The project benefited the Roma population by targeting the poorest quantile of the population. According to
  ICR, the project also supported creation of a National Poverty Council as a platform to build consensus on
  social assistance reforms among various stakeholders, including representatives of civil society. The
  project's management information system investments strengthened the grievance redress mechanism to
  collect citizens’ feedback on social safety net performance.

  The project did not have any specific gender-related targets or objectives but collected gender-
  disaggregated data on recipients of the AS and Heating Allowance programs. The data showed that the
  percentage of women benefiting from both programs increased over the project period.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                      ICR                       IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                             Moderately               Moderately
Outcome                                                                          ---
                             Satisfactory             Satisfactory
                                                                                 The political sensitivity of
                                                                                 social assistance reforms in a
                                                                                 highly unstable political
                                                      Moderately                 environment was
Bank Performance             Satisfactory
                                                      Satisfactory               underestimated, and the
                                                                                 proposed mitigation measures
                                                                                 were insufficient, eventually
                                                                                 affecting the project outcome.
Quality of M&E               Substantial              Substantial                ---
Quality of ICR                                        Modest                     ---

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Strengthen SSN - Results (P120913)




12. Lessons


The ICR (p. 26) provided three lessons on the project and reiterated (in an annex) a number of important
technical lessons from the evaluation of the Ajutor Social program. This ICR review partially concurs with two of
those lessons and takes them one step further.


  • .Results -based financing allows flexibility to maintain implementation of social safety net reforms in the
  period of political change, but it cannot serve as a safeguard against major policy reversals that can alter the
  overall reform trajectory.
  • The sustainability of investment in management information systems requires high levels of capacity
  building. Better coordination and synergies between World Bank projects and implementing agencies can
  improve the likelihood of achieving and sustaining results.




13. Assessment Recommended?

Yes

Please explain


It may be worth to assess Moldova's social safety net programs two years after the closure of this project to
understand the extent to which the policy reforms have been resilient to forthcoming political changes in 2019.

Another useful undertaking could be to conduct a PPAR of SSN projects implemented in similar political
contexts, to learn lessons on how to better overcome the challenges in sustaining reform gains.




14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR was clear and followed guidelines. It usefully constructed an overall theory of change for the project,
using evidence from the evaluation of the AS program carried out by Oxford Policy Management in
2016. There were some shortcomings in the analysis, such as lack of discussion of how results under the
technical assistance component were achieved. In this respect, it is striking that two out of three project
lessons are coming from the area (administrative and governance efficiency) where the ICR provided the least
detailed evidence on achievement. The ICR could have gone further to explore more the results in this area
and why some of them did not materialize. In addition, the ICR was unnecessarily repetitive and did not define

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Strengthen SSN - Results (P120913)



some key concepts and terms (Nominative Compensation, categorical benefits, the Fund for Social Support of
the Population).

The ICR's conclusion that "using a combined investment and results-based instrument for financing medium
term social assistance reform was appropriate" (p. 26) was also not well supported, at least
in Moldova's politically unstable situation. To what extent did the use of DLIs, which aimed to provide
incentives for timely implementation, prove to be effective for pursuing policy change in a politically sensitive
area? From a reform perspective, there could be a downside to extending the implementation of policy
changes over such a long period of time in a country with frequent government changes. Slow implementation
may create “reform fatigue,” and frequent government changes may mean frequent staff turnover, lower
institutional memory, and less incentives to carry forward the policy changes started by the predecessor
government.

The self-evaluation of this project could have also benefited from a candid discussion of the impact of DLIs on
the project’s internal efficiency. Getting the borrower’s feedback on the use and reporting of DLIs may
have provided useful lessons on the transaction costs of having such a detailed M&E framework.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Modest




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 15
