     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Climate Adaptation and Water GEF (P127088)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0021537

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P127088                                     NI Climate Adaptation and Water GEF

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Nicaragua                                   Environment & Natural Resources


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-13410                                    30-Jun-2018                                          6,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Nov-2012                                 30-Jun-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             6,000,000.00                                     6,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              6,000,000.00                                     6,000,000.00

 Actual                                          6,000,000.00                                     6,000,000.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl              Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 5) and the Grant Agreement of December 4, 2012 (p.
   6) the objective of the project was “to enhance climate resilience of investments made in Nicaragua’s rural
   water supply sector in order to cope with: (i) increasing climate variability; (ii) expected adverse impacts of
   climate change in selected areas.”
   According to the project restructuring paper of May 27, 2016 (p.8) the objective of the project was revised “to
   pilot water resources protection and drinking water supply systems with an integrated and participatory
   approach in selected climate vulnerable communities in Nicaragua.”


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Climate Adaptation and Water GEF (P127088)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  27-May-2016
                                                           PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project included three components:
   Component 1: Pilot adaptation initiatives to enhance climate resilience in the selected
   municipalities (appraisal estimate US$3.6 million, actual US$3.6 million): This component was to
   support the integrated adaptation projects to be implemented in four pilot municipalities (Juigalpa, Murra,
   San Ramon and San Juan de Limay). Furthermore, this component was to finance demand- and supply-
   side measures to enhance climate resilience and improve the efficiency of water use by: i) supporting
   water harvesting, water storage, rehabilitation and construction of additional wells and aqueducts and the
   associated household connections, and the development of alternative water sources in drought-prone
   areas; ii) introducing approaches to strengthen the efficiency of water use and reduce climate vulnerability
   of drinking water supplies; and iii) investment in climate-resilient sanitation solutions (improved traditional
   latrines better adapted to climate extremes in areas where increased climate stress exacerbates pollution
   of water sources by latrines). Also, this component was to finance the protection of water sources and the
   use of economic instruments to strengthen water supplies’ resilience to climate variability and change.
   Activities were to support the strengthening of the implementation of watershed and water source
   protection measures by enhancing the resilience of water sources to climate change.
   Component 2: Coast wetland protection and reduction of vulnerability to sea level rise in the
   municipality of Corn Island (appraisal estimate US$0.9 million, actual US$0.83 million): This
   component was to support the environmental protection and climate change adaptation program through: i)
   the implementation of a Wetland Protection and Mangrove Restoration Program to reduce vulnerability to
   sea level rise; ii) establishment of an Environmental and Climate Change Monitoring Program including the
   monitoring of such parameters as precipitation and temperature, and (iii) development of an education
   program on adaptation to climate change and protection of the islands’ natural capacity to withstand
   climate pressures and protect its water sources.
   Furthermore, this component was to support the strengthening climate resilience of water supply and
   sanitation systems and water sources in Corn Islands through (i) implementation of a Groundwater Climate
   Resilience Program; (ii) technical assessments of groundwater aquifers’ hydrology and the additional
   pressures from climate variability and the rising sea level.
   Component 3: Institutional strengthening, project management and monitoring (appraisal estimate
   US$1.5 million, actual US$1.57 million): This component was to finance the strengthening of institutional

                                                                                                               Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Climate Adaptation and Water GEF (P127088)



   capacity and coordination mechanisms at national and municipal levels to facilitate the integration of
   climate change adaptation into Nicaragua’s water supply and sanitation and water resources management
   sectors. Also, this component was to support the creation of a climate change-water resources knowledge
   base, build institutional capacity for climate change adaptation, and support the Ministry of Environment
   and Natural Resources (MARENA) and the Emergency Social Investment Fund (FISE) to implement,
   manage, monitor and evaluate the pertinent parts of the project.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$6.0 million, actual cost was US$5.97 million.
   Financing: The project was to be financed by a US$6.0 million grant from the Special Climate Change
   Fund administered by the Global Environment Facility of which US$5.97 million disbursed.
   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was not to make any contributions.
   Dates: The project was restructured twice:

     •  On July 27, 2016, the project was restructured to : i) revise the objective of the project to reflect the
     pilot scale nature of the project that was to finance a number of diverse climate adaptation measures
     and supporting activities in the selected communities with differing socio-environmental conditions and
     in close collaboration with the beneficiary communities; ii) adjust the Results Framework to improve its
     overall presentation and consistency, the logical results chain between the revised PDO formulation
     and the PDO and intermediate results indicators, and the measurability of the project results;
     iii) change in components and costs; iv) change in legal covenants; v) change in institutional
     arrangement to include the National Forestry Development Fund (FONADEFO) as a cooperating
     agency in charge of the external field monitoring; and vi) change in financial management.
     • On February 28, 2018, the project was restructured to revise the Results Framework to better connect
     the progress made towards the achievement of the PDO with the Project’s logical results chain.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale
  According to the PAD (p. 1) Nicaragua was likely to achieve its MDG commitment to ensuring access to
  improved water sources and was making good progress on access to sanitation. However, Nicaragua was
  experiencing frequent water rationing, high system losses, lack of domestic metering, low collection rates,
  and poor water quality, particularly in rural areas. At the time of appraisal, the country also experienced
  great disparity in terms of urban and rural access to water (98 percent versus 68 percent respectively), and
  to sanitation (63 percent versus 37 percent). In order to address these challenges, the government of
  Nicaragua defined the increase of Nicaragua’s water supply and sanitation access, associated with better
  service quality, as one of the pillars of the country’s 2008-2012 National Development Plan. Also, the
  original and revised objectives of the project were aligned with the country’s 2010-2015 National

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            NI Climate Adaptation and Water GEF (P127088)



       Environmental Climate Change Strategy which included two strategic policy areas relevant for this project:
       i) environmental and natural resource protection policy, and ii) climate change policy. Improving water
       supply, sanitation access and service quality were an essential part of the Bank’s Country Partnership
       Strategy (CPS) 2008–2012. At project closing, the original and revised objectives of the project were in line
       with the Bank’s most recent CPS (FY18-22) which pillar III focuses on improving institutions for resilience
       and sustainability, and objective 6 which aims to improve natural resources management and reduced
       vulnerability to natural hazards.



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To enhance climate resilience of investments made in Nicaragua’s rural water supply sector in order to cope
     with increasing climate variability:

    Rationale
    The project’s theory of change connected the piloting of supply-and-demand-side interventions such as the
    construction and rehabilitation of rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) systems
    that incorporated climate change adaptation measures, the piloting of a compensation for environmental
    services (CES) mechanism to promote more-sustainable land use and the enhancing of coastal wetland
    protection and the reduction of vulnerability to sea-level rise in Corn Island with enhancing climate resilience
    in selected communities.
    Outputs:
    • An analysis of the climate change vulnerabilities with scenarios and water balance of the selected
    municipalities was conducted.
    • A guideline to develop and systematize the implementation of municipal plans for environmental protection
    in the face of climate change were developed.
    • A methodology to determine the vulnerability of water sources and delimitation of water recharge areas for
    the drinking water supply sector was developed.
    • A manual of technical procedures and management for the implementation of the compensation of the
    ecosystem services (CES) program was developed.

    Outcomes:
    • The CES program was launched and first payments were made to selected communities, achieving the
    target of 100% of selected communities benefiting from the program.
    • 270 farmers received Compensation for Environmental Services (CES) payments for participating in the
    program. This output did not have a target. 29% of beneficiaries participating in the program were women,
    not achieving the target of 35% of beneficiaries being female.

                                                                                                         Page 4 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Climate Adaptation and Water GEF (P127088)



 • The PDO indicator target of 1,250 beneficiaries with access to new or rehabilitated water supply systems,
 resulting from the implementation of the municipal climate change adaptation strategies was not achieved.
 • The PDO indicator target of a 20% increase in the value of water sources protection index was not
 achieved.
 • Four municipal plans for the protection of families to cope with climate change of the selected
 municipalities (San Juan de Limay, Juigalpa, San Ramon, and Murra) were developed and, a water
 resources policy including a climate change adaptation dimension was prepared by the National Water
 Authority (ANA). However, the target of 13 frameworks, policies and investment tools/instruments was not
 achieved.



 Rating
 Modest
PHREVDELTBL
 PHINNERREVISEDTBL
 Objective 1 Revision 1
 Revised Objective
 To pilot water resources protection with an integrated and participatory approach:

 Revised Rationale
 Outputs:
 • 700 technicians of key public institutions were trained in the area of water resources and climate change,
 surpassing the target of 300 technicians. 43% of the technicians were female, surpassing the target of 40%
 being female.
 • Implementation of the first economic compensation for ecosystem services (CES) program for the
 protection of critical water sources in climate-vulnerable rural communities. This output was measured
 through the application of water source protection index which was developed under the project. The index
 aimed to measure the implementation of climate change adaptation measures and better land use practices
 (reforestation, natural regeneration, installment of vegetation backfire buffer strips etc.) to protect water
 sources by farmers. 59 drinking water supply sources and their recharge areas were protected, surpassing
 the target of 56 drinking water supply sources.
 • Ten tools to incorporate climate change adaptation in water and sanitation investments were developed by
 MARENA and FISE, achieving the target. These tools included for example a technical manual to protect
 water sources with climate change adaptation approach, a methodology to delimit water recharge areas in
 the drinking water supply sector, guidelines of good practices for wetlands protection with a focus on climate
 change.
 • All seven WASH systems were constructed in the selected communities, achieving the target of all WASH
 systems being constructed.
 • 3,028 hectares of land were conserved, reforested, and restored to increase protection water sources of
 the selected vulnerable communities, surpassing the target of 3,000 hectares. The land conserved included:
 i) adaptation measures during the construction of the WAS systems (195 hectares); ii) implementation of the
 CES program (2.496 hectares); iii) wetlands protection in Corn Island (26.6 hectares); and iv) spillover
 protection by the CES program (311 hectares). This indicator was added during the 2018 restructuring.


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            NI Climate Adaptation and Water GEF (P127088)



    • Technical studies on hydrology and a risk assessment on climate change were carried out in sub-project
    areas. This output did not have a target.
    • A Climate Information Module for water and climate change was integrated into the National Water
    Resources Information System (SiAGUA) and ANA, achieving the target.
    • Three weather and oceanographic monitoring stations were established and are functioning in Corn
    Island, surpassing the target of two stations. Also, an index for wetland protection was developed to increase
    the protection of recharge areas of aquifiers to support the adaptation capacity of water supply in Corn
    Island. These outputs did not have a target.




    Outcomes:
    • The value of the water source protection index in water recharge areas of selected climate-vulnerable
    communities that benefit of a CES program supported by the project was 85,045, surpassing the target of
    73,241. The water source protection index measures the protection achieved of selected water recharge
    areas of the water supply sources of selected 35 climate vulnerable communities using different scores and
    criteria such as slope, vegetation cover, vulnerability. This indicator was revised during the 2018
    restructuring.
    • All vulnerable communities coordinated and organized water community groups for future management
    and operation of the drinking water systems and to protect water resources, achieving the target of all
    communities.


    Revised Rating
    Substantial
PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     To enhance climate resilience of investments made in Nicaragua’s rural water supply sector in order to cope
     with expected adverse impacts of climate change in selected areas:

    Rationale
    Outputs:
    • A hydrological study on the availability of water resources for human consumption in communities
    vulnerable to climate change in the selected communities was conducted. The study was to inform the
    design of future WASH investments. This output did not have a target.
    • Hydrological and hydrogeological studies on the risks and vulnerabilities of the water resources of Corn
    Islands were conducted. These studies were to inform the design of the pilot intervention in the recharge
    areas of Corn Island. These outputs did not have a target.
    • 1,553 people were trained on climate change and adaptation to cope with the expected adverse impacts
    of climate change in the selected communities, surpassing the target of 500 people.
    Outcomes:


                                                                                                       Page 6 of 15
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  NI Climate Adaptation and Water GEF (P127088)



             • The first climate (rainfall) monitoring system in Corn Island and a climate change education program was
             implemented, achieving the target.




             Rating
      Modest
     PHREVDELTBL
             PHINNERREVISEDTBL
             Objective 2 Revision 1
             Revised Objective
             To pilot drinking water supply systems with an integrated and participatory approach:

             Revised Rationale
             Outputs:
             • Access to improved water sources with adaptation measures to 338 households were provided, reaching
             1,786 people (including 821 females), not achieving the original target of 4,500 people but surpassing the
             revised target of 1,329 people.
             • The construction of seven WASH systems in the defined communities was achieved, achieving the
             target. This indicator was revised during the 2018 restructuring. Constructions included seven water supply
             systems from sub-terranea or superficial water resources, 87 household connections to drinking water
             systems, 51 public water outposts, 45 rainfall harvesting systems, 345 sanitation units, and 347 hand
             washing stations.
             • The country’s first pilot on artificial groundwater recharge in Corn Island was completed.
             • All vulnerable communities were able to manage and operate the delivered WASH systems and protect
             water resources, achieving the target of all vulnerable communities being able to do so. Seven CAPS (water
             supply, sanitation and hygiene committees) were created and complied with existing legislation for water
             resource protection activities and were to be responsible for operation & maintenance of the WASH
             community systems.
             Outcomes:
             • Policy and operational tools were developed to incorporate climate change adaptation in WSS sector by
             MARENA, FISE, and ANA.
             • 25,929 people benefited from the project (among which were 50% female), surpassing the target of 23,801
             project beneficiaries.




             Revised Rating
             Substantial

PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale
Achievement of the original PDO was modest while achievement of the revised PDO was Substantial.


                                                                                                              Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NI Climate Adaptation and Water GEF (P127088)




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

5. Efficiency

 Economic Efficiency:
 The PAD (p. 14) did not conduct a traditional economic analysis. The PAD stated that specific communities to
 benefit from project investments had not been identified, and technical assessments had not been conducted
 to estimate the costs of activities to be implemented under component 1 (which counted for 80 percent of
 investment costs and 60 percent of its total costs). Therefore, no ex-ante economic evaluation of component
 1 was undertaken at the time of appraisal. For component 2 (which counted for 20 percent of project
 investment costs and 15 percent of its total estimated costs at appraisal) the PAD (p.72) conducted an
 evaluation of alternative design to identify the most cost-effective options.
 The ICR (p. 50 – 61) conducted a cost-benefit analysis. The costs were defined as the actual financial project
 costs discounted by six percent (US$ 4.7 million). Realized investment costs for components 1 and 2 were
 estimated at US$3.12 million. A Net Present Value (NPV) of US$3.1 million and an Internal Rate of Return
 (IRR) of 14 percent was estimated for the investments made under component 1 and 2. For the entire project
 a NPV of US$0.7 million and an IRR of 7 percent was estimated indicating that the project was a worthwhile
 investment.
 Operational Efficiency:
 According to the ICR (p. 50) the project implementation of component 2 was slightly more efficient than
 originally planned (US$0.83 million instead of US$0.90 million) and component 3 was slightly costlier
 (US$1.57 million instead of US$1.5 million) than originally planned. However, the target numbers of
 communities to be benefitted under sub-component 1.1 had to be reduced (from 15 to seven pilot
 communities) during the project restructuring in July 2016 due to initial implementation delays and higher than
 originally estimated costs of the community drinking water systems. Even though the revised activities under
 component 1 were completed by the original loan closing date, delays negatively impacted project
 implementation. For example, the ICR stated (p. 51) that after four years of project implementation the
 designs for the community water supply systems still had not been completed. In addition, CES payments for
 participating farmers were not made until modifications were made.



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate
                                                         Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                   Available?


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NI Climate Adaptation and Water GEF (P127088)



                                                                                   0
Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome

The relevance of the original objective was High given its relevance to the Bank’s most recent Country
Partnership Strategy. The achievement of the original PDO and efficiency was Modest, resulting in a
Moderately Unsatisfactory rating.

The relevance of the revised objective was High. The achievement of the revised PDO was Substantial and
efficiency was Modest resulting in an overall outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.
According to the IEG/OPCS guidelines, when a project’s objectives are revised, the final outcome is determined
by the weight of Bank disbursements under the set of objectives (48.3% under the original objective, and 51.7%
under the revised objective).
Under the original objective, the outcome rating is Moderately Unsatisfactory (3) with a weight of 1.44 (3 x 48%).
Under the revised objectives, the outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory (4) with a weight value of 2.08 (4 x
52%).
These add up to a value of 3.52 (rounded to 4), which corresponds to a Moderately Satisfactory rating.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The sustainability of the outcomes achieved under the project faces several risks. First, the ICR (p. 27) stated
that the national budget currently does not provide any funding for the continuity for the CES program. Even
though the Bank has been supporting the government in the development of a REDD+ strategy, which, once
approved, will provide payments for emissions reduction from forest degradation and deforestation and also has
been preparing a project which will include similar payments for ecosystem services program to protect first
land in the Caribbean region, no long-term financing is ensured. Also, the Bank is supporting the Sustainable
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project (PROASAR) which includes activities to address climate
risk. In addition, a proposal to finance 10 water supply, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) pilots with climate
change adaptation measures is being discussed.
Second, the project faced political challenges. According to the ICR (p. 27) during the last five months of
project implementation MARENA’s authorities changed and a high staff turnover, especially staff working under
the project on climate change, procurement, and financial management areas took place. Also, since March
2018 the country experienced on the national level a political turmoil negatively impacting the implementation of

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NI Climate Adaptation and Water GEF (P127088)



the project’s civil works activities, payments to CES program beneficiaries, and the conclusion of activities on
Corn Island. And third, despite FISE continuing to invest in water supply to poor communities, it has been
hesitant to include climate change aspects in its project design.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (p. 19), the project design was built on studies on water resources, lake health, and
  pollution which were conducted by the government with the support of the Bank during 2010 and 2011.
  The ICR (p. 25) stated that the project’s integrated approach remained relevant throughout
  implementation. Also, the Bank team elaborated on the operational manual during project preparation. Due
  to the limited financial funding available, the project identified priority municipalities through
  hydrogeological studies. The project was linked to ongoing Bank operations such as the Nicaragua Rural
  Water Supply and Sanitation Project (PRASNICA). However, the ICR (p. 19) stated that due to timing
  issues, the two projects became delinked throughout implementation. The Bank identified relevant risk
  factors such as inter-institutional coordination as High since the three different agencies, FISE, MARENA
  and ANA had never worked together on a Bank project and had different capacities and experiences in
  implementing climate change measures and the Bank’s safeguards. According to the Bank team (January
  23, 2019) mitigation measures included the provision of safeguard training, technical assistance and close
  supervision by the Bank team and the Ministry of Finance’s steering committee. A Steering committee was
  established to improve cooperation between the different agencies.
  However, the project also experienced significant shortcomings during preparation. First, the original PDO
  was too broad for only piloting investment activities and given the limited financial resources available and
  weak institutional capacity. Second, the costs for investment sub-projects were underestimated due to the
  lack of knowledge of the pilot communities and their water supply needs. Third, the method to determine
  payments for the Compensation for Environmental Services (CES) was too complex. Fourth, the need for
  more technical studies, such as a study on the availability and vulnerability of water resources on Corn
  Island had not been sufficiently taken into account. And fifth, when project implementation started, the
  project was only partially ready since the pilot communities had not been identified.
  The Results Framework also had several shortcomings (see section 9a for more details). According to the
  ICR (p. 19) target for the number of communities to be benefitted under subcomponent 1.1 was inaccurate
  since it was based on inadequate information in regards to the average cost of such systems.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  According to the ICR (p. 26) the Bank conducted regular supervision missions throughout project
  implementation. The Bank ensured a smooth transition between the five different Task Team Leaders
  (TTLs). The ICR (p. 26) stated that the Bank provided especially close support to the implementing
  agencies during the last one and a half years of implementation resulting in the completion of all project

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Climate Adaptation and Water GEF (P127088)



  activities despite challenging political times. According to the ICR (p. 26) the Bank’s supervision reporting
  was candid and the project benefited from a strong collaboration between the Global Practice and the
  Country Management Unit. The ICR (p. 20) stated that the Bank developed action plans with the Borrower
  to support project implementation.
  The Bank team restructured the project twice to make the PDO more precise and measurable and to revise
  the Results Framework to better capture project outputs and outcomes.
  However, according to the ICR (p. 20) the Bank did not provide timely technical support to address the
  delays on the payments of the CES program. Also, the Bank did not sufficiently support the borrower in
  regards to several technical studies which were prepared before the preparation and development of the
  Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) investments which were lengthy and resulted in delays in
  project implementation.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The project’s M&E system was to utilize the existing systems in the FISE and MARENA to monitor investments
  in rural water supply and sanitation infrastructure and indicators related to Municipal Climate Change
  Adaptation Plans and Strategies. The project was to conduct an impact evaluation including a baseline survey
  and periodic follow-up surveys in a sample of participating communities together with a control group for the
  activities implemented under sub-component 1.2.
  The extent to how the key activities and outputs were to lead to the intended outcomes was sound and
  reflected in the results framework. However, the objective of the project was not clearly specified and had to be
  revised during a project restructuring. Also, the selected indicators did not encompass the outcomes of the
  PDO statement well and also had to be revised during the restructuring. None of the PDO indicators or
  intermediate outcome indicators had a baseline.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project’s Results Framework was revised during the project restructurings in 2016 and 2018 to revise the
  PDO to reflect the pilot scale nature of the project and to adjust and improve the logical results chain between
  the revised PDO formulation and the PDO and intermediate results indicators, and the measurability of the
  project results. According to the ICR (p. 22) the indicators were monitored on a regular basis and the manuals
  and tools developed created transparent methodologies and clear processes for identifying vulnerable
  communities. This helped to identify in which area project interventions should be intensified.


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Climate Adaptation and Water GEF (P127088)



  During project intervention the M&E system was modified to include the National Forestry Development Fund
  (FONADEFO) as the responsible institution for on-the-ground monitoring of activities which were
  implemented under sub-component 1.2. The planned impact evaluation for this component consulted a
  sample of program participants (10%). The ICR (p. 22) stated that the results confirmed the benefits of the
  project in the selected communities.
  The ICR (p. 22) stated that through project support a module for the National Water Resources Information
  System (SiAGUA) was developed and implemented to define relevant indicators for the National Water
  Authority (ANA) to perform its responsibility for water resource regulation. At project closing ANA was
  incorporating information from different agencies (municipalities, MARENA, Nicaraguan Institute for Territorial
  Studies (INETER), MINSA, etc.) into its M&E system. ANA also assessed the quality of water resources in
  Corn Islands.
  Beneficiaries were involved in the M&E activities through meetings with FISE, MARENA, and ANA and local
  communities to discuss implementation progress or delays. According to the Bank team (January 23, 2019)
  M&E data was of good quality. The Bank also sent engineers to check on the sites to ensure that reporting
  and progress was accurate.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project used M&E results to inform decision making. For example, according to the ICR (p. 22) the
  project used findings from studies such as the inventory of water resources and hydrogeological studies to
  guide the design of project activities. Also, the results of the analyses of water quality on Corn Islands were
  used to guide implementation such as the decision not to connect the sources of water to the drinking water
  system.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
  (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP/BP 4.36 (Forests), OP/BP 4.09 (Pest
  Management), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous People), OP/BP 4.12
  (Involuntary Resettlement), and OP/BP 7.50 (Projects on Waterways). According to the ICR (p. 24) the
  project complied with all social and environmental safeguards. An environmental and social management
  framework (ESMF) within the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) was developed during project preparation
  and supported implementation. A permanent environmental specialist monitored, and supervised project
  construction works and forest, farm and wetland interventions. The Bank team provided support in regards
  to mangrove restoration and management of construction sites as well as training staff of the Emergency
  Social Investment Fund (FISE).



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Climate Adaptation and Water GEF (P127088)



  During project preparation the team also prepared a resettlement plan for the resettlement of 10 families
  living within the wetlands recharge areas. A full-time social specialist within the PIU oversaw the project’s
  compliance with national legislation and Bank policies. In addition, 10 social development specialists were
  hired to support project activities such as community consultations, CAP formation of Water Supply and
  Sanitation Committees (CAPs), and dissemination of water, hygiene, and water resource protection
  measures.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:
  MARENA was responsible for consolidating the project’s financial management. In order to fulfill its role,
  MARENA hired a financial management specialist, accountants and trained key staff. According to the ICR (p.
  25) the project generally had adequate financial management arrangements which were complied with
  throughout most of the implementation period. However, the project’s financial management experienced
  several challenges. For about five months MARENA’s experienced a high rotation of financial management
  staff, financial management units experienced delays in issuing financial statements, bank reconciliations, and
  statement of expenses to the Bank, as well as submitting external audit reports. MARENA and FISE worked
  together to address these issues. Furthermore, the ICR (p. 25) stated that most audit reports were unqualified
  and no internal control issues were identified. The financial management rating ranged from Moderately
  Unsatisfactory to Moderately Satisfactory throughout project implementation and remained at Moderately
  Satisfactory at project closing.
  Procurement:
  According to the ICR (p. 24) the procurement divisions of FISE and MARENA implemented adequate
  procurement arrangements and plans throughout the project period. Also, standard procurement activities
  were carried out on a routine basis. FISE hired two additional procurement analysts and MARENA contracted a
  qualified procurement specialist. However, the project experienced procurement related delays despite the
  divisions being familiar with Bank procedures due to insufficient capacity, a heavy work load, and complexity of
  procurement procedures in regards to the consultant selection process for the designs of the community water
  systems. The ICR (p. 25) stated that these issues were addressed by reorganizing FISE’s procurement
  division, completing an independent review, and the Bank providing additional training.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  NA



d. Other
   ---




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NI Climate Adaptation and Water GEF (P127088)



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                       IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately               Moderately
Outcome                                                                            ---
                               Satisfactory             Satisfactory
                               Moderately               Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                   ---
                               Satisfactory             Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Substantial              Substantial                ---
Quality of ICR                                          Substantial                ---

12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 27-28) provided several lessons learned which were adapted by IEG:

  • Including stakeholders on all various levels is critical for building stronger capacity. In this project,
  MARENA and FISE involved municipalities, community organizations, and beneficiaries throughout project
  implementation through holding workshops, sharing information, and providing training. This resulted in
  being able to build strong adaptation capacity and resilience on the rural, municipal, and national levels.
  • Putting in place a strong financial management system is especially important for projects that
  include more than one implementing agency. This project faced several financial management issues
  that had been undetected. Once the Bank identified these issues and provided close supervision to address
  them, important lessons learned were derived which were helpful for project management and Bank
  supervision during the final year of project implementation.
  • Being able to adapt a project’s approach is critical for a successful project implementation. In this
  project, the government and the Bank adapted the methodology for the CED program which helped to
  activate payments to participating farmers allowing for an on-schedule, on-budget and more sustainable
  implementation of the community sub-projects.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a good overview of project preparation and implementation and included an adequate
economic analysis. However, the ICR was output driven rather than outcome driven and did not provide
targets for all outputs. Also, the ICR was internally inconsistent in some places. For example, in paragraph 66
it stated first that the procurement divisions were adequately staffed. However, a few sentences later it stated
that the project experienced procurement delays due to insufficient capacity. In addition, the ICR did not


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Climate Adaptation and Water GEF (P127088)



explain what happened to the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.10 and OP/BP 7.50 which were triggered in
the PAD but not mentioned in the ICR. Also, with 28 pages the ICR is lengthy.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                             Page 15 of 15
