     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AFAAS Second MDTF (P143367)



                                                                               Report Number : ICRR0021500

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P143367                                  AFAAS Second MDTF

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Africa                                   Agriculture


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-15730                                31-Dec-2017                                           5,536,881.00

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Aug-2013                             30-Jun-2018

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           5,540,000.00                                    5,540,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            5,536,881.00                                    5,536,881.00

 Actual                                        5,536,881.00                                    5,536,881.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl            John R. Eriksson             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 15) and the Grant Agreement of October 31, 2013 (p.
   5) the objective of the project was “to reform and strengthen Agricultural Advisory Services (AAS) in
   accordance with FAAP principles towards increasing agricultural productivity and food security.”
   On December 18, 2017 the project’s objective was revised to “support and strengthen Agricultural Advisory
   Services (AAS) in accordance with the Framework for African Agricultural Productivity (FAAP) principles”.




                                                                                                Page 1 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AFAAS Second MDTF (P143367)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  18-Dec-2017
                                                         PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included two components:
   Component 1: Support to Country Agricultural Advisory Services (AAS) for Engagement in
   Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Advisory Services (CAADP) Pillar IV (appraisal estimate
   US$10.5 million, actual US$4.64 million): This component was to finance the support of all AAS
   stakeholders, both public and private, guided by the FAAP principles, in their engagement in the
   implementation of CAADP Pillar IV in their various countries. This component was to finance the
   establishment and strengthening of country fora aimed at supporting AAS stakeholders at the country
   level. This component was to also support the regional and continental collaboration in AAS by supporting
   the establishment of the infrastructure and mechanisms to enable AAS actors to network for sharing
   experiences, finding solutions for everyday problems, accessing global knowledge hubs and facilitating
   collective innovation in AAS delivery.
   AFAAS’ membership included 40 North African and Sub-Saharan African countries. Existing Country Fora
   include Benin, Malawi, Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda and Sierra Leone and they were amongst the initial
   countries to be supported. Country For a are country-specific multi-stakeholder entities comprised of public
   and private individuals and organizations active in the Agricultural Extension and Advisory Services
   (AEAS) space within countries.
   Component 2: AFAAS Governance, Management and Secretariat Activities (appraisal estimate
   US$6.50 million, actual US$0.90 million): This component was to support the AFASS secretariat
   (located in Uganda) by supporting AFAAS governance and management systems, developing and
   implementing monitoring and evaluation system, undertaking syntheses and strategic studies, and
   developing and maintaining a database on agricultural advisory services in Africa.
   According to the ICR (p. 10) a third component (MDTF Management and Supervision (Bank-Executed)
   with an appraisal estimate of US$1.44 million) was included in the PAD erroneously and was included in
   the total appraised project cost of US$18.4 million. (See following section for explanation of difference
   between appraised and actual costs).




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$18.44 million, actual cost was US$5.54 million.
   According to the ICR (p. 10) the Multi-Donor Trust Fund Financing for the Bank-approved PAD in the
   amount of US$18.4 million did not fully materialize since the financing amount was based on AFAAS’

                                                                                                             Page 2 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AFAAS Second MDTF (P143367)



   Strategic and Operational Plan (which included recipient executed components 1 and 2, and Bank
   executed component 3) rather than the actual grant funds available for the recipient.
   Financing: The project was to be financed by the European Commission (US$6.8 million) which was
   to be disbursed through the MDTF, and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) (US$1
   million). At the time of appraisal additional funding was anticipated from USAID, AusAID, Canadian
   International Development Agency (CIDA), Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC),
   Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), Agence Française de Développement
   (AFD) and other donors who had shown an interest in participating in the AFAAS MDTF. The World Bank
   was to provide financing in the amount of US$5.54 million, of which US$5.53 million was disbursed.
   Borrower Contribution: It was not planned for the Borrower to make any contributions.
   Dates: On December 18, 2017 the project was restructured to: i) change the objective of the project to
   make it more attributable to AFAAS given its mandate to fit the realities of Comprehensive Africa
   Agriculture Development Program (CAADP) implementation and national policy reform structures in
   Africa; ii) adapt the two PDO indicators and several intermediate outcome indicators in the Results
   Framework to show direct attribution to AFAAS; iii) change components to include only the two recipient-
   executed components (component 1 and 2) and costs; iv) extend the closing date from December 31,
   2017 to June 30, 2018 to allow for AFAAS to fully disburse against approved sub-grants and provide
   bridge financing, as AFAAS was expecting to secure additional bilateral financing during the extension
   period; v) reallocate between disbursement categories; vi) change legal covenants; and vii) change
   implementation schedule.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale
  According to the PAD (p. 11) even though Africa’s agricultural output almost doubled over the past forty-
  year period it was almost entirely due to increases in land and labor inputs. Increases in factor productivity
  was marginal and played a minor role in the growth of the sector not improving poverty reduction or the
  elimination of hunger. Reasons for this situation are soil and water constraints, extremely low levels of
  human capital in the farm population, health of the rural population, lack of infrastructure, poorly functioning
  markets etc. Also, the flow of information from the farm to inform research, education and extension
  systems is limited. In order to improve this situation, fostering agricultural research and developing an
  integrated approach around the research, extension, and educational “triangle,” with the farmer at the
  center would be critical to addressing the constraints to growth, poverty reduction and elimination of hunger.
  The PAD (p.11) stated that women farmers need particular attention in this area as they play a leading role
  in all aspects of crop production and commercialization.
  The objective of the project was in line with the agenda of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture
  Development Program (CAADP) by the African Union which was initiated in 2003 and aimed to help African
  countries reach and sustain a higher path of economic growth through agricultural-led development that
  reduces hunger and poverty and enables food and nutrition security and growth in exports. The CAADP
  identified under pillar four the challenges of agricultural education, research and technology uptake to the
  farm level.

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 12
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            AFAAS Second MDTF (P143367)



       Furthermore, according to the ICR (p.14) the objective supported IDA’s 18 goals for agri-food development
       which identified the importance of supporting advisory services in Africa in order to achieve its second goal
       “better jobs – developing skills and innovation”. The PDO of the project was realistic given the amount of
       resources available.
       Having acknowledged the need, there is no real evidence of a strategic linking between support to a peak
       body and flow-on benefits by way of productivity improvements over and above individual country level
       research. Given the emphasis on cross-country collaboration and regional benefits, greater articulation of
       the strategic advantage of this approach would have been helpful to know what the activities were to add up
       to.



       Rating
       Substantial

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     Original objective: To reform and strengthen Agricultural Advisory Services (AAS) in accordance with FAAP
     principles towards increasing agricultural productivity and food security.

     Revised Objective: To support and strengthen Agricultural Advisory Services (AAS) in accordance with the
     Framework for African Agricultural Productivity (FAAP) principles.

     Even though the objective was revised, no split rating is required given the objectives “to support” and “to
     strengthen” remained the same.

    Rationale
    The project’s theory of change linked the establishment of a Country Fora as a platform for AAS stakeholder
    involvement in CAADP at country level, the establishment of a networking mechanism for AAS stakeholder
    at the regional and continental level, the active participation of AFAAS in the implementation of CAADP’s
    pillar IV at the continental level and the improvement of AFAAS governance and management to increase
    agricultural productivity and food security.
    Outputs:

    • AFAAS established and supported AAS Country Fora (CF) through participatory review and validation of
    guidelines for the establishment and strengthening of CF (based on implementation experience) and
    completion of in-country sensitization in 24 countries. The ICR did not include a target for this output.
    • When the project closed, 22 CF were operational in Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Kenya,
    Ghana, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, South Africa, South
    Sudan, Sudan, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe. The ICR did not include a target for this
    output.


                                                                                                         Page 4 of 12
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AFAAS Second MDTF (P143367)



• These CF supported AEAS capacity and reform through advocacy such as in Malawi and participation in
policy making processes and policy reforms such as in Uganda, Rwanda, Nigeria, Liberia, South Sudan,
South Africa, Malawi, and Ghana. Also, CF piloted innovation tools, promoted quality and professionalization
of AEAS services in Ethiopia, Nigeria, and South Africa. The ICR did not include a target for this output.
• CF used sub-grants to pilot a variety of innovative ideas such as youth-led commercial-based extension
services in Uganda, and land info mobile app technology to provide soil and climate information in Kenya.
The ICR did not include a target for this output.
• AFAAS developed a participatory review of guidelines incorporating AEAS concerns in CAADP compacts,
built capacity in experts to backstop CF in their engagement in CAADP processes from an AEAS
perspective, and sensitized and mentored CF during events at continental/regional levels.
• AFAAS institutionalized the delivery of the biennial Africa-wide Agricultural Extension Week to enable a
face to face interaction between AEAS stakeholders from within and outside Africa. The aim of these
interactions was to foster knowledge exchange, learning and developing AEAS innovations. AFAAS has held
three extension weeks during MDTF project implementation: 2013 in Botswana, 2015 in Ethiopia and 2017
in South Africa). The number of participants has been steadily increasing from 300 (2013) to 400 (2015) and
then 700 (2017).
• AFAAS participated in CAADP implementation at the continental level which resulted in the development
of a strategy for AEAS engagement in CAADP and its embodiment in the strategic plan for CADDP Pillar IV.
• AFAAS facilitated the availability and accessibility of appropriate and up-to-date knowledge on AAS from a
range of sources in Africa and around the world by establishing infrastructure and mechanisms that enabled
AEAS actors to network, share experience, solve problems, access global knowledge hubs, and facilitate
collective innovation in AEAS delivery.
• AFAAS built 107 partnerships at national, regional, continental, and international levels between AAS and
other institutions with similar mandates and interests, surpassing the target of 28 partnerships.
Outcomes:
• The number of AEAS actors who were directly affected or reached by AFAAS interventions increased from
5,000 actors in 2013 to 28,431 AEAS actors in 2018, surpassing the target of 25,000 actors.
• The percentage of AEAS actors who were directly reached/affected by AFAAS that are satisfied with the
quality of its services increased from 45 percent in 2013 to 68 percent in 2018, surpassing the target of 65
percent.
• The number of CFs established increased from 5 CF in 2013 to 22 CF in 2018, achieving the target of 22
CF.
• The number of registered CF members increased from 150 members in 2013 to 3,594 members in 2018,
surpassing the target of 2,200 members.
• 16 CF developed the capacity to articulate demands, advocate for AEAS reforms, address gender
equality, mobilize and manage resources, and act as platform for sharing knowledge, surpassing the target
of 15 CF.
• 15 CF recommended policy options to policy makers, surpassing the target of 13 CF.
• 16 AEAS extension approaches were recommended and/or implemented by stakeholders, surpassing the
target of four approaches.
• 32,686 individuals utilized IT tools and platforms facilitated by AFAAS & CF, surpassing the target of
12,000 individuals.



                                                                                                 Page 5 of 12
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  AFAAS Second MDTF (P143367)



             • The number of partnerships formed at national, regional, and international levels increased from 20
             partnerships in 2013 to 107 partnerships in 2018, surpassing the target of 28 partnerships.
             • 12 partnerships recommended emerging and cross-cutting issues (gender, youth, climate change) related
             reforms in AAS, surpassing the target of four partnerships.
             • The satisfaction level of stakeholders with government procedures, management structures, and policies
             was ”highly satisfactory” (according to the survey), achieving the target of “highly satisfactory”.
             • The percentage increase in the amount of funds for supporting the AFAAS strategic plan increased from
             31 percent in 2013 to 51 percent in 2018, not achieving the target of 96 percent.
             • The number of advocacy initiatives that recommended emerging/cross cutting issues (gender, youth,
             climate change) reforms in AEAS to policy makers increased from six initiatives in 2013 to 15 initiatives in
             2018, surpassing the target of 11 initiatives.




             Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale
There was considerable achievement in getting the various parties more involved and interactive in supporting
AAs activities. However, linking the achievement of these activities with higher level outcomes is weak with limited
insight as to how the activity and participation will lead to improvements in agricultural productivity and food
security. Therefore, the achievement of the objective is rated Substantial.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

     5. Efficiency

            Economic Efficiency:
            The PAD did not conduct a traditional economic analysis since a full and detailed ex-ante economic and
            financial analysis was not warranted due to the difficulty of estimating in advance the specific benefits of the
            activities and investments the project was to support. The PAD (p. 27) stated that based on previous work on
            the rate of return to investments in agricultural research and extension, the returns of the investments made
            in AFFAS would be well above typical threshold levels.
            The ICR did not conduct a traditional economic analysis, stating the same reasons as the PAD. Therefore, we
            are left to speculate as to whether the investment was likely to have the expected financial returns to justify its
            costs. In the absence of any economic analysis, it is difficult to confidently support this assertion.
            Operational Efficiency:


                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AFAAS Second MDTF (P143367)



According to the ICR (p. 18) the project achieved efficiency through building partnerships which allowed
AFAAS to leverage funds from other projects such as AFAAS and CF reaching farmers with extension
models and participating in a policy dialogue at different levels for CF. The ICR also stated that the AFAAS
secretariat did not increase salaries as approved by the board, resulting in a reduction of administrative
costs. However, the project restructuring was delayed due to slow actions by the Bank and the donors,
requiring an extension of the closing date by six months, which suggests an inefficient use of financial
sources.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate
                                                         Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                   Available?
                                                                                   0
Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was rated Substantial, the project efficacy rating was considered Substantial given
the breadth of activities, but taking into account the limited data on broader impacts. Efficiency was rated
Modest given minor administrative issues and the lack of any attempt at economic justification for the
investment. This results in an overall Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The most critical risk to the sustainability of the project’s development outcomes is AFAAS’ ability to raise
sufficient financial resources to continue its operations. According to the ICR (p. 24) AFAAS has not been able
to diversify its financial sources such as through projects, membership subscriptions, crowd funding or services
to members and other development partners. According to the Bank team (January 18, 2019) AFAAS had


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AFAAS Second MDTF (P143367)



addressed this risk in its new strategy and operational plan which also included detailed fundraising efforts. In
October 2018, AFAAS confirmed that IFAD support was moving ahead, with the expectation that funds would
be available as early as January 2019.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (p. 20) the project’s design was based on AFAAS’ 2011-2015 strategic and
  operational plan, which focused on five key areas: i) participating in implementation of CAADP pillar IV; ii)
  information, communication, and knowledge management; iii) establishing and supporting CF; iv) linkages
  and partnerships; and v) developing governance, management, and funding systems. The ICR (p. 23)
  stated that the project design was informed by lessons learned from the first Multi-Donor Trust Fund
  (MDTF) such as that a second MDTF would help to provide stability for AFAAS to carry out its proposed
  work program, and that AFAAS’s technical and administrative capacity would need to be strengthened to
  do so. The Bank identified relevant risk factors. The risk related to having only partially secured the funding
  for AFFAAS’s five-year operational plan was rated as Substantial. Mitigation efforts were not adequate,
  and the risk materialized, resulting in AFAAS being able to hire fewer staff than originally planned.
  According to the ICR (p. 23) the project design could have been aligned with available grant financing to be
  followed by additional financing once other funds materialized. A shortcoming of the M&E design was that
  it included PDO indicators which measured the long-term impact of project activities rather than project
  level outcomes, making the attribution of project activities challenging.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  According to the ICR (p. 24) the Bank conducted regular supervision missions and provided clear guidance
  to AFAAS on project implementation and any issues that had to be addressed. The Mid-Term Review,
  which was conducted in April 2016, identified the need to restructure the project. However, the restructuring
  was first delayed by the Bank and then by the donor due to a slow response time of 11 months resulting in
  the project only being restructured in December 2017. This negatively impacted already delayed
  processing. Furthermore, M&E was weak throughout project implementation and the project was not able
  to systematically report on PDO indicators on a regular basis. However, when a Bank and an Independent
  Procurement Review identified procurement shortcomings, the Bank provided support to address them.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AFAAS Second MDTF (P143367)



  Moderately Satisfactory



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The theory of change illustrating how key activities would lead to intended outcomes was sound and reflected in
  the Results Framework. The objective of the project was clearly specified. However, according to the ICR (p.
  22) the Results Framework was based on AFAA’s Strategic & Operational (S&OP) logical framework and
  included PDO indicators which measured the long-term impact of project activities rather than project level
  outcomes, making the attribution of project activities challenging. The intermediate results indicators were
  adequate to capture the contribution of the project’s activities towards the PDO. The majority of indicators had
  a baseline and were measurable and were sufficiently specific.
  M&E activities were to be conducted by the AFAAS Secretariat, Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation
  Department. An Evaluation Officer was to monitor implementation progress and link monitoring activities with
  activities that were to be carried out at regional, sub-regional and country levels.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 22), the AFAAS Secretariat Planning and M&E Department was to hire a planning
  manager, an M&E manager and an M&E officer. However, AFAAS was not able to do so due to a lack of
  funding. Instead, AFAAS had to depend on support by the Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA)
  and/or consultants to conduct M&E activities. The ICR stated that this negatively affected the implementation
  of M&E activities and the project was not able to systematically report on PDO indicators on a regular basis.
  and AFAAS was not able to collect data from the Country Fora on a timely basis. However, AFAAS was able
  to conduct the baseline, mid-term, and end-of-project surveys using program staff and consultants.
  When the project was restructured in December 2017, the Results Framework was modified to adapt the two
  PDO indicators and several intermediate outcome indicators to show direct attribution to AFAAS. However,
  the Bank failed to include outcome indicators at the PDO level.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 23), given the shortcomings mentioned above, AFAAS could not use the project’s
  M&E data as effectively as planned to inform decision making. The ICR stated that AFAAS was able to use
  data gathered through its own M&E system to modify its work plan and develop its new strategy.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AFAAS Second MDTF (P143367)




a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as category C and did not trigger any of the Bank’s safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:
  According to the ICR (p. 23) a financial management manual and grant award guidelines were prepared to
  provide guidance on project implementation and sub-grants disbursement. Also, the Bank conducted regular
  supervision missions and reviewed the project’s financial management to ensure compliance with the Bank’s
  fiduciary requirements. According to the Bank team (Jan 18, 2019) starting in November 2014, the Bank
  identified several weaknesses related to financial management including inter-project borrowing (co-mingling of
  funds) ineligible expenditure relating to staff gratuity, salary advances not supported by HR policy or operations
  manual, weak records management, segregation of duties and reporting delayed, and lack of an internal audit
  committee. The ICR (p. 23) stated that the AFAAS addressed and solved these issues. Also, according to the
  ICR the AFAAS’ internal audit conducted regular reviews and unaudited interim financial reports and annual
  audited financial reports were submitted in a timely and acceptable manner. Furthermore, the Bank generally
  rated the project’s financial management as satisfactory.
  According to the Bank team (January 18, 2019) the audited financial statement submitted by Deloitte & Touche
  on December 10, 2018, which covered the 18-month period from January 1, 2017 to June 30, 2018 was
  unqualified. It did, however, draw attention to the lack of a tax exemption certificate, as well as the fact that the
  MDTF was the primary source of financing for AFAAS, that the MDTF had closed and that AFAAS had not
  replaced this funding, therefore creating a going concern of material uncertainty.
  Procurement:
  According to the ICR (p. 23) the Bank and an Independent Procurement Review, which was conducted in
  October 2016, identified several procurement issues such as slow and delayed procurement processes, poor
  contract management and supervision of consultancies, and lack of knowledge of roles and responsibilities by
  stakeholders in procurement and contract management. These issues were addressed by developing an action
  plan, creating templates for the procurement of goods and services, providing basic procurement training for
  stakeholders.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  NA



d. Other
   ---



                                                                                                      Page 10 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AFAAS Second MDTF (P143367)



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                       IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   There were shortcomings both
                                                        Moderately                 in the project's Efficacy and in
Outcome                        Satisfactory
                                                        Satisfactory               the measuring of the project
                                                                                   Efficiency.
                               Moderately               Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                   ---
                               Satisfactory             Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                   Modest                     ---
Quality of ICR                                          Substantial                ---

12. Lessons

 The ICR (p. 24-25) provided useful lessons learned:
• It is critical for a project’s design to identify and clarify institutional areas to be supported according
to the financing available. This project supported the entire Strategic and Operational Plan of AFAAS without
having secured the necessary financing. This resulted in the hiring of fewer staff at AFAAS and relying more on
consultants, which might have had a negative impact on capacity building within AFAAS.
• Ensuring financial sustainability of institutions being supported under a project is critical. In this
project, AFAAS has been and continues to rely on donor funding which puts a critical risk on the sustainability
of AFAAS. Also, this uncertainty impacts the planning of activities and the effectiveness of activities due to a
limited time horizon. It could have been beneficial if the project had included a sub-component which supported
the development of a resource mobilization strategy and built capacity within AFAAS for sustainable resource
mobilization.
• Country Fora (CF) are an effective way to foster reforms and strengthen public sector support for
AEAS systems. In this project, the CF model was built on existing institutions and used local expertise
resulting in the emergence of champions and volunteers that were critical for establishing the CF.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a good overview of project preparation and implementation. The ICR is internally concise,
generally candid and consistent. However, the ICR did not attempt to conduct a traditional economic analysis
(cost-benefit or cost-effectiveness), and is not particularly outcome driven. The ICR did not include information
on procurement shortcomings during project preparation.



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AFAAS Second MDTF (P143367)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                       Page 12 of 12
