     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0021528

1. Project Data



 Project ID                            Project Name
 P092353                               ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07)

 Country                               Practice Area(Lead)                       Additional Financing
 Ethiopia                              Water                                     P125307


 L/C/TF Number(s)                      Closing Date (Original)                   Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-43330,IDA-49760                   31-Oct-2015                                            105,794,445.60

 Bank Approval Date                    Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Jun-2007                           31-Oct-2017

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                             121,314,499.56                                            0.00

 Actual                                         105,794,445.60                                            0.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Ebru Karamete               Christopher David           Christopher David Nelson      IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Nelson



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   The project development objectives stated in the Financing Agreement (page 5) and Project Appraisal
   Document (page 10) was:
   “to sustainably increase agricultural output and productivity in the Project Area. “

   The project development objectives were revised on Sep 12th, 2016 as:
   “to improve access to irrigation and drainage services and build farmers' capacity in irrigated
   agriculture in the Project Area.”

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  12-Sep-2016
                                                         PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components

   The project had four components:

   1. Irrigation Development (Appraisal: US$75.0 million, Revised: US$126.3 million, Actual: US$150.7
   million).

   This component aimed to finalize feasibility and detailed design studies and develop irrigation
   infrastructure for about 20,000 hectares in Megech and Ribb benefiting approximately 12,600 households.
   The component also aimed to conduct feasibility studies for 80,000 hectares of newly developed irrigated
   agriculture in selected sites including Anger, Upper Beles, Negesso and Megech, and promote low-cost
   irrigation technologies in low-lying areas around Lake Tana. Environmental and social assessment of the
   investments were to be financed under this component. In addition, as the project investment in Ribb area
   would rely on the construction of the Ribb Dam, financed by the government, the project identified
   mitigation measures to reduce risks. One of the measures included dropping the Ribb area and expanding
   the Megech area investments instead.

   The restructuring in 2014 after the Mid Term Review (MTR), reduced the scope of the two schemes and
   eliminated the activity related to groundwater development through low-cost technologies because the
   priority was to develop surface water systems. The restructuring in 2016 eliminated the implementation of
   the Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and the Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for
   the 80,000 ha of new irrigation and the proposed hydraulic infrastructure in the Lake Tana sub-basin
   because there was neither funding nor time to develop any of this new irrigation before the Credit closed,
   and the Credit was not financing any other hydraulic infrastructure in the Lake Tana sub-basin.
   2. Agriculture and Market Development (Appraisal: US$17.0 million, Revised: US$20.4 million,
   Actual: US$6.5 million).
   This component aimed to establish forward and backward linkages between irrigated agriculture and
   markets so that multiplier effects of irrigation development would be captured by direct and indirect
   beneficiaries. This was to be achieved through support for the delivery of adaptive research and
   development (R&D) on improved production systems and technologies, agricultural advisory services and

                                                                                                             Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)



  the improvement of market linkages, development of value chains through matching grants within the
  project’s target Woredas (districts) and Kebeles (sub-districts). Activities under this component were to be
  implemented by the regional agricultural bureau and complement the interventions of the Rural Capacity
  Building Project (RCBP) in the relevant project areas.

  The Additional Financing in 2011 added soil fertility management and land leveling activities for the newly
  redistributed irrigated land. The restructuring in 2016 scaled down the activities under Component 2,
  because there was insufficient time to implement them.

  3. Irrigation Management (Appraisal: US$13.3 million, Revised: US$21.3 million, Actual: US$20.0
  million).

  This component aimed to establish accountable and transparent irrigation management in two ways: (i)
  strengthening the capacity of Water User Groups to carry out the necessary operation and maintenance
  (O&M) and cost recovery functions; and (ii) promoting and implementing a greater role for public-private
  partnerships in irrigation infrastructure management in order to improve the efficiency and operational
  performance of the sector.

  4. Project Management (Appraisal: US$4.7 million, Revised: US$5.7 million, Actual: US$6.5 million).

  This component financed project management related activities through the provision of technical
  assistance, training, auditing, evaluation studies, operating costs, overall project planning, strengthening
  procurement and financial management capacities, and preparation and implementation of a
  communications strategy; and the establishment of a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system and
  performance-based management information system (MIS).




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Project Cost: Total project cost at appraisal was estimated at US$110.0 million, then it was revised to
  US$173.6 million with the Additional Financing in 2011, as estimated costs increased substantially after
  the design was approved. Costs were revised to US$181.1 million during the restructuring in July 2014
  and then to US$183.7 million during the restructuring in September 2016. Actual costs were slightly
  higher at US$183.9million. Please note that total costs were not finalized at the time of the ICR and during
  this review, as the final audit was yet to be finalized.

  Financing: The IDA grant (IDA-43330) of US$100.0 million increased to US$160.0 million with the IDA
  Additional Financing grant (IDA-49760) of US$60.0 million. The total disbursement was US$129.9 million.

  Borrower Contribution: It was planned that the Borrower and local communities would provide
  US$10.0million, which was revised to US13.6 million with the additional financing. The actual contribution
  was US$53.8 million.


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)



   Dates: The project was approved on June 21st, 2007 and effective seven months later, on January 24th,
   2008. The original closing date was October 31st, 2015 and the actual closing date was two years later
   (with the Additional Financing), on October 31st, 2017. The Additional Financing (AF) was approved on
   June 23rd, 2011 and extended the project closing date for 2 years. The delay was due to delays in
   detailed engineering designs, the time needed to complete the rebidding process for Megech and Ribb
   civil works contracts and to mobilize contractors.

   Restructuring: The project went through three restructurings, and one additional financing. The AF in
   June 23rd, 2011: (i) included US$60 million additional financing, after it became clear based on the
   detailed designs that estimated costs were about eighty percent higher than the estimations of the
   preliminary designs; (ii) allocated US$10 million to the Fertilizer Support Project that was approved during
   the food crisis in 2009; (iii) extended the original closing date for two years; (iv) eliminated the
   intermediate outcome indicators that were of low relevance or difficult to measure, clarified the wording of
   some indicators, or incorporated new indicators with targets disaggregated by gender , and the targets for
   the areas covered with new I&D services were changed from the initial estimate of 20,000 ha gross of
   irrigation and appurtenant infrastructure to 17,300 ha net, reflecting the detailed designs.

   Following the Mid Term Review, the restructuring on July 31st, 2014: (i) revised the project budget from
   US$173.6 million to US$181.1 million and reallocated funds between disbursement categories to account
   for the changes in project scope; (ii) revised the intermediate outcome targets to reflect the reduction in
   project scope and the decision in 2012 to split the Ribb scheme into two phases. The restructuring on
   September 12th, 2016 increased the total project budget from US$181.1 million to US$183.7 million due
   to exchange rate savings and cancellation of the US$10 million for the food crisis emergency response.

   The final restructuring on October 30th, 2017 revised the PDO and designed new intermediate outcome
   indicators to capture targets that could be achieved during the remaining project period, including length
   of the main canals constructed, a number of operational training and service centers, and a number of
   functional O&M systems. Other indicators such as the change in yield, the real value of marketed projects,
   and the adoption of modern technologies, and irrigation efficiency of the main supply system were
   dropped because they were not achievable, difficult to verify, and no longer aligned with the revised PDO.
   The restructuring also allowed the Borrower to use Credit funds for compensating 6,618 project-affected
   persons (PAPs), including cash payments for livelihoods restoration for 1,486 PAPs, at a total cost of
   US$9.68 million.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  Original Objective:




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)



       While the original project development objective was relevant to the country and World Bank strategies at
       appraisal and closing, they were quite ambitious considering the implementation capacity in the country, as
       well as the project’s scope versus its duration as a single project. In addition, there was the issue of unclear
       and insufficient linking between particularly productivity aspect and the market linkages presumptions. At the
       time of project appraisal, agricultural productivity in Ethiopia was low with productivity of major cereal crops
       was around 990 kg per hectare, and cropping intensity was approximately 0.5, corresponding to one crop
       every two years. The country’s irrigation potential was estimated to be 3.7 million hectares (ha), with actual
       irrigation development representing only 0.5 percent of this potential and irrigation accounting for only three
       percent of food production. The government’s strategy for achieving the Millennium Development Goals
       called for a rapid scaling up of existing irrigation plans with an aim to develop irrigation on 717,400 ha, with
       381,000 ha serving small scale farmers (ICR page 12-13). Based on the above issues, Ethiopia’s Second
       Poverty Reduction Strategy (2006), namely the “Plan for Accelerated Sustained Development to End
       Poverty Strategy” aimed to promote market-based agriculture as well as integrated water resources
       management with an emphasis on irrigation development.
       The World Bank Country Assistance Strategy (FY08-FY11), strategic objective 1 (Fostering economic
       growth), included increasing productivity of agriculture through investments in irrigation and preparation of
       value chain analysis (page 26). The World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework’s (FY18-FY22), focus
       area 1 (promote structural and economic transformation through increased productivity) noted that
       agriculture was one of the key drivers of growth and poverty reduction and included improved agricultural
       productivity and commercialization as one of the objectives (page 28-30). Focus area 2 (building resilience
       and inclusiveness) was also aligned, seeking to achieve enhanced management of natural resources and
       emphasized that the recent investments in sustainable land and water management, and small-scale
       irrigation have improved land quality. The World Bank would continue to support the government in
       sustaining the gains that have been made (page 33[CDN1]).

       Revised Objective:

       The revised PDO became more relevant as it became more streamlined, realistic and linked to project
       activities[CDN2] . That is the revised PDO dramatically moved towards what the project sought to do in
       improving irrigation. However, it was done very late during project’s implementation.



       Rating
       Substantial
   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     The original objective, “to sustainably increase agricultural output and productivity in project areas”, is rated
     Negligible.

                                                                                                            Page 5 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)




 Rationale

 According to the theory of change (TOC), the project development objective, to increase agricultural output
 and productivity in rural areas, would be achieved through three main activities: (i) Developing irrigation that
 would lead to increased productivity and incomes; (ii) Under Component 2, supporting agricultural
 intensification and commercialization in the areas served by the new irrigation systems. This support would
 focus on improving production systems and technologies, strengthening value chains, and facilitating market
 linkages. (iii) Measures under Component 3 to ensure the sustainability of the new irrigation systems by
 developing or strengthening water user associations to carry out operations and maintenance (O&M) and
 cost recovery, as well as the promotion of public private partnerships (PPPs) that presumably will lead to
 improved irrigation efficiency and operational performance. The higher-level objective of reducing poverty
 would be obtained through the targeting of small farmers and higher productivity and production outcomes
 attained through project infrastructure investments. However, these objectives were overly ambitious. Given
 this limitation, a significantly delayed restructuring in 2016 simplified the PDO to include improvement of
 irrigation and drainage services and building farmers’ capacity on irrigated agriculture, better reflecting what
 the project was actually doing.

 The key expected outcome indicators were: (a) a 40 percent increase in value added per worker; and (b) a
 40 percent increase in value added per hectare.

 The project did not monitor these indicators; nor the other outcome indicators and intermediate outcome
 indicators on yields, cropping intensity, value of marketed products. Irrigation efficiency was dropped during
 the restructuring in 2016, as they were either not achievable or difficult to verify. Thus, with insufficient
 evidence to justify achievement, the original objective is rated as Negligible.



 Rating
 Negligible
PHREVDELTBL
 PHINNERREVISEDTBL
 Objective 1 Revision 1
 Revised Objective

 Revised objective was to “improve access to irrigation and drainage services and build farmers’ capacity in
 irrigated agriculture in project areas”. First part of the revised PDO, “ to improve access to irrigation and
 drainage” is rated negligible.

 Revised Rationale

 The changes in the PDO and outcome targets in 2016 were made to align them with results that could be
 achieved and measured by the closing date. However, due to significant delays in implementation, very few
 of the activities were completed, and none of the outcome targets were met. The following overview
 summarizes the project’s achievements:


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 18
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)




    • Provision of new or improved irrigation or drainage infrastructure in the Megech-Seraba Scheme was
    planned to cover 4,000 ha (revised target), reaching a total of 10,097 beneficiaries. By project closing, only
    1,000 ha (25 percent) in the Megech-Seraba Scheme were completed. Also, during the 2016 growing
    season, only 18.25 ha (0.46 percent of the target) were fully utilized for irrigation in the Megech-Seraba
    Scheme, benefitting only 28 farmers (0.28 percent of the target). The reasons for such limited use of the I&D
    services in the Megech-Seraba Scheme Phase 1 were that the provision of irrigation water was delayed and
    many farmers continued their traditional rain-fed agricultural approach, and higher than average rainfall
    reduced the farmers’ demand for irrigation water. During the 2017 growing season, the lack of a reliable
    power source for the pumping station continued to be a limiting factor in the provision of irrigation water. A
    continuous power supply to the Megech pump scheme remained a challenge because the backup power
    supply generators was delayed due to procurement issues. The project team informed IEG that the provision
    of the power supply has been resolved and now there is reliable power supply via the national grid.

    • The remaining 3,000 ha (Megech Scheme Phase 2 Scheme) still had unfinished canal works, crossing
    structures, and flood protection emergency works at project closing. The on-farm works were only 14 percent
    completed.

    • Under the Ribb Scheme Phase 1 (3,000 ha), only 44 percent of the main irrigation system was completed
    at project closing. The intake structures and most of the primary canal was completed but the majority of the
    canals and drainage channels remained unfinished. The planned completion date for the main system was
    April 8, 2018, about 5 months after the project closed. The project team subsequently informed IEG that due
    to higher than average rainfall and localized flooding in 2018, the works have still not been completed and
    the contract has been extended. The physical works progress now stands at 79 percent and the planned
    completion date is May 2019.

    Due to very limited progress on outcomes and outputs by project closing, the achievement of the revised
    objective is rated Negligible.



    Revised Rating
    Negligible
PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     There was no second objective prior to the restructure. The second objective of the revised PDO, was “to
     build farmers’ capacity in irrigated agriculture in project areas”, and was rated as Negligible.

    Rationale

    Outputs:



                                                                                                       Page 7 of 18
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)



             • The project provided capacity building support to Amhara Regional Agricultural Research Institute (ARAR)
             to conduct, validate, and deliver irrigated agriculture research outputs. ARAR conducted 46 adaptive
             irrigated agriculture research studies and provided demonstrations in selected commodities.
             • 24 irrigation technologies were developed.
             • Nine farmer training centers were constructed.
             • 4,416 farmers and agriculture extension workers directly benefited from field days, trainings and
             experience sharing visits.
             • Nine animal health posts were established to provide critical veterinary services.
             • Matching grants were provided to create 66 micro-enterprises (exceeding the target of 18), These
             included: 42 cooperative grain stores, four milk production and processing facilities, two oil extraction plants,
             three shallow well digging service providers, 13 onion and onion seed producers, and two chemical spraying
             service providers. All of these services were operational by the closing date, and all adopted financial
             management and accounting systems.
             • Only five IWUAs in the Megech-Seraba Scheme were operational (out of the targeted well-functioning 35
             schemes), and 12 IWUAs were established in the Ribb Scheme, but they had not become operational due to
             delays in the completion of irrigation infrastructure. By project closing the management and supervision
             contract (MSC) had not taken any meaningful steps to transfer knowledge and skills for O&M, and there was
             no scheme level water management plan informed by a clearly defined cropping pattern and calendar.

             Outcomes:

             There were some positive results under the matching grants scheme to establish micro-enterprises.
             Nevertheless, while the project provided training to farmers and helped improve the capacity of ARAR, due
             to delays in receiving irrigation services, none of the 3,000 target project beneficiaries adopted an improved
             agricultural technology promoted by the project. In addition, the achievements on establishing functioning
             Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) and knowledge transfer on O&M and water management
             plans were very limited. There was evident activity that took place during the course of the project, but there
             is no substantive evidence of outcomes against this objective.



             Rating
     Negligible
    PHREVDELTBL

PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

The combined rating under original and revised objective is Negligible.




Overall Efficacy Rating                                                Primary reason
Negligible                                                             Low achievement

                                                                                                                  Page 8 of 18
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)


PHREVISEDTBL



  5. Efficiency


  Economic and Financial Efficiency: Using only Component 1 cost and benefits, the project prepared
  financial and economic analyses four times (at appraisal, during additional financing, during restructuring and
  at completion), and each time there were changes in scope, changes in the cost assumptions, cropping
  patterns and intensity. A representative farm model was designed separately for Megech and Ribb irrigation
  schemes for with and without project scenarios. A cropping pattern was formulated using thirteen new crops for
  irrigated and rain fed farming and for wet and dry seasons. The discount rate was 12 percent at appraisal,
  while the ICR used two different discount rates of 10 percent and 6 percent. Benefits were derived from
  increases in farm income as a result of increases in crop and livestock productivity and production. Unit costs
  for irrigation differed considerably between the PAD and the ICR level analysis (cost per ha was estimated at
  US$ 2,800 per ha, vs. US$13,709 considering that the schemes would be completed using additional sources).
  There were significant cost over-runs. Considering that only 18.3 ha was completed as opposed to the target of
  7,000 ha, the overall NPV was negative.

  Based on the above, Net Present Value (NPV) of the project at completion was US$-52.2 million using a 10
  percent discount rate and US$-77.2 using a 6 percent discount rate (compared to the appraisal estimate of
  US$12.34 million). Using the assumption that the schemes would be completed using additional resources,
  then the NPV becomes US$-7.1 (for 10 percent discount rate) and US$17.7 million (using 6 percent discount
  rate), also the EIRR becomes 8.4 percent (compared to 15 percent at appraisal).

  Administrative and Operational Efficiency: There were significant delays in developing infrastructure and
  operationalizing the irrigation schemes. Even though the project ‘s original duration of approximately 7.5 years
  was extended for two more years, this extension was still not sufficient, and only an insignificant portion of the
  works could be completed at project closing.



  Efficiency Rating
  Negligible


  a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
    and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                             Rate Available?   Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        72.00
    Appraisal                                                 15.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
    ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

  * Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)




6. Outcome


While the original project development objective was relevant to the country and World Bank strategies at
appraisal and closing, they were quite ambitious considering the implementation capacity in the country, as well
as project’s scope versus its duration as a single project. Therefore, relevance of the original objective is rated
substantial. The revised objective remained relevant as it became more streamlined, realistic and linked to
project activities, however the revision was done very late during project’s implementation. The project’s,
original development objective “to sustainably increase agricultural output and productivity in project areas”, is
rated Negligible, as the project did not monitor and report on any of the indicators designed to measure the
achievement of this objective. The revised objective 1: “ to improve access to irrigation and drainage” is rated
Negligible, due to significant delays in implementation, very few activities were completed, and none of the
outcome targets were met. The second objective, added as part of the revision to the PDO, “to build farmers’
capacity in irrigated agriculture in project areas”, is also rated Negligible. While there were positive results on
the micro-grant schemes, and improvements in the capacity of ARAR, there were significant delays in receiving
irrigation services and none of the 3,000 target project beneficiaries adopted an improved agricultural
technology promoted by the project. In addition, the achievements on establishing functioning IWRMs and
knowledge transfers on O&M and water management plans were very limited. Efficiency of the project is rated
Negligible, due to negative NPV at the time of project closing, very high unit costs due to cost over-runs and
completing only insignificant portion of the works. The project results did not improve despite the two-year
extension. Thus, the original and the revised combined overall outcome is rated Highly Unsatisfactory.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


The risk to development outcome is significant given the limited progress and threats on O&M.

As mentioned in the Efficacy section, by project closing, only 1,000 ha of water delivery and distribution
infrastructure out of the revised target of 4,000 ha were completed, and the pumping station to ensure the
sustainable delivery of the water was not functioning. The ICR noted that (para. 87), the remaining 3,000 ha in
the Megech scheme and an additional 3,000 ha in the Ribb scheme were expected to be completed by June
2018, based on the government’s commitment on the use of budgetary resources. Nevertheless, provision of a
sustainable power supply to Megech remained an issue by the end of the project period, threatening full
operation of the scheme (4,000 ha) during the 2017/2018 growing season. In addition, there were very low gains
in institutional capacity building and technical knowledge transfer due to delays in construction that led to limited
deployment of O&M staff. Thus, by the end of the project, the GoE intended to transfer management of the


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)



Megech-Seraba Scheme to the regional government through a dedicated unit within the Abbay River Basin
Authority (ARBA), even though the scheme lies outside its mandate.

Regarding the government funded Ribb Dam, the main works were completed but as the government had not
completed all of the actions recommended by the dam safety review panel (DSRP), this posed a threat not only
to the dam structures but the safety of downstream communities and infrastructure. The project team informed
IEG that remedial measures recommended by the DSRP were finalized but impoundment of the dam was
delayed by a year to allow for recommended investigation and remedial measures.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  The rapid project preparation resulted in a weak project design. The project was conceived based on a
  series of regional meetings as part of the Nile Basin Initiative supported by the Bank. The Eastern Nile
  Subsidiary Action Program (ENSAP), which includes the countries of Egypt, Ethiopia, and Sudan, sought
  to initiate a regional, integrated, multi-purpose program through a series of investments, and the Eastern
  Nile Council of Ministers decided in March 2001 that funding should be sought to advance studies of
  promising irrigation and drainage sites to the feasibility and design level in October 2004, when ENCOM
  decided to fast-track the preparation of the I&D project. The project was designed about two years after
  this decision. However, the project was not ready at the time of appraisal, and it needed to complete the
  detailed preparation work required for project implementation. Since, past irrigation investments in
  Ethiopia were on a limited scale and under institutional arrangements different from those intended under
  this project, past lessons were of limited applicability. Therefore, the project team designed the
  investment using information from conceptual designs that relied on simple assumptions and cost
  estimates that were highly unrealistic.

  The project risk assessment ignored the low implementation capacity in the country, therefore sufficient
  time and resources to build this capacity were not included in implementation arrangements. For
  example, considering the Government’s limited experience, structuring a Management Supervision
  Contract in a country with low project management capacity and limited experience with private operators
  in the water resources management sector, the Bank did not ensure that the Government had sufficient
  time to internalize options and build the necessary capacity for managing complex contracts of this
  nature. The design was also too optimistic in expecting the construction of civil works to be completed
  within two to three years in view of the government’s limited experience. More time would be needed to
  address safeguard requirements and social factors under this project, as well as the government funded
  Ribb Dam project.

  The project technical design did not consider that the farmers would be using a new irrigation system for
  the first time, and that dedicated support to the farmers in transitioning from their traditional rain-fed
  agricultural practices to the irrigated agriculture would be needed. The original design did not include soil
  and land management support for the newly irrigated land. This was a later addition.

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  The number of project missions by the bank team were sufficient, i.e. during the project’s ten-year
  implementation period, 21 supervision and support missions were carried out (about every six months).
  The missions were staffed with the required experts to cover technical reviews of all components, in
  addition to fiduciary safeguard support, including experts in dam safety. Aide Memoires and
  Implementation Status Reports noted the emerging issues related to procurement, financial
  management, institutional capacity, and safeguards. In the course of implementation, four different task
  teams brought in a range of expertise. The ICR did not report on any issues or concerns caused during
  transitioning between different task team leaders.

  However, there were shortcomings. These were as follows:

  • The project development objective and results framework revisions were done very late during project
  implementation, despite the significant shortcomings with the results framework. Mission conclusions
  tended to be overly optimistic during the early years and the achievement of the PDO was rated
  satisfactory, despite bottlenecks. During the 2011 request for AF, there was sufficient evidence that the
  project was facing serious issues and limitations, as well as cost increases. However, instead of
  restructuring the project during the time of the AF, the Bank waited another five years before revising the
  PDO and establishing more realistic targets during the 2016 restructuring when there was only about a
  year remaining in the project period. Although the project had started to show more progress by then, it
  was still highly unlikely that the project would meet its targets by the closing date. Thus, the project team
  discussed with the client another year’s extension to complete the physical works for Megech. Although
  the client was in favor of the extension, the World Bank management refused to extend the project given
  the ongoing implementation problems.

  • Another significant flaw was on the social and environmental safeguards. Bank decision making
  delayed the allocation of government funds for compensation payments. The project was not in
  compliance on safeguards throughout most of the implementation period. The outstanding issues by the
  end of the project posed serious flood risks, dam safety risks, and reputational risks associated with the
  6,616 people that were not compensated, lost their livelihoods, lost access to utility services, or were at
  risk of being encircled by the Ribb reservoir. It was only at the end of the project when the final
  restructuring allowed the government to use credit funds to compensate these impacted people that
  some of these risks were mitigated. These issues could have been resolved much earlier during project
  implementation.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  M&E responsibility was shared between the National and Regional Project Coordination Office to carry
  out annual work plans and annual progress and performance reviews, routine monitoring activities, and
  the maintenance of a systematic project database to facilitate periodic reporting. There were issues
  with the selection of outcome indicators and intermediate outcome targets, which had to be revised
  later on during implementation.



b. M&E Implementation

  The M&E system could not consolidate, highlight and transmit on time information on the project progress
  and implementation challenges to relevant decision makers. Therefore, issues were mostly identified during
  the Bank supervision missions, rather than through adequate M&E processes and procedures. The project
  could carry out only two of the three planned surveys required, but with delays.



c. M&E Utilization

  M&E information was rarely used for addressing any of the bottlenecks, delays, and other challenges arising
  during project implementation. Despite changes in the outcome and intermediate indicators reflecting greater
  attention to gender, the data did not lead to any actions that would facilitate women’s participation in project
  benefits.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)



a. Safeguards

  The project was categorized as Category A on environmental and social safeguards triggering seven
  safeguards: Environment Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04), Pest Management (OP 4.09),
  Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), Involuntary Resettlement, (OP 4.12), Safety of Dams (OP 4.37), and
  Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50). A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a detailed
  Environmental and Social Impact Assessment were prepared during project preparation.

  Environmental Safeguards:

  The ICR noted that (para 76) implementation and compliance of environmental safeguards were
  unsatisfactory due to the poor performance primarily related to OP 4.01 and OP 4.37. The issues in general
  were: (a) weak commitment of the client to periodically follow up and review implementation progress and
  take the necessary remedial measures; (b) limited staff capacity in the national and regional project
  coordination offices; (c) poor coordination at all administrative levels; and (d) poorly performing contractors
  and international consultants.
  Environment Assessment (OP 4.01). Critical safeguard issues remained outstanding at the closing of the
  project. The main issues as reported by the ICR were (para 77) limited proactivity to rehabilitate non-active
  borrow/quarry areas that posed health, safety, and environmental (HSE) hazards to local communities, as
  well as to maximize future use of these sites; flood emergency preparedness plans for both schemes and
  river training works for the Ribb scheme, which were not completed by the closing of the IDA credit; and
  delays in the construction of an access road and two pedestrian bridges across the main and secondary
  canals for the partially isolated village (approximately 200 households) at the Ribb Reservoir. The latter
  posed particularly adverse impacts on vulnerable groups such as children, elderly, pregnant women and
  disabled individuals.

  Safety of Dams (OP 4.37). This policy applied to the GoE-financed Ribb Dam, which was at the feasibility
  stage during the time of appraisal. An Independent Panel of Experts was contracted to support the review,
  design, and construction of the dam, and the Dam Safety Review Panel (DSRP) carried out periodic visits
  and provided detailed recommendations. However, enforcement and implementation of these
  recommendations proved to be a challenge because the construction of the dam lied outside the purview of
  MoWIE. Eventually, the Bank and DSRP experts ensured preparation of a series of critical instruments and
  tools, including an emergency preparedness plan, operation and maintenance plan, dam safety
  instrumentation plan, and reservoir impoundment plan. However at project closing, several critical dam
  safety issues remained outstanding. To address these issues, a dedicated committee was formed to follow
  up on the remedial measures recommended by DSRP before proceeding with plans for reservoir
  impoundment. Project team informed IEG that after the project closed, remedial measures recommended by
  DSRP were finalized, but impoundment of the dam was delayed by a year to allow for recommended
  investigation and remedial measures.

  Pest Management (OP 4.09) and Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11). Overall compliance with these
  policies was satisfactory. The Physical Cultural Resources policy measures were addressed as part of a
  detailed Environmental and Social Impact Assesment, which did not find any critical heritage sites in the
  project areas.

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)




Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50). Riparian notifications were sent to all downstream neighbors.
The project was regionally identified under the auspices of the Nile Basin Initiative, which helped underpin
the feasibility of the project and provide assurance that the levels of water abstracted would not cause
noticeable changes in water availability for downstream riparian. Thus, compliance with this OP was rated by
the ICR as satisfactory.

The ICR did not report on the compliance with the Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) policy.

Social Safeguards:

Regarding the Resettlement Action Plan, by the end of the project period, 6,618 project affected persons
were identified and still needed to be compensated either for temporary loss of access to their land during
redistribution and construction, or for permanent relocation due to the construction of the GoE-financed Ribb
Dam and Reservoir. The total estimated cost of US$21.7 million was to cover compensation for temporary or
permanent relocation and livelihood restoration. However, the government financed only US$11.17 million
equivalent for resettlement cash compensation. In August 2017, the government requested that the Bank
allow an exceptional use of IDA credit proceeds to finance the long delayed cash compensation to the 6,618
people identified in the approved RAPs. On October 31, 2017, the Bank approved US$9.68 million to be
used for compensating the PAPs who had been identified before the Credit closed. In addition, although the
livelihood restoration for displaced persons was also the government’s obligation, weak institutional capacity
limited implementation of the planned activities. A decision was made to compensate the people who
resettled from Ribb Reservoir for livelihood restoration in the same way the cash compensation was paid to
the eligible people, so that they can adjust to their new urban setting. In February 2017, the GoE requested
Bank financing for livelihood restoration activities. Subsequently, it was agreed that the IDA credit would
finance the estimated cost of US$4 million equivalent for resettling 1,486 people affected by the Ribb Dam
and Reservoir construction. The project team informed IEG that all compensation payments were completed
within the grace period of the project, but there were still outstanding safeguards issues, which were: (i)
finalization of flood protection works – ongoing to be completed with construction of Ribb scheme; (ii) access
and bridge for partially encircled community at Ribb dam – completion stalled due contractual issues. As of
December 2018, a new contractor was on board and a bridge is due to be completed by March 2019; (iii)
restoration of non-active burrow sites – 4 out of the 11 burrow/quarry sites are under still under rehabilitation.

The ICR noted that (para 75), the performance in social safeguards was unsatisfactory due to prolonged
delays in making compensation payments and supporting livelihood restoration for the people in the Ribb
reservoir and dam construction site. This poor performance contributed to increasing frustration on the part
of the affected communities and rising tension in the project areas. Due to project delays, the participating
communities had little incentive to give up their land, and to some extent caused disruption or damage to
already installed infrastructure. Thus, throughout much of the project implementation period, the project was
not in compliance with OP 4.12 and posed high social risk. It was only after credit closure that the project
could be brought into compliance through the use of the credit to cover the costs.




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial Management. Audit reports were submitted with unqualified opinions, and the project team took
  timely action on report findings and other Bank recommendations. Although the team was proactive in
  addressing financial management issues, challenges continued throughout the project period. For example,
  although the World Bank moved to an online withdrawal application submission system to facilitate
  disbursement, the project continued to face delays in submitting withdrawal applications because the
  signatories did not sign off in a timely manner. In addition, internal weaknesses were observed mostly in
  fixed asset management.

  Procurement. The ICR noted that procurement performance was unsatisfactory (para 69). Many
  procurement packages and contracts, including the main civil works contracts, remained incomplete by the
  credit closing date, with little progress in implementing agreed actions. The Project coordination office’s
  capacity was not sufficiently strengthened to manage multiple complex contracts and other obligations.
  Requests by the Bank for independent review of some allegations were not followed up to verify the
  quantities certified for both the Megech-Seraba and Ribb schemes. Moreover, requests for submission of
  revised, realistic, and resourced schedules for all outstanding contracts were not addressed in a timely
  manner, thus complicating the orderly closure of the IDA credits. Such delayed actions as well as
  procurement and contractual issues exposed the government to contractual disputes and claims, some of
  which required lengthy negotiations between MoWIE, contractors, and consultants. In addition, delays in
  establishing dispute boards for the civil works and MSC as per the provisions of each contract undermined
  resolution of claims and disputes. Procurement reviews often identified inconsistencies with World Bank
  procedures. In one case, mis-procurement was declared after project closure due to the lack of sufficient
  evidence to justify conducting a transaction without an approved procurement plan, and the awarding of a
  contract to an ineligible state-owned enterprise dependent on the implementing agency.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

  No unintended impacts were reported.



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                     IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                       Highly Unsatisfactory   Highly Unsatisfactory    ---

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)



Bank Performance               Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory            ---
                                                                                 M&E design, implementation
Quality of M&E                 Modest                  Negligible                and utilization was extremely
                                                                                 weak.
Quality of ICR                                         Substantial               ---

12. Lessons


The ICR provided comprehensive lessons. The most relevant ones follow with some modification of language:

• Reforms that include a transformation from rain fed to irrigated farming as well as the introduction of
private operators and Water User Associations require a long term and phased approach implemented
through more than one project. This project experience showed that a single project is not sufficient to
introduce large scope irrigation investments and innovations for the first time in a country. Proper phasing of an
I&D investment would ideally include infrastructure development and initial development of WUAs in the first
phase. The second phase would aim at operationalizing the WUA as well as improving and commercializing
agricultural markets and value chains. Innovative technological advancements could be piloted in small areas
first to be scaled up in later phases.
• Ensuring project readiness before approval is one of the key success factors. Incomplete preparation
of the project led to long delays (up to four years) and unreasonable timeframes for meeting project objectives
and unrealistic targets. In the future, the Bank should ensure that project designs are based on sound
assumptions and detailed engineering designs. Project teams may be able to use a PPF or trust fund to finance
these preparation costs well before project implementation.
• Realistic assessment of the project performance by the Bank during implementation accompanied by
course revisions to address all the needs and bottlenecks, is likely to ensure more realistic results.
During the implementation of the project, the Bank teams consistently assigned high ratings despite obvious
signs that the project was facing issues that could seriously undermine the project achieving its objectives.
Teams need to conduct realistic assessments of project performance and consider either substantial reductions
in project scope or even dropping a project when it becomes apparent that project constraints could not be
overcome within the original project period and financing.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR candidly presented a narrative that supported the ratings and available evidence. The report was
concise, followed the guidelines, and was focused on results. The project’s theory of change was adequately

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Irrigation & Drainage SIL (FY07) (P092353)



presented and helped the reader to understand how the ratings had been reached. The ICR’s lessons were
clear, very useful and based on evidence outlined in the ICR. The only weakness was there was
inconsistency in terms of project costs and disbursements in the report.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                             Page 18 of 18
