     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: IDEA Project (P121528)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0021387

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P121528                                    BD: IDEA Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Bangladesh                                 Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-49380                                  30-Jun-2016                                         111,251,189.65

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 10-May-2011                                28-Feb-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           195,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            170,042,059.52                                               0.00

 Actual                                        113,738,163.07                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Antonio M. Ollero           Judyth L. Twigg              Malathi S. Jayawickrama         IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 4), the project development objective of the Identification
   System for Enhancing Access to Services (IDEA) Project of the People's Republic of Bangladesh was "to
   assist Bangladesh to establish an accurate, secure, and reliable national ID system for a more efficient and
   transparent service delivery".

   As the project development objective did not change during the life of the project, this ICR Review will
   undertake a standard evaluation of the project, and not a split-rating evaluation, as the ICR did. Additional
   outcome and output indicators were added during the restructuring of June 2015, but these did not alter the

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: IDEA Project (P121528)



   project objective, and the targets for these new results indicators, once set at restructuring, did not change
   during the remaining life of the project.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                           PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The IDEA project comprised the second phase of the Government of Bangladesh's effort to build a national
   identification (NID) system based on existing voter lists. Earlier, in 2008, the United Nations Development
   Programme (UNDP) funded the Bangladesh Preparation of Electoral Roll with Photographs (PERP)
   project which built a database of 18 million citizens aged 18+ years, a biometric based de-duplication
   system for data entry, and an information technology (IT) infrastructure covering nearly 500 upazila
   offices. (An upazila is a local administrative region in Bangladesh, the equivalent of a county in other
   countries.) The IDEA project, which was designed to advance the Government's effort to issue NID cards
   with security features, develop the capacity to provide identity verification services, and begin to integrate
   the NID system into public and private services, had three components:


   Regulatory Framework for the National Identification System and Integration into Service Delivery (US$9
   million estimated at appraisal, US$8 million estimated at the third restructuring, final disbursed amount not
   reported on a component basis but on a disbursement-category basis) supported the development of the
   regulatory framework for the NID system, including drafting and issuance of rules and regulations for the
   NID system, the integration of the NID system into services delivery in selected government agencies, and
   the provision by the authorities of electronic identity verification services to public and private entities.

   Operation and Management of the National Identification System (US$146 million estimated at appraisal,
   US$128 million estimated at the third restructuring, final disbursed amount not reported on a component
   basis but on a disbursement-category basis) supported the design and deployment of technology
   infrastructure and facilities for the NID, including a data center and disaster recovery site, a data
   communications network, a decentralized technology infrastructure, the enhancement of database
   contents, and the production, personalization and delivery of NID smart cards to citizens. (A smart card
   has a built-in microprocessor capable of electronic transactions. Personalization is the technical process
   by which each smart card is made unique.)


   Capacity Building, Communication, and Overall Project Management (US$40 million estimated at
   appraisal, US$35 million estimated at the third restructuring, final disbursed amount not reported on a
   component basis but on a disbursement-category basis) supported the provision of technical assistance,

                                                                                                               Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BD: IDEA Project (P121528)



  training, and technology to help develop the capacity of the newly-established National Identity Registration
  Wing (NIDW) of the Bangladesh Election Commission (BEC) to serve as a high-performing, service-
  oriented, and self-dependent public organization.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total cost of the project was estimated at appraisal at US$195 million (SDR 123 million
  equivalent, at the exchange rate of SDR 0.63 = US$1.00 at appraisal in April 2011). With the depreciation
  of the SDR against the U.S. dollar, the total cost of the project was re-estimated at the third restructuring
  at US$171 million (SDR 123 million, at the exchange rate of SDR 0.72 = US$1.00 at restructuring in
  March 2015) .


  Financing: The project was financed with an International Development Association (IDA) credit in the
  amount of SDR 123 million (US$195 million equivalent, at the exchange rate of SDR 0.63 = US$1.00
  at project approval in July 2011). The depreciation of the SDR against the U.S. dollar reduced the U.S.
  dollar value of the financing from US$195 million at approval to US$171 million by the time of the third
  restructuring in June 2015. The actual amount disbursed was SDR 105.4 million (US$113.7 million
  equivalent) by the project closing date. The undisbursed amount of SDR 17.6 million (US$25 million
  equivalent at the exchange rate of SDR 0.70 = US$1.00 in December 2017) was cancelled effective
  December 14, 2017.


  Borrower Contribution: Bangladesh was expected at appraisal to contribute US$2 million to the
  project. The Government was to pay: the rent for the Project Office, disaster recovery site, and data
  center; utility charges for the Project Office; and the salaries and benefits of Government personnel who
  worked at the Project Office or the NIDW. Moreover, at the third restructuring, the borrower contribution
  was raised to a proposed US$24 million, according to the Restructuring Paper of June 25, 2015 (page
  8). The customs duties and value added tax (VAT) for the 90 million blank NID smart cards and 10
  personalization systems would be higher than the US$23 million originally estimated. The higher
  borrower contribution would limit the financing by the project of customs duties and the VAT. The
  authorities have not provided an accounting of these borrower contributions, but the ICR team contends
  that it is reasonable to assume that the Government fulfilled the foregoing commitments.


  Dates: The project was approved on May 10, 2011 and became effective on August 28, 2011. The
  project closed on February 28, 2018, a year and eight months after the original closing date of June 30,
  2016.


  Restructuring: The project was restructured four times. The restructuring did not change the project
  development objective.

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: IDEA Project (P121528)




     • The first restructuring of March 27, 2012, with none of the project funds disbursed, modified the
     categories of expenditures for the project to allow for the use of project funds for start-up activities,
     including for consultants to help with the rules and regulations to implement the National Identity
     Registration Act of 2010.
     • The second restructuring of August 12, 2013, with SDR 3.4 million disbursed (2.7 percent of the
     project financing), reallocated the project funds between expenditure categories: increasing the
     allocation for operating costs from SDR 16.5 million to SDR 17.7 million, and reducing the allocation for
     goods, works, services, consultant services and training from SDR 34.8 million to SDR 33.5 million.
     • The third restructuring of June 28, 2015, with SDR 65.6 million disbursed (53.3 percent): (a) revised
     some results indicators --- added two outcome indicators, deleted three output indicators, and added
     four output indicators; (b) extended the closing date from June 30, 2016 to December 31, 2017; (c)
     changed the financing plan for the project in view of the depreciation of the SDR against the U.S. dollar,
     which reduced the U.S. dollar value of the IDA credit from US$195 million to US$171 million; (d) revised
     the estimates of the costs of the three components to reflect the reduction of the U.S. dollar value of the
     IDA financing --- the cost of the Regulatory Framework for the National Identification System from US$9
     million to US$8 million, that for the Operation and Maintenance of the National Identification System
     from US$146 million to US$128 million, and that for Capacity Building and Communication from US$40
     million to US$35 million; (e) reallocated the project funds between expenditure categories; (f) authorized
     the use of the project funds to pay for customs duties and the VAT on imports for the project, for up to
     US$23.3 million; and (g) changed the schedule for the annual disbursements of the project funds.
     • The fourth restructuring of December 29, 2017, with SDR 105.4 million disbursed (85.7 percent),
     extended the project closing date from December 31, 2017 to February 28, 2018 and cancelled the
     undisbursed balance of SDR 17.6 million (US$25 million equivalent).




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale
  The objective to establish an accurate, secure and reliable NID system was to be accomplished by the
  production, personalization, and distribution of smart NID cards to Bangladeshi citizens. By this statement,
  the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) equated the smart NID card system with an “accurate, secure, and
  reliable” means of identification of citizens for public and private purposes, in contrast with the previous
  paper ID card system which would be considered as not “accurate, secure, and reliable”. The PAD,
  however, did not associate these attributes to elements of the smart NID card system (e.g. an accurate
  database, a secure card, a reliable ICT network), or define metrics to measure the level of, or degree of,
  “accuracy”, “security”, and “reliability” of the smart NID card system. The same shortcoming applies to the
  equation by the PAD of the use of the smart NID card system by Government agencies with a “more
  efficient and transparent delivery” of public services to citizens.


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 19
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            BD: IDEA Project (P121528)




       These shortcomings do not undermine the basic premise that smart NID cards provide for an “accurate,
       secure and reliable” NID system, but an association of the terms with elements of the NID system, as well
       as metrics to measure levels or degrees of these attributes, would have made for a more robust formulation
       of the project objective, reporting of the project results, and evaluation of the project outcome.


       Notwithstanding the foregoing shortcoming, this ICR Review considers the project to be highly relevant to
       the development priorities of Bangladesh and to the assistance strategy of the World Bank Group in the
       country, both at project appraisal and at project closing.


       The project was relevant to the development priorities of the country at project closing. The "Seventh Five
       Year Plan (FY2016-2020)" aimed to accelerate inclusive growth, reduce poverty, empower citizens, and
       promote sustainable development. The plan expected Bangladesh to achieve these objectives by
       improving the investment climate, raising investments in infrastructure and manufacturing, addressing skills
       challenges in industry, leveraging the advantages of information and communications technology, and
       enhancing the efficiency of the financial sector. The plan would equally empower citizens to contribute to
       these development priorities by striving for universal primary and secondary education, increasing access to
       improved public health care, strengthening social protection systems, and promoting gender equality in
       education and employment. By integrating the new NID system into the range of public services that it
       provided, the Government would more effectively and efficiently achieve the objectives of the development
       plan, and with the active participation of its citizens.


       The project was aligned with the assistance strategy of the Bank Group in Bangladesh at project
       closing. The "Country Partnership Framework for Bangladesh for the Period FY16-FY20" called for the
       Bank Group to engage the Government in "three foundational priorities" for promoting sustainable growth
       and creating jobs --- maintaining macroeconomic stability, promoting human development, and
       strengthening institutions and the business environment --- and in "five transformational priorities" where
       country performance has lagged --- energy, inland connectivity, regional and global integration,
       urbanization, and adaptive delta management. The NID system would continue to support the efforts of the
       Government to efficiently and transparently provide public services to its citizens along these priorities.



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL




                                                                                                       Page 5 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: IDEA Project (P121528)




Objective 1
Objective
To assist Bangladesh to establish an accurate, secure, and reliable national identification system.

Rationale
The project only modestly achieved the objective of establishing an accurate, secure and reliable NID
system, as the project delivered smart NID cards for only half the number of Bangladeshi citizens that the
Government targeted.


  • A total of 40.39 million citizens had access to secure and reliable means of identification, with their NID
  cards personalized by the project closing date, representing only 50.5 percent of the target of 80 million
  citizens. The implementation of the project and the initiation of the procurement process for the NID cards
  were much delayed, in large part because the Government could not finalize the rules and regulations to
  implement the National Identity Registration Act (NIRA) of 2010 --- a condition to the disbursement of the
  project funds --- without a Parliamentary amendment to the NIRA. The NID card contract was not signed
  until January 2015, roughly three and a half years after the project effectivity date. Thereafter, there were
  be problems with contract implementation, with only half the target of smart NID cards personalized,
  and the contract was not renewed after it expired in June 2017. Meanwhile, the authorities issued 91
  million paper-laminated NID cards by end-fiscal year 2015, which were accepted as valid identity tokens,
  but which lacked security features. The paper-laminated NID cards met the criterion for "reliability" of an
  NID system, but failed to meet the criterion on "security". The ICR (page 20) estimates that the project,
  the financing of which the Government had assumed after the project closing date in February 2018,
  should be able to complete the personalization of the remaining 38.81 million smart NID cards by end-
  December 2018, using the remaining blank NID cards supplied by the contractor. The ICR team has since
  reported that the Government has further extended its schedule for completing the project on its own
  account to end-June 2019.




  • A total of 19.15 million women had access to secure and reliable means of identification, with their NID
  cards personalized, representing only 47.9 percent of the target of 40 million women. The authorities
  issued 45 million paper-laminated NID cards to women by end-fiscal year 2015. The ICR (page 20)
  similarly estimates that the project, under financing by the Government, should meet this target by end-
  December 2018. The ICR team has since reported that the Government has further extended its schedule
  for completing the project on its own account to end-June 2019.


The project had a better record completing the outputs defined under the three components of the project to
support the first objective. However, the inability of the project to provide smart NID cards to roughly half the
number of citizens in the target population means that the other half of the target --- some 39.6 million


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 19
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            BD: IDEA Project (P121528)



    citizens --- still did not have access to an accurate, secure and reliable NID system by the project closing
    date.


        • The operational procedures for the management of the NIDW at the BEC were introduced, as planned.
        • The regulatory and operational guidelines for the NIDW and NID verification service were issued, as
        planned.
        • The data center and the disaster recovery center of the NIDW at the BEC were established, as
        planned. (A data center is a facility that houses computer systems and associated components, including
        telecommunications and storage systems. A disaster recovery center enables the recovery or
        continuation of vital technology infrastructure and systems following a natural or human-induced disaster).
        • One personalization center for smart NID cards was established, meeting the target.
        • A total of 516 upazila server stations capable of NID registration and updating of information were
        connected through the virtual private network (VPN), exceeding the target of 230 upazilla server
        stations. (A server station is a computer that handles data requests from other computers. A virtual
        private network extends a private network across a public network, creating a safe and encrypted
        connection over a less secure network.)
        • Some 43 staff were recruited to the NIDW, short of the target to recruit 71 staff members.
        • Some 4,261 staff members were trained in the operation of the NID and management of the NIDW,
        exceeding the target to train 2,240 staff members.
        • No orientation session was organized for the upazila-level staff of the NIDW for community mobilization
        for the NID system, compared to the target to organize 60 orientation sessions. The consulting firm hired
        for this purpose failed to deliver the orientation sessions.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     To use the accurate, secure and reliable national identification system as a basis for a more efficient and
     transparent delivery of public services.

    Rationale
    The project substantially achieved the objective for Government agencies to use the NID system as a basis
    for a more efficient and transparent delivery of public services to Bangladeshi citizens. The number of
    agencies and the number of citizens using the smart NID card system for identity verification exceeded the
    targets by wide margins.



                                                                                                         Page 7 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: IDEA Project (P121528)




  • A total of 17 public and 68 private agencies used the NID system to verify the identification of their
  clients and service beneficiaries, exceeding the target that at least two public and two private agencies
  use the system for client and service beneficiary identification. The ICR (pages 21-23) profiles five public
  and two private agencies that use the NID services, including the Ministry of Finance (some 800,000
  "ghost" employees and pensioners were found), the National Board of Revenue (some 1.2 million false or
  duplicate taxpayer accounts were identified), the Department of Immigration and Passports (which
  reported an easier verification of identity and hence more timely issuance of passports), the Office of the
  Registrar General (which uses the NID number of a parent to issue a birth certificate to a child), and the
  Government Exchequer (which was able to collect US$17 million for the NID services).




  • There was no progress with the target to have five public and private agencies use the NID system for
  offline identity verification using smart NID cards. The ICR (page 19) reports that the project could not
  gather data on the number of agencies doing offline identity verification, using either smart or paper-
  laminated NID cards, citing this as a shortcoming of the M&E system rather than a failure to achieve the
  outcome target.




  • A total of 70 million citizens had their identity electronically verified, exceeding the target of 7 million
  citizens.


The project also substantially delivered on the outputs defined under the three components of the project to
support the second objective.


  • Three social protection programs utilized the NID to verify the identity of their beneficiaries, short of the
  target that five social protection programs use the NID.
  • Some 71 percent of agencies surveyed expressed satisfaction with the NID verification services,
  according to a survey conducted over the period November-December 2017, exceeding the target that 70
  percent of agencies be satisfied using the NID verification services.
  • Some 93 percent of citizens surveyed expressed satisfaction with the use of NID smart cards, according
  to a survey conducted over November-December 2017, exceeding the target that 70 percent of citizens be
  satisfied with using NID smart cards.



Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                         Page 8 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  BD: IDEA Project (P121528)


     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale
This ICR Review weighs the first objective more heavily than the second because establishing an accurate,
secure and reliable NID system would form the basis for achieving an efficient and transparent delivery of public
services. For this reason, this ICR Review considers the composite rating for the overall efficacy of the project to
be modest.




Overall Efficacy Rating                                             Primary reason
Modest                                                              Low achievement

     5. Efficiency

            The efficiency of the project is assessed as modest.


            Economic Efficiency: The ICR (pages 23-24) calculated the net present value (NPV) of the project, from the
            perspective of the NID services provider, the Government's BEC. The NPV was positive at US$36.1 million,
            on an initial investment of US$113.2 million. Revenues consisted of receipts from public agencies using the
            NID services, at Bangladesh Taka (BDT) 1.16 (US$0.014 equivalent at BDT84.75 = US$1.00) per hit, and
            from private entities, at BDT 2.30 (US$0.027 equivalent) per hit. Revenues and operating costs were
            assumed to increase at 10 percent per year. The NPV was computed over a 10-year period and with a
            discount rate of 10 percent. The positive NPV signifies that the operation was efficient in economic
            terms. The Project Appraisal Document (page 57) previously estimated a positive NPV for the services
            provider, at US$69 million, over a ten-year period and using a discount rate of 7 percent.


            Operational Efficiency: The implementation of the project was delayed considerably. Progress with the
            project was limited in the first three years, as the finalization of the rules and regulations to implement
            the NIRA of 2010 required an amendment to the NIRA law itself. The amendment to install data privacy and
            security clauses was passed by Parliament only in October 2013, roughly two years after the effectivity of the
            project. The closing of the project was deferred twice, by a combined one year and eight months after the
            original project completion date. The project funds were not fully disbursed. Fourteen percent of the SDR
            123 million IDA financing was cancelled at the fourth restructuring.




     Efficiency Rating
     Modest



                                                                                                               Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: IDEA Project (P121528)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                    Rate
                                                          Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                    Available?
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                13.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome

The outcome of the project is rated as moderately unsatisfactory. The project was highly relevant to the
development priorities of the Government and aligned with the assistance strategies of the World Bank Group in
Bangladesh. The efficacy of the project was modest. Although the project substantially achieved the second
objective for Government agencies to use the smart NID card system as a basis for efficient and transparent
delivery of public services, the project only modestly achieved the first objective to establish an accurate, secure
and reliable NID system, with only half the target of 80 million Bangladeshi citizens having access to the new
NID system with smart NID cards. The efficiency of the project was modest overall. The NPV of the project was
positive for the NID services provider, signifying economic efficiency. However, the project suffered operational
inefficiencies. Project completion was delayed by almost two years, and some 14 percent of the project funds
were cancelled even after a sharp depreciation of the SDR against the U.S. dollar reduced the U.S. dollar value
of the IDA financing from US$195 million to US$171 million. The Government did not deliver on counterpart
financing for the project.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There are four risks to the sustainability of the development outcome of the project.


Political risk: According to the ICR (page 33), all major political groups in Bangladesh recognize the authenticity
of the NID database, as the NID data emanated from the electoral roll. Thus, the risk that political commitment
to the NID may waver is low.




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: IDEA Project (P121528)



Institutional risk: The NIDW is an operational institution. It is headed by a Director General, has a workforce
skilled in information technology, and should be able to attract more staff if its operations expand.


Financial risk: The NIDW generates its own revenue from the provision of NID services. The revenue base is
expected to grow as the number of users of the system increases. Moreover, the Government has taken over
ownership of the project and is committed to providing financial resources to the BEC when needed to sustain
the NID services. However, there is a contractual dispute between the BEC and the supplier of the NID
cards. According to the ICR (page 34), the BEC has yet to settle payment to its international supplier for some
77.3 million blank NID cards. As the project funds are no longer available to the Government following the
closing of the project in February 2018, the Government will have to bear the costs of settling this dispute
including the costs of litigation. The ICR team has since reported that the Government and the supplier have
reached agreement on the payment for the 77.3 million NID cards delivered and on the delivery of the
remaining 13.7 million NID cards, with all payments due to the supplier after the project closing date to be made
by the Government.


Technical risk: It is expected that the BEC will be able to technically maintain and provide support services to
the information technology systems established by the project for the NID system. The BEC is also anticipated
to increase the storage capacity of the data center and the disaster recovery site going forward. For this
purpose, a five-year plan is currently being developed, including for retaining skilled staff, to ensure the ability of
the NIDW to sustain the outcome of the project and mitigate any technical risks that may emerge. Meanwhile,
the NIDW is providing an Application Programming Interface (API) to its users to help them authenticate data in
the system. The initiative was beyond the original scope of the project. The system is yet to become
interoperable, however. (Interoperability is the ability of computer systems to exchange information, in this case
between the NIDW computer system and those of other public and private organizations.) The lack of
interoperability would pose future risks to advancing the development outcome of the NID system as the system
matures.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank defined a clear results chain for the project. An NID system, supported by an
  appropriate regulatory framework, efficient information and communication technology (ICT) infrastructure,
  and strong technical and managerial capacity, should provide Bangladeshi citizens with access to an
  accurate, secure and reliable identification system, and public and private institutions with access to
  accurate identity verification services. When integrated with the provision by government agencies of
  various public services, the NID system should enable the efficient and transparent delivery of public
  services to citizens.



                                                                                                        Page 11 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: IDEA Project (P121528)




  The Bank laid out detailed institutional and operational arrangements to implement the project, a useful
  blueprint considering the technical nature of the operation. The NIDW at the BEC would implement the
  NID system in technical partnership with the Local Government Division and the Bangladesh Bureau of
  Statistics. An NID Steering Committee, including public and private agencies, an expert group, and
  citizens' representatives, would provide strategic policy guidance.


  The Bank identified five operational risks that could potentially derail the implementation of the project and
  outlined mitigation measures that would address these risks. The technical complexity of the project was
  cited as a high-likelihood high-impact project risk, to which the Bank proposed developing a detailed
  project operations manual, pilot testing key activities including NID card distribution, mobilizing an
  implementation support consultancy, and launching a massive communication strategy.


  There was a significant shortcoming with the quality at entry, however. The Bank does not appear to have
  anticipated that the issuance of the rules and regulations to implement the NIRA, principally those on data
  privacy and information security, would have required an amendment by Parliament of the original NIRA
  legislation. The Financing Agreement (page 13) required the issuance of the NIRA implementing rules and
  regulations as a condition for project disbursement. However, the Appraisal Document (page 25) did not
  previously cite any need for an amendment to the NIRA, when discussing the NIRA implementing rules
  and regulations. The amendment would not be passed by Parliament until October 2013, roughly two
  years after the effectivity of the project.

  There was another minor shortcoming with the quality at entry. The quality at entry was less robust for the
  PAD not having defined metrics covering “accurate, secure and reliable” in reference to the smart NID card
  system, and “efficient and transparent” in reference to the use of the smart NID card system by
  Government public service agencies. The PAD also did not associate these attributes to elements of the
  smart NID card system, where applicable (see Section 3).




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The Bank organized a complete team of technical experts, procurement specialists, financial management
  specialists, and consultants who closely engaged with the NID Steering Committee, the highest body
  providing strategic policy guidance over the project, and the BEC Secretariat, the implementing agency of
  the project, during project implementation. The Bank fielded 14 supervision missions over the six and half-
  year life of the project, roughly two missions a year. The supervision missions prepared 14 Implementation
  and Results Reports (ISRs) and Aide-Memoires, which were comprehensive, detailed, and

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: IDEA Project (P121528)



  candid. According to the ICR (page 32), both technical and fiduciary teams worked to maximize the
  development impact of the project. Their work resulted in several adjustments to the project during
  implementation, as reflected in the restructuring documents.


  However, there was a moderate shortcoming with the quality of supervision. Four Bank task team leaders
  (TTLs) managed the project at different times. The ICR (page 32) suggests that the TTL changes might
  have affected the Bank's engagement with the Government, but does not cite specific evidence that it
  adversely did.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The Project Appraisal Document (pages 20-21) defined two outcome indicators and seven output indicators to
  measure the degree of achievement of the project development objective. At the restructuring of the project in
  June 2015, the first PDO-level outcome indicator "the number of citizens having access to secure and reliable
  means of identification, of which the percentage of women" was de-coupled to consist of two indicators. A
  fourth indicator was also added. The final outcome indicators were:


    • "the number of citizens having access to secure and reliable means of identification";
    • "the number of women citizens among the number of citizens having access to secure and reliable means
    of identification";
    • "the number of public and private institutions using electronic identity verification for their service delivery";
    and
    • "the number of public and private institutions using off-line identity verification for their service delivery
    using smart NID cards".


  The restructuring of June 2015 also revised the output indicators to consist of a final set of eleven:


    • that "operational procedures for the management of the NIDW are introduced" --- this was added as a new
    output indicator;
    • that "the regulatory and operational guidelines for the NID department and verification services are issued";


                                                                                                       Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: IDEA Project (P121528)



    • that "the BEC data center and disaster recovery center are established";
    • "the number of upazila server stations that are capable of NID registration and updating of information" ---
    this revised the original wording of "the number of upazila server stations that are capable of NID registration
    and update";
    • that "the necessary information systems are in place to design and implement the cost recovery
    mechanism";
    • "the number of social protection programs using the NID system to improve the targeting of beneficiaries"
    with a target of 5 programs --- this revised the original indicator "the percent of social protection programs
    using the NID system to improve targeting of beneficiaries";
    • "the number of staff recruited to the NIDW" --- this was added as a new output indicator;
    • "the number of staff trained in the operation and management of the NIDW";
    • "that a comprehensive nationwide communication strategy is implemented" --- this output indicator was
    dropped;
    • "that orientation sessions are organized the for the upazila-level staff of the BEC for community
    mobilization for the NID system", with a target of 60 sessions --- this was added as a new output indicator;
    • "the user perception of the quality of the ID system targeted by the project" --- this output indicator was
    dropped;
    • "agencies are satisficed using the NID verification services", with a target of 70 percent of agencies
    surveyed --- this was added as a new output indicator;
    • "citizens satisfied using NID smart cards", with a target of 70 percent of citizens surveyed --- this was
    added as a new output indicator;


  The M&E plan called for the implementing agency, the NIDW of the BEC, to conduct the M&E of the
  project. The plan also called for the hiring of a project management consultancy firm to support the NIDW on
  M&E, among other project activities.

  There was a minor shortcoming with M&E design, however. The M&E design was less robust for the PAD not
  having defined metrics to measure the level of, or degree of, “accuracy, security, and reliability” of the smart
  NID card system (see Section 3).


b. M&E Implementation
  The NIDW created the reporting formats for the project, issued the guidelines for data collection and report
  preparation, regularly collected M&E data, and reported on the progress with the project, both against the
  baseline values and the targets for the results indicators.


  However, the NIDW was not able to report on the fourth outcome indicator added during the restructuring of
  June 2015 --- "the number of public and private institutions using off-line identity verification for their service
  delivery using smart NID cards". The ICR (page 37) explains that data was not available for this indicator.



                                                                                                       Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: IDEA Project (P121528)




c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was used to inform the decisions made by the Bank and the Government to restructure the
  project in 2012, 2013, 2015 and 2017, including to reallocate the project funds among various components
  and cost categories, as well as to extend the project closing date twice.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
  Environmental Safeguards: The project was classified as an environmental category "C" at appraisal. The
  project did not trigger any Bank environmental safeguards policies. No physical construction activities were
  included in the project design, other than the refurbishment of the project office.


  Social Safeguards: The project did not raise any issue with Bank social safeguards policies. Rather, the
  project was expected to have a potentially significant social impact by creating and operating an accurate,
  reliable, and secure national ID system for many public and private purposes.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement: As the BEC did not have sufficient experience with large-scale ICT procurement (procurement
  for a preceding United National Development Programme project was implemented by the donor agency), the
  Bank required the BEC to undertake several risk mitigation and institutional capacity building measures: (a) hire
  an implementation support consultancy firm to handle the complete contract management cycle, including the
  tendering of bids and the quality control of goods and services received from vendors; (b) appoint procurement
  personnel dedicated to handle the procurement activities for the agency; (c) establish a system to credibly
  address any complaint related to procurement; and (d) provide a semi-annual report on a procurement risk
  mitigation plan covering, among others, bid openings, publication of awards, internal controls, coercive
  practices, and record keeping. The ICR (pages 31-32) reports that all procurement tendering packages were
  completed following the approved project procurement plan and that the procurement performance of the
  project was rated as moderately satisfactory.


  Financial Management: A financial management assessment was conducted in March 2010 to determine
  whether the financial management practices of the NIDW of the BEC were acceptable regarding: the use of
  funds for their intended purposes; the preparation of accurate, reliable and timely financial reports; and

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: IDEA Project (P121528)



  the safekeeping of agency assets. The assessment generally found the financial management risk of the
  project to be moderate. However, to address certain weaknesses, the Bank required that: (a) an
  implementation support consultant would be retained, and (b) a project financial management action plan
  would be prepared. The ICR (page 31) reports that action plan was followed and that the financial
  management performance of the project was rated as moderately satisfactory throughout project
  implementation. The unaudited interim financial reports were submitted to the Bank in a timely manner and
  found to be acceptable. The annual financial statements were audited, and the auditors submitted unqualified
  audit opinions in all cases.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                      ICR                      IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                             Moderately              Moderately
Outcome                                                                        ---
                             Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                                                               The Bank does not appear to
                                                                               have anticipated that the
                                                                               issuance of the rules and
                                                                               regulations to implement the
                                                                               NIRA, principally those on
                             Moderately              Moderately                data privacy and information
Bank Performance
                             Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory            security, would have required
                                                                               an amendment by Parliament
                                                                               of the original NIRA
                                                                               legislation. As a result, there
                                                                               was a two-year delay in
                                                                               effectiveness.
Quality of M&E               Substantial             Substantial               ---
Quality of ICR                                       Substantial               ---

12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the ICR (pages 34-35), with adaptation.


                                                                                                Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: IDEA Project (P121528)




New legislation, or amendments to existing legislation, that are needed for an operation should be planned for
well in advance of project approval or effectivity. The inclusion of data privacy and security clauses in the
implementing rules and regulations to the NIRA apparently required a Parliamentary amendment to the NIRA,
which was not anticipated at project preparation, and effectively delayed the implementation of the project by
about two years. This ICR Review does not agree with the assessment of the ICR (page 34) that "complying
with a legal framework is not a suitable condition for disbursement ... because the executive does not have
control over the actions of the parliament" and that "an investment project would benefit from not including a
politically-linked condition outside the control of the project and its implementing agency". This ICR Review
considers the amendment to have been inevitable, given the requirement for data privacy and security in the
NID system, and deems that the appropriate lesson should be that legislative actions must be planned for deep
in advance of project approval or effectivity.


For technology-heavy operations, it is vital that borrower governments be competently supported by suitable
technical assistance, including possibly beyond the project completion date, to ensure the sustainability of the
project outcomes. The project benefitted from having an implementation support consultancy firm handle the
contract management for the project, considering that the NIDW and the BEC did not have the technical
capacity and the operational experience for a large- scale ICT procurement. Going forward, there remain
considerable technological challenges for the Government and the NIDW: (a) the inter-operability of the NID
system relative to the computer systems of various public and private sector clients will be an issue as the NID
system matures; (b) the National Enterprise Architecture (NEA) bus launched by the Bangladesh Computer
Council will have to be implemented to enable the provision by the Government of electronic services (e-
services); and, (c) procurement and staffing related to these activities will continue to be
challenging. Hence, continuing technical assistance to the Government and the NIDW would be necessary
going forward.


A national identification initiative requires an effective communications strategy. According to the ICR, the
strategic communications program for the project, delivered by a professional communications firm, was
instrumental and effective in building demand for the NID services. The communications effort also collected
feedback information on the NID from both citizens and NID service users. It will be incumbent on the
Government to strengthen the communications strategy for the NID well beyond the project closing date.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: IDEA Project (P121528)




The ICR provides a comprehensive record of the project, beginning with the context of the operation at
appraisal (pages 8-9), the theory of change underlying the project (pages 9-11), and the design of the project
components and sub-components (pages 11-13). The document provides an informative tally of the changes
to the project's costs, financing plan, timetable, and results indicators made over four restructuring
episodes. The Government's Project Completion Report, attached as Appendix 1 to the ICR (pages 60-124),
offers even more detailed information on various aspects of project implementation, including the procurement
of goods, works and consultancy services, the installation of ICT equipment for the NIDW, the use of foreign
and local consultants, and the provision of training related to the implementation of the NIDW.


The assessment of the program's results is evidence-based. The ICR provides a useful summary and narrative
of the operation's performance, set within the results framework for the project (pages 18-20 and pages 36-
42). Details on the project outputs are supplied in a useful annex (pages 43-45).


The analysis of the program outputs and outcomes is candid. The ICR cites how the project only partly met
the objective to assist Bangladesh to establish a secure, accurate, and reliable national ID system for a more
efficient and transparent service delivery because the project delivered personalized NID smart cards to only
half the number of citizens and women citizens it targeted (pages 18-21). It also cites a significant
deficiency with quality at entry (page 32), citing the failure of the Bank preparation team to identify the
finalization of the NIRA implementing rules and regulations as a readiness condition for the project. However,
the ICR also acknowledges that the NID drew significantly more users than the project expected, and together
with the positive impact of the NID on its users, would have set the foundation for achieving the project
objective in the long run.


There are minor shortcomings with the ICR, however, perhaps owing to poor editing of the document.


  • The ICR (page 15) appears to confuse the two figures for borrower contribution, citing the Government
  contribution to the project as US$24 million at appraisal and US$2.01 million as the "revised" figure at
  restructuring.
  • The ICR (page 2) lists only three restructuring episodes. The ICR missed the first one, of March 2012,
  covered by a Restructuring Paper (Report No. 67650v1) and an Amendment to the Financing
  Agreement dated March 27, 2012.
  • The ICR, which puts forward a split rating for the project, cites the efficacy of the project after restructuring
  as "Modest" in one part of the report (page 25) and "Substantial" in another part (page 23).



a. Quality of ICR Rating


                                                                                                        Page 18 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BD: IDEA Project (P121528)



Substantial




                                                                    Page 19 of 19
