     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Kunming Urban Rail (P117656)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0021559

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P117656                                   CN-Kunming Urban Rail

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                     Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80370                                30-Nov-2016                                         276,926,592.19

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 10-May-2011                               30-Jun-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          300,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           276,926,592.19                                               0.00

 Actual                                       276,926,592.19                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Peter Nigel Freeman        Victoria Alexeeva            Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   The project development objective (PDO) stated in the loan agreement dated July 28, 2011 (Page 5) was "to
   support compact, transit-oriented urban development by providing high quality, integrated public transport on
   the East-West Line 3 corridor." This was identical to the wording in the project Appraisal Document (PAD -
   Page 5).

   The PDO itself was not changed, but the associated outcome indicators were revised in a restructuring
   approved on November 23, 2015. A split rating for the assessment of the PDO is not deemed necessary as

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Kunming Urban Rail (P117656)



   the outcome indicators were refined to more accurately measure the project achievements; and those that
   were dropped were not measurable or poorly defined. In the case of the revised outcome targets, a split
   rating will not affect the ratings as these were revised when the share of the IBRD funds disbursed was 30
   percent.

   Abbreviated indicators and amendments: (see section 9 for full details).

   1. Peak period travel from Shi Zui station site to Xiaoximen along Line 3 was re-defined as peak period travel
   time between origin and destination pairs along Line 3 (with the same target).
   2. Peak period travel time from East Long-distance bus terminal to NanPin Walking Street along Line 3 was
   re-defined as peak period travel time between origin and destination pairs along Line 3 (with the same
   target).
   3. Average daily weekday ridership on Line 3 after 1 year of operation was revised to after 6 months of
   operation.

   The following four outcome targets were dropped:

   4. Percentage of public transport riders who have access to a private car for their commute.
   5. Successful multi-modal integration with buses and cycles.
   6. Percentage of total new development that occurs along the railway line.
   7. Working ratio of the Kunming Rail Transit Company (KRTC), Line 3.

   New outcome indicators were:

   8. User satisfaction.
   9. On-time performance, and
   10. Floor Area Ratio (FAR) along Line 3 relative to district FAR in terms of new development.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  23-Nov-2015
                                                         PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components



                                                                                                             Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Kunming Urban Rail (P117656)



   The project had three components linked to the PDO and key indicators (costs are given for IBRD only):


     • Component 1: Civil Works (appraisal estimate: US$ 209.4 million, actual at closing US$ 279.2 million):
     Carrying out a program of civil works for selected stations, including, inter alia, bus interchanges and
     bicycle parking facilities, where appropriate, and associated facilities such as depots and track;
     equipment installation; and other related installations at selected stations.
     • Component 2: Equipment (appraisal estimate $86.9 million, actual at closing US$ 18.6 million):
     Provision of various equipment such as power supply; escalators; fare collection and communication
     systems; as well as technical equipment at depots and other related facilities.
     • Component 3: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (appraisal estimate US$ 3.0 million, actual
     at closing US$ 2.0 million ): Provision of: (i) studies to support bus-rail integration and the future
     development and construction of the public transport system; and (ii) support for project management
     capacity building and for operations management.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

   Project Cost: The original total project cost was US$ 1,711,600,000, but delays before construction could
   commence led to increases in costs. The final total project cost was US$ 1,842,400,000 of which US$
   1,803,926,592 (97.9 per cent) was disbursed.

   Financing: US$ 300,000,000 (16.28 per cent) through an IBRD loan. Some 92.3 per cent of the IBRD loan
   was disbursed (US$ 276,926,592). The balance was funded by the Borrower.

   Borrower: US$ 1,411,600,000 revised at restructuring to US$ 1,542,400,000 of which US$ 1,527,000,000
   (99.0 per cent) was disbursed.

   Dates: The original completion date of November 30, 2016 was extended by 19 months to June 30, 2018.
   This was primarily due to delays in the start date due to traffic management concerns and the need to
   adjust the urban rail construction schedule, but also because it took longer than expected to resolve the
   resettlement compensation claims.

   Restructuring: The results framework was extensively revised at restructuring and some targets for
   passenger volumes revised downwards slightly based on actual experience from the previous two metro
   lines that had already been opened.




3. Relevance of Objectives



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            CN-Kunming Urban Rail (P117656)



       Rationale


       Increasing urbanization caused the Government of China to look for solutions to lower the levels of traffic
       congestion, air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. Other goals were to achieve fewer traffic-related
       accident fatalities, improve mobility and accessibility (especially for low income populations), and
       accommodate non-motorized transport needs. This culminated in a State Council Directive to give priority to
       public transport, a "People First" initiative, and support for the "development of low-carbon compact cities."
       Urban rail transport was given priority in the development planning of first to third tier cities in China's 12th
       Five year Plan and Kunming was chosen for a pilot urban rail project. The Kunming Urban Rail Project was
       the first metro project considered for financial support by the World Bank in China. Selection was influenced
       by previous sustained support by the Kunming authorities for public transport and the city's location in one
       of the poorest western provinces of China. The value the Bank added was to provide strong technical
       support and knowledge of good international practice to enhance urban planning as well as bus, rail and
       cycling modal integration.

       The project was in line with the 2006-10 and 2013-16 Country Partnership Strategies supporting Chinese
       policies to balance urbanization, reduce poverty, inequality and social exclusion, and support the financing
       of sustainable and efficient economic growth. The project was also consistent with the goals of the Bank's
       transport strategy focused on safe, clean and affordable transport services. It continues to be relevant to
       China's current 13th Five Year Plan (2016-20), which calls for more coordination in development planning,
       especially in respect of green development, coupled with an acceleration in the development of mass transit
       in line with Chinese National Plan on New Urbanization (2014-2020). In addition the project was consistent
       with all aspects of the Sustainable Mobility for all (Sum4All) initiative, a new global partnership in support of
       sustainable development in the transport sector.

       Promoting compact city growth entailed increasing population density around stations, and improving land
       use between residential and commercial needs to reduce travel distances and thus greener growth
       solutions. At the local level, the PDO supported Kunming's development priorities as detailed in the city's
       master plan. These priorities encompassed the curtailment of urban sprawl, the construction of a high
       quality public transport network, with urban rail as its backbone, and the establishment of an integrated
       system to achieve seamless transfer between modes.



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective


                                                                                                            Page 4 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            CN-Kunming Urban Rail (P117656)




     To provide a high quality rail line along the East-West Line 3 corridor.

    Rationale

    The Theory of Change predicated that the civil works and associated equipment would reduce travel time,
    increase public transport ridership, and through high quality features and on-time performance result in user
    satisfaction.

    Outputs:

        • The project as completed comprised 17 stations and 19.20 km of track work. Seventeen stations
        were included as planned in the PAD. A saving in track length of 0.34 km was achieved as a result of
        alignment optimizations in design. The target was met.
        • The completed project also included provision of a power supply system, safety systems, a passenger
        information system, and a fare collection system.



    Outcomes:

        • Average daily ridership after six months of operation. The target was originally 200,000 riders, revised
        downwards in the restructuring to 150,000. Actual ridership achieved was 153,800 at project closure,
        slightly exceeding the revised target. The revised target was based on actual experience on the two earlier
        metro lines completed. At appraisal this information was not available.
        • On-time performance. The target was 98 percent and the actual performance at project closure was 99
        percent exceeding the target.
        • Peak period travel time (Shi Zui station to Xiaoximen) was reduced from 43 minutes to 14 minutes
        against a target of 22.5 minutes, (150 percent achieved).
        • Peak period travel time (East long distance bus terminal to NanPin walking street) reduced from 38
        minutes to 15 minutes against a target of 17.5 minutes, (122 percent achieved).
        • User satisfaction with service at project closure was 91.2 percent against a target of 80 per cent (114
        percent achieved). There has been a high level of service quality conforming with international standards.
        The stations are air conditioned and there is universal access for the disabled and elderly.



    Rating
   High
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2

                                                                                                        Page 5 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            CN-Kunming Urban Rail (P117656)




    Objective

     To integrate public transport along the East-West Line 3 corridor.

    Rationale

    The Theory of Change was that the bus and rail schedules and fare collection systems would be integrated
    to achieve efficient mobility and better user satisfaction.

    Outputs:

        • Number of stations built with bus/bicycle facilities within 50m of an exit. Thirteen of the 17 were
        completed by project closure (76 percent).
        • Shared fare card integrating bus and rail. This system was in operation at completion as per target.




    Outcomes:

        • Bus routes restructured to support integrated public transport as per the results of the route restructuring
        report. Partly achieved. Three measurements were used to assess the degree of integration: completion of
        physical interchange facilities, introduction of integrated fare payment and restructuring of bus routes. An
        integrated fare payment system was in place but four of the 17 interchange works were delayed due to
        lower than expected passenger demand. In these four instances road construction including sidewalks
        were not completed at closure. The implementation of the route restructuring is gradual and ongoing but
        not yet complete. However, a working mechanism between the authorities is now in place replacing the
        previous ad hoc integration process. Some overlapping of routes has been eliminated and 12 new feeder
        routes have been introduced. The ICR (page 18) indicated that it may take up to three years before all the
        feeder routes were operating, which had the effect of reducing the revised EIRR by 0.2 percentage points.
        Nevertheless, overall, substantial progress has been made.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective

     To support compact and transit-oriented urban development along the East-West Line 3 corridor.

    Rationale

                                                                                                          Page 6 of 16
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      CN-Kunming Urban Rail (P117656)




             The Theory of Change indicates that the investments in urban rail in the longer term will lead to a more
             compact and transit-orientated urban development along the Line 3 corridor.

             Outputs:

                  •   A study on achieving bus-rail integration was completed.
                  •   A study on future development and construction of the public transport system was completed.
                  •   Capacity building activities were rendered related to project management and operations management.


             Outcomes:
             Transit orientated development (TOD) is now supported not just by the KRTC but also by the Municipal
             Construction Bureau and the Development and Reform Commission. However, due to unfavorable real
             estate market conditions, such development has been concentrated on the middle section of Line 3 where
             significant re-development has taken place around the stations including pedestrianized shopping streets,
             high rise commercial complexes and dense residential areas. There was no indicator to measure this
             process, which is a long-term trend affected by many factors. The ICR says (Page 17) that the original
             economic evaluation was based on the understanding that there would be significant commercial
             development at downtown stations as well as at the eastern end of the line. However, the worsening
             economic conditions have discouraged the eastern end developments and some station and depot
             developments have been canceled or postponed.

             The target for the floor area ratio along Line 3 (relative to that in the broader district) was to be greater than
             one. This was a proxy for compact development and by the end of the project was found to be 1.6 times
             higher indicating that the city was encouraging more higher density developments.


             Rating
      Modest
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

Although a market downturn resulted in less transit-orientated development than expected, such development did
take place in the central district. The movement towards compact development has been commenced but will
take several years to come to fruition. A high quality rail line has been established and progress made towards
bus-rail integration. Ridership was lower than foreseen at appraisal but based on inadequate information. A split
analysis of this factor would not have altered the outcome.




                                                                                                                     Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Kunming Urban Rail (P117656)



Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

5. Efficiency


 The ex post economic analysis at closure had an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 7.9 per cent over
 the 30 year evaluation period of the project, whereas the PAD estimated it at 8.0 per cent, which met the
 threshold required by the Government of China (PAD page 67). Annex 4 of the ICR gives a detailed and
 thorough analysis of factors which changed during the interim. These included higher construction costs, the
 delayed opening date, an increase in the metro fares, the lack of commercial development at the eastern
 stations, and the incomplete restructuring of the bus routes to act as feeders to the metro. It also points out
 that the original population predictions were based on data from an unknown source, whereas at the time of
 the ICR newer and better data were available. Although the EIRR appears at first sight as marginal, the latest
 thinking on urban metro planning (see World Bank Urban Rail Development Handbook, 2018) suggests that
 complex metro projects can be supported with much lower EIRRs nowadays because many other factors are
 now taken into account including poverty reduction and access to jobs; land values; reducing the intensity of
 energy consumption so as to reduce the impacts of climate change; and improvements in economic
 growth due to a concentration of economic activity and the facilitation of business connections. At appraisal
 techniques to measure these factors had not been developed.

 Regarding administrative and operational issues, the project was delayed by 19 months. This was partly due
 to expected negative traffic impacts from the construction of three new metro lines simultaneously, which led
 to a decision by the Kunming authorities to delay the commencement of Line 3 construction. This delay
 reduced the EIRR on Line 3 by 0.2 percentage points. In addition, the relocation of households
 also contributed to the delay by impacting the procurement schedule. However, two new technical assistance
 proposals were agreed to be included in the Bank project to strengthen the project's efficiency. The first was
 to optimize materials management in order to improve cost efficiency and the quality of system construction
 and maintenance. The second was to improve the passenger survey methods used.



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                    Rate
                                                         Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                    Available?
                                                                                   99.00
 Appraisal                                              8.00
                                                                                   Not Applicable



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Kunming Urban Rail (P117656)



                                                                                       99.00
ICR Estimate                                               7.90
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


The relevance of the objectives was high, while the overall efficacy of the three objectives was substantial.
Efficiency was also substantial when measured against comparable results in the urban rail sector. The outcome
overall is rated satisfactory.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


There were three risk areas - the adequacy of sufficient funds for operations and maintenance activities, the
sustainability of multi-modal integration, and the sustainability and expansion of compact and transit-oriented
development:

Funds for operations and maintenance (O&M) activities: Although the overall performance of Line 3 met
expectations, the ridership at some stations has yet to reach the initial target, and real estate development
is modest in these areas, which means that the expected inflow of funds from such activities by KRTC has not
yet fully materialized. The Municipal Corporation and KRTC need to ensure adequate funding for the O&M
activities of Line 3, recognizing that maintenance costs are relatively low in the first two years of operation but
start to rise in later years. At the same time, ridership will begin to increase and the inflow of funds from the real
estate activities of KRTC is expected to materialize over time, thus eliminating the need for special additional
funding.

Sustainability of multi-modal integration: This will depend on coordination between the urban rail company, the
bus company, and the Transport Bureau at the municipal level. At present, according to the ICR (Page 27), the
metro company does not report directly to the Transport Bureau, while the bus company does, which makes
coordination difficult. The national government has been promoting a single authority for overall planning and
design to facilitate the linkages between all transportation modes, which the Bank supports. However, such a
major institutional change will take time to become a reality.

Sustainability and expansion of compact and transit-oriented development: To mitigate this risk, the Kunming
municipality has drawn up a master plan that promotes high density, and compact land use development. It


                                                                                                         Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Kunming Urban Rail (P117656)



has already taken actions to curtail unchecked development in Kunming and to enhance the efficacy of land
use. Meanwhile, the Kunming Land Bureau is evaluating the impact of regulations on land value
capture including the commercial use of land around stations, in order to increase the revenues from land use,
and is exploring options to sustain compact growth and Transit Oriented Development. In this regard, the Bank
is implementing a China Sustainable Cities Integrated Approach Pilot Project with central government to review
national laws and regulations on urban planning and land administration.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  This was the first metro project that the Bank had supported in China. The project design benefitted from
  the Bank’s technical advice including the development of innovative tools and methodologies to forecast
  inter alia urban rail demand. By introducing concepts such as transport oriented demand and transport
  integration, the team engaged with the government at central, provincial and city levels to discuss the core
  policy and institutional issues that had to be resolved to achieve sustainable urban mobility. The
  introduction of international good practices, benchmarks and tools introduced by the team were the main
  reason for the Bank's involvement and provided opportunities for the client to strengthen the management
  of urban rail investments and improve the quality of service. According to the ICR (Page 25), "there was
  sufficient citizen engagement and consultation with key stakeholders during project preparation, and most
  risks and barriers to transit-oriented spatial growth and to the development of an effective multi-modal
  public transport system were identified." While IEG concurs with this, it is clear that the project results
  framework was not given adequate attention since it was almost entirely revised during implementation.
  The fact that three metro line projects were to be disrupting traffic simultaneously was also not identified as
  an issue during preparation.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  The Bank fielded a team that was technically strong and enhanced supervision by basing a co-task team
  leader in China. Mission findings were expressed in Aide Memoires and expedited in timely follow up
  actions. The team updated and substantially improved the results framework in the 2015 restructuring. It
  also engaged planning experts to train and arrange study tours for the improvement of Kunming's urban
  planning capabilities. The Bank organized in-depth discussions with experienced rail transit experts in China
  and Singapore on the technical aspects of Line 3.

  At the Mid-term review in October 2014 the Bank team indicated that the Borrower was falling short in its
  agreed legal covenants to report on environmental, social and resettlement progress and thereafter there

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Kunming Urban Rail (P117656)



  was an improvement in reporting after the Environmental Management Plan monitoring was assigned to the
  Quality and Safety Department of the construction management company of KRTC.

  The Bank team’s supervision activities added value by providing support on engineering designs,
  procurement, environmental and social safeguards and financial management.The assessment of social
  safeguard risks, however, was overoptimistic, considering that the project was substantially delayed by
  resettlement activities, even though it was well known world-wide to be a factor for delay during the early
  stages of metro project implementation. Nevertheless, the technical advisory support provided by the Bank
  was practical and well appreciated by the client according to the Borrower’s report. The Bank also hired
  highly specialized international consultants to review designs, technical specifications, bills of quantities and
  variations for works, equipment supply and installation as well as goods contracts. The Bank’s technical
  support not only benefited this project, but also other KRTC projects. For example, KRTC initiated more
  citizen engagement by broadly involving the communities around new routes prior to the construction of
  metro Lines 5 and Line 6. The experience, knowledge and capacity acquired from managing the
  procurement of this project also helped KRTC to prepare and manage projects financed by other
  international financial institutions. In addition, some 220 persons completed technical training at Southwest
  Jiaotong University and between 400-500 persons received operational management training in KRTC.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The project results framework could have been much better designed and was almost entirely revised at
  restructuring. Originally, there were seven PDO indicators but at restructuring four had to be dropped and three
  new ones added. Baselines were established and the KRTC was given the responsibility for implementing the
  framework. Although lessons were drawn from previous regional and global experience, insufficient attention
  was given to the results framework. Measuring project support for compact and transit-oriented development
  was erroneously based on urban planning regulations and market outcomes that were beyond the control of
  either the railway company or the Transport Bureau.



b. M&E Implementation




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Kunming Urban Rail (P117656)



  The results framework was almost completely redesigned. The indicator that measured “the percentage of
  public transport riders that have access to a private car for their commute”, was dropped because the project
  had no means of establishing whether passengers owned or had access to a private car. It was replaced by
  user satisfaction (based on project funded surveys conducted by an independent party). Indicators to
  measure travel time between two pairs of locations (Shi Zui station site to Xiaoximen and East Long-Distance
  Bus Terminal to NanPin Walking Street) were revised at restructuring. The new baseline and new target only
  incorporated travel time instead of a division between waiting time, travel time and transit time. They were
  also adjusted to meet the new implementation schedule following delayed start-up. The Indicator that
  measured the “Average Daily Weekday Ridership on Line 3 after one year of operation” was revised as
  monitoring a full year of operations was not considered necessary to assess the quality of operations; as a
  result, the measurement period was reduced to six months, and the target ridership was identified as
  optimistic and adjusted downwards from 200,000 to 150,000, based on the observed demand for Line 1
  (which opened in 2015).

  The indicator to measure the “percentage of total new development that occurs along rail lines”, was
  considered to be beyond the control of the implementing agency and dropped. Most real estate
  development induced by Line 3 had already occurred prior to the commencement of construction and given
  that the baseline was determined in 2008, initial targets were achieved even prior to commencement of
  operations. Consequently, this indicator was replaced by an indicator to measure the “floor-area-ratio (FAR)
  along Line 3 relative to district FAR in terms of new development”, as changes in FAR more accurately
  reflected the concept of compact development. While this indicator reflected compact development, changes
  in FAR along the Line they were not fully attributable to the project and therefore could only partially measure
  progress in this regard. An indicator to measured the “Working Ratio of the Kunming Rail Transit Company
  Line 3” was not considered realistic and dropped. According to the ICR (Page 9) only two metro systems
  worldwide had ever achieved the original working ratio (operating costs over revenue) target of less than 1.
  An indicator to measure on-time performance was added to assess the quality of the system. Two
  intermediate output indicators were deleted, two remained similar, and three were added. All these changes
  in the view of IEG improved the results framework considerably but further indicators to measure accessibility
  improvements could have been introduced. KRTC carried out data collection regularly and diligently.



c. M&E Utilization

  The M&E information was said to have been used to monitor the progress of project implementation and the
  achievement of the PDO but since 30 per cent of the project loan had been disbursed by the time the new
  framework was approved, some of the monitoring would have been retrospective. The user satisfaction
  survey results were also used for improving the level of service on Line 3. However, the lack of an indicator
  to measure support to integration made it difficult to track progress on this aspect and according to the ICR
  (Page 23) affected the dialogue with Kunming on the need to speed up integration between Line 3 and the
  bus systems.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Kunming Urban Rail (P117656)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was classified as Category A because of the scale of the civil works and the potential significant
  environmental and social effects of building a metro line. Three safeguards were triggered, namely,
  environmental assessment (OP/BP 4.01), physical and cultural resources (OP/BP 4.11), and involuntary
  resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

  The EMP (Environmnetl Management Plan) requirements were included in the bidding documents and had
  been successfully carried out by the time of the ICR mission and this was formally noted in the ICR (Page
  24). The ICR confirmed that appropriate traffic management had been conducted at project sites, while
  safety and dust control measures had also been carried out. Noise control was achieved
  through disallowing nighttime construction. During the operational phase Bank supervision missions
  confirmed that vibration impacts and wastewater discharge were in compliance with applicable standards.

  Regarding physical and cultural resources, a cultural relics survey along the rail line identified eight
  buildings that were classified as protected buildings above the tunnel alignment. Chance find procedures
  were included in the EMP but no relics were found. The "shield" method was used for tunneling since it
  reduced vibration effects, and land subsidence monitoring was introduced where necessary.

  A Resettlement Action Plan was prepared and publicly disclosed. Some 837 residential households and
  108 enterprises were found to be affected by the project, even though design consultants had optimized
  designs to minimize the number of demolitions. Because some technical features of the project needed to
  be changed and because of protracted negotiations with project affected persons, resettlement took 28
  months longer than had been anticipated, concluding in April, 2018. By the end of the project all affected
  households had moved into new replacement buildings and resettlement compensation had been paid in
  full.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Prior to appraisal, the project’s financial management system was assessed as able to meet the minimum Bank
  financial management requirements, as stipulated in OP/BP 10.02, and financial management risk was rated
  as “Low.” Throughout implementation, the project maintained appropriate financial management arrangements.
  The interim financial reports were submitted on time, and annual financial reports were audited and



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Kunming Urban Rail (P117656)



  “unqualified”. There were some minor delays in reviewing and processing the physical progress certificate and
  interim payment requests but overall, the financial management performance of the project was satisfactory.

  Procurement was carried out in accordance with Bank procurement policies, procedures and requirements.
  Eight large supply and installation contracts for equipment to be procured under International Competitive
  Bidding (ICB) in the original procurement plan. During project implementation these contracts were changed
  from the goods category to the works category in consultation with the Bank and the procurement method was
  changed from ICB to National Competitive Bidding based on the procurement threshold for the works category.
  These actions ensured that the equipment were to be procured, delivered and installed in a timely manner to
  match the overall project implementation schedule. Contract implementation was delayed, however, due to the
  resettlement issues mentioned above.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

  None identified.



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                      ICR                      IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                      Satisfactory            Satisfactory               ---
                                                                                The fact that three metro line
                                                                                projects were to be disrupting
                                                                                traffic simultaneously was not
                                                                                identified during preparation
                                                                                leading to delays. The results
                                                     Moderately
Bank Performance             Satisfactory                                       framework at entry was
                                                     Satisfactory
                                                                                inadequate, and although it
                                                                                was revised during the
                                                                                restructuring, the overall Bank
                                                                                performance is MS following
                                                                                the current guidelines.
Quality of M&E               Modest                  Modest                     ---
Quality of ICR                                       Substantial                ---

12. Lessons


                                                                                                 Page 14 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Kunming Urban Rail (P117656)




For the optimization of urban metro routes a geological survey may be necessary. Major
resettlements contributed to the delay in the construction of Line 3. An important lesson learned was that
detailed geological investigations utilizing modern technologies should be carried out to select the best route
and location of stations to minimize the dismantling of existing structures and relocation of households. Urban
rail projects invariably require land acquisition - even when tunneling works are carried out underground - for
the construction of stations, ventilation shafts, and other surface facilities, risks related to resettlement must
be thoroughly assessed during project preparation and during the early stages of implementation.

In the case of Kunming and perhaps for other larger cities in China, it is necessary to establish a
municipal agency to oversee all modes of transport and to ensure multimodal integration. The weak
coordination between the company and the municipality limited multimodal integration under this project.
Establishing an apex coordinating body and empowering the implementing agency to do so, or establishing a
separate counterpart agency during project preparation, would have facilitated transport integration under the
project.

World Bank’s value added initiatives to urban transport in China through transport-oriented
design (TOD) and integration need to be further pursued. At the time of project appraisal, the Bank was
engaged in a valuable dialogue with the Government and the second to third tier cities on the need to focus on
multi-modal integration to facilitate transit and support the development of compact city growth. China was
setting a good example in cross learning from project to project in similar cities, through a good mix of
programmatic approach and decentralization of implementation responsibilities. Going forward, projects in
China should address institutional challenges identified in this project that prevented the full benefits of TOD
and Integration from materializing.

Appropriate PDO indicators are needed to capture the progress of multi-modal integration, as well as
compact and Transit Oriented Development. Since the appraisal of this project, the Bank has provided
improved guidance to staff in defining PDO indicators and these are now reflected in the Bank’s ICR
Guidelines. Further guidance is that the delivery of the PDO’s outcome should fall under the responsibility of the
implementing agency. More recently, accessibility indicators have been used in urban projects to quantify
increased access to job opportunities. There are also additional economic effects that could also be considered
to design a project for more equitable mobility. Poor people might benefit relatively more from better public
transport options, since they are more likely to be located further away from the city center. A recent study has
helped to quantify the differential impacts in terms of access to economic opportunities of transport projects.
Such impacts have been shown to be directly correlated with changes in density, rents, economic activities and
welfare in cities. The promotion of compact city development could help to mitigate the relocation effects that
tend to affect the poorest people. Similar analyses can be used to quantify welfare increases from a good
feeder system, different subsidy/pricing offers across modes, and for coordinating the construction of urban rail
with land value capture opportunities.




13. Assessment Recommended?


                                                                                                      Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Kunming Urban Rail (P117656)




Yes

Please explain


Because many of the benefits of this project depend on developments in land use in the future, it would be
good to re-visit this project and other similar projects currently in implementation after a few years have
elapsed to see whether the reported expectations will be realized. This will help to fine-tune policy
recommendations and design of future indicators.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR


Overall, the quality of the ICR was substantial. The document was well written supported by sound
evidence and illustrated with useful photographs showing some of the facilities provided. The ICR was
relatively candid about aspects of the project that were less successful but there was a little internal
consistency concerning the rating for quality at entry, given that the results framework was totally inadequate
and had to be almost completely re-worked. The lessons were valuable since this was a pioneering urban rail
project for the Bank in China.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 16
