     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0021435

1. Project Data



 Project ID                            Project Name
                                       Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up
 P111567
                                       Proj.

 Country                               Practice Area(Lead)                        Additional Financing
 Rwanda                                Energy & Extractives                       P126483,P126489


 L/C/TF Number(s)                      Closing Date (Original)                    Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-46510,IDA-51930                   31-Jan-2014                                             124,496,525.55

 Bank Approval Date                    Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Oct-2009                           30-Mar-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             70,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            130,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        124,496,525.55                                               0.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Victoria Alexeeva           Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   The project development objective was “to improve access to reliable and cost-effective electricity services
   for households and priority public institutions” (Financing Agreement, page 6; Project Appraisal Document,
   page 8).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  19-Feb-2013
                                                          PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   1. National Grid Rollout (appraised at US$68 million, of which IDA US$58 million and OPEC Fund US$10
   million; IDA additional financing (AF) of US$45 million; actual US$105.19 million). The component targeted
   areas identified in the National Electricity Access Program (NEAP) access prospectus to be suitable for
   grid connection following a least cost prioritization model. The investment program had the following
   subcomponents: (i) Grid intensification in urban and peri-urban areas to finance a grid intensification
   program for already-connected urban areas; the target was to increase the number of consumers from
   110,000 to 210,000 households by end-2012. This subcomponent would support Rwanda Electricity
   Corporation (RECO) to procure the required poles, conductors, transformers, meters, and other connection
   hardware and local installation services. The project would start with “quick wins,” focusing on the larger
   cities such as Kigali, Cyangugu, Huye, Kibuye, Giseniy, Gitarama, and Ruhengeri, where the “unserved”
   potential was believed to be the highest. As the resource envelope permits, the project would then extend
   to peri-urban areas.(ii) Electrification of new districts and sectors, including medium voltage (MV)
   extensions and low voltage (LV) reticulations would finance extension of the existing national grid to
   previously unconnected areas identified in the NEAP prospectus where there were major clusters of
   potential demand close to existing grid supply points. Connections would be made using appropriate
   technologies to minimize investment costs and the need for maintenance. Investments would include
   poles, conductors, transformers, and other needed hardware as well as planning, engineering and
   installation services. (iii) Backbone MV/HV grid strengthening, improved operational capacity, and service
   network expansion would address persistent supply issues in the Rwandan national grid, such as supply
   bottlenecks and low or fluctuating voltage levels, to reach the required transfer capacity and supply quality
   for the targeted areas in the rollout program. Investments would be focused on continued rehabilitation and
   capacity improvement of the existing grid infrastructure, started under the IDA-funded Urgent Electricity
   Rehabilitation Progam, including both upgrading the existing Kigali underground cable network and
   meeting rehabilitation needs as identified in the RECO energy audit to be completed in 2009. With
   customer numbers set to triple, support would also be provided to RECO to extend its service network to
   new areas. This would include establishment of new customer service centers, procurement of equipment
   and vehicles for improved maintenance, reduced response times to customer complaints, and unforeseen
   service interruptions.

   2. Green Connections (appraised at US$5.2 million (only IDA); IDA AF US$5.0 million; actual US$3.6
   million) was to finance a range of activities to improve affordability for the consumers and reduce the need


                                                                                                              Page 2 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)



for additional generation resources. The subcomponents were: (i) Efficient lighting to improve affordability
and reduce impact on supply, each new customer would receive a package of energy-efficient CFLs
(compact fluorescent lights) when the new meter is installed. (ii) Energy efficiency. The program would
support incentives to promote the use of solar hot water heaters sold through private dealers. The
incentive scheme would introduce a voucher system to provide partial subsidies for households (up to 40
percent of an estimated capital cost of US$1,200 per unit) and a credit scheme to cover part of the
remaining investment cost. (iii) Solutions adapted for low-income households. The program would support
initiatives to buy down connection costs further for the poorest households, including mainstreaming the
use of low-cost “ready boards” for poor households to reduce the need for internal wiring, and to enable
households in dwellings previously not eligible for a connection (such as thatched roof houses and
temporary constructions) to qualify. (iv) Productive users would support efforts to increase productive use
of electricity in the targeted areas, which would stimulate economic growth and job creation and increase
affordability. Project support would include spatial mapping and targeting connections to rural market
centers and other clusters of commercial activities, such as coffee-washing stations, tea plantations, and
sites for agro-processing. It would fund specific outreach and information campaigns to newly connected
areas to accelerate the use of electricity for productive purposes, with special focus on Small Medium and
Micro Enterprises (SMMEs) and local artisans.

3. Technical Assistance, Capacity Strengthening, and Implementation Support (appraised at US$6.8
million (only IDA); IDA AF US$10 million; actual US$25.86 million). This component was designed to
finance technical assistance and capacity building to ensure adequate management of the NEAP and
Sector-Wide Approach (SWAp). The program focused on three main areas of support: (i) RECO
Institutional Strengthening and Program implementation; (ii) Development of a SWAp for the Energy
sector; (iii) technical assistance to develop strong sector institutions and strategies.

Revisions to components during project implementation:


  • At the time of additional financing approved in February 2013, activities under all three components
  were scaled up (see sub-section (e) below for detail).
  • During project restructuring in May 2016, Component 2- Green Connections was dropped.
  Procurement of solar water heaters (SWH) under sub-component (ii) was delayed due to slow decision
  making related to procurement decisions and lack of understanding of the World Bank procurement
  procedures (ICR, para 98). As the Project Restructuring Paper (PRP, 2016) specifies the final draft
  bidding documents for the design, supply, installment, and commissioning of solar water heaters were
  submitted to the Bank in May 2015 (one year prior to project closure), and as there was not sufficient
  time to complete this activity, it was agreed with the Government that the activity would be dropped and
  the undisbursed funds (US$8.17 million equivalent) would be reallocated for activities under Component
  1. Regarding the progress towards achievement of the target on compact fluorescent light bulbs (CFLs),
  the Government policy did not allow imports of incandescent bulbs, implying that all new households
  connected to the grid would use CFLs (the utility had a parallel project distributing compact fluorescent
  lamps for all new customer connections). As per PRP (2016), due to this Government policy, the target
  of 90 percent had already been exceeded (reaching 100 percent)-without project intervention. The ICR

                                                                                                 Page 3 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)



    (para 100) also adds that the project had procured sufficient numbers of ready boards that were in stock
    and did not require more during the lifetime of the project.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Project cost. The estimated total project cost of US$80 million was increased to US$140.17 million
  through additional financing to scale up project activities. The actual total project cost was US$134.5
  million.

  Financing: The project was financed through an original IDA credit in the amount of US$70 million,
  supplemented by an additional financing (AF) of US$60 million approved on February 19, 2013 to scale
  up the ongoing activities, to a total US$130 million. The IDA credits were disbursed at US$124.5 million at
  project closure. A parallel co-financing loan of US$10 million was provided as appraised by the OPEC
  Fund for International Development (OFID) for the national grid rollout under component A.

  Borrower contribution. The project did not plan for the government contribution but, as the project team
  subsequently clarified, it introduced a principle (through a covenant) of the Government contributing to the
  electricity access program through reinvesting consumer connection fee contributions. As reported by the
  project team, the Government continued to abide by this covenant.

  Dates: The project closing date was extended by about four years from January 31, 2014 to March 30,
  2018. Overall, the project was restructured four times as follows:


    1.  In February 2013, following fast progress on achieving the access targets, additional financing
    (AF) in the amount of US$60 million was approved to scale up the activities under all three
    components. The AF would support connecting an additional 48,000 households to the electricity grid
    as part of Phase 2 of the Rwanda Electricity Access Rollout Program (EARP). In addition, the AF was
    to support scaling up of "green connections" associated with energy efficient solutions; increased
    uptake of solar products such as solar water heaters and solar photo-voltaic systems; low-cost products
    such as ready-boards to make it affordable for low-income households to get connected to the
    electricity grid; and productive uses of electricity to promote increased use of electricity by SMEs
    (Project Paper on a Proposed Additional Credit, 2013). The project closing date was revised from
    January 31, 2014 to June 30, 2016 in line with additional activities. The outcome targets were revised
    upwards.
    2 . In May 2016, the following changes were made: (a) Component 2 was dropped from the project (see
    reasons above in section 2d). (b) The implementation agency was changed from the Electricity, Water,
    and Sanitation Authority (EWSA) to the Electricity Development Company Limited (EDCL). (c) Funds
    were reallocated between the disbursement categories. (d) Outcome indicators related to solar water
    heaters (SWHs) installed and estimated energy reduction from energy efficient investments were


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)



     dropped since related activities under Component 2 were cancelled. (ii) The indicator ‘Households
     connected to electricity’ was renamed ‘Households connected to electricity under the Government
     EARP program’, to reflect the relationship between the indicator and the Government electrification
     program. (iii) The core indicator ‘People provided with access to electricity by household connections’
     was added to the Results Framework. (e) The project closing date was extended to June 30, 2017.
     3 . In May 2017, the project was restructured to extend the closing date for an additional five months to
     November 30, 2017. This was motivated by the availability of funds (US$3 million) released from
     cancellation of two nonperforming contracts of an engineering, procurement, and construction (EPC)
     company terminated in March 2017 (Restructuring Paper, May 2017).
     4 . In November 2017, the project was restructured to extend the closing date by an additional four
     months to March 30, 2018, to allow completion of a ‘purchase of trucks’ contract due to delays in the
     approval process.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  At appraisal in 2009, only 6 percent of Rwandan households (110,000 customers) had access to electricity
  from the grid, despite the high density of population (estimated at about 9 million and more than 320
  individuals per km2). The project was to support the Rwanda Electricity Access Rollout Program (EARP-the
  Program) that presented a five-year plan (2009-2013) under Phase 1 for extending electricity access to
  achieve Rwanda’s targets for the electricity sector set under the Economic Development and Poverty
  Reduction Strategy (EDPRS). The total number of electricity connections to be increased was from around
  110,000 connections to 350,000 connections, tripling access to about 16 percent of households by 2013 and
  at least 50 percent of identified public institutions in health, education, and local administration. The
  project was to be delivered through the Rwanda Electricity Sector Access Program Investment Prospectus
  (IP-2009) funded by the Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) that used geospatial
  prioritization for grid compatible areas, prioritizing new grid connections depending on demographic and cost
  factors, including proximity to the existing grid, inter-household distances, social infrastructure, access to
  road networks, and the ability of consumers to afford electricity.

  Together with contributions pledged by the Government of Rwanda (GoR) and the Rwanda Electricity
  Corporation, contributions from customers, and major donors such as African Development Bank (AfDB),
  Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA), Belgium, European Union (EU), Netherlands,
  Japan, OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), Saudi Fund, the World Bank, and others, a total of
  US$357 million was mobilized for the Program (PAD, Annex 1). The EARP was set up under a sector-wide
  approach (SWAp) concept that was initiated by Rwanda in 2008 in the energy sector to increase aid
  effectiveness by reducing fragmentation of donor aid flows in the sector. The World Bank was a leading
  donor and the main contributor to the Program.



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 21
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)



       The project was scaled up in 2013 as part of Phase 2 of the EARP to support increasing the national access
       rate to at least 35% by 2017 (Project Paper on a Proposed Additional Credit, 2013). The project
       development objectives remained aligned with the GoR’s priorities in the energy sector and its long-term
       development strategy-Vision 2020. It also remained relevant to the most recent WBG Country Partnership
       Strategy (CPS) for Rwanda (FY2014-2018), which prioritized increased generation and access to electricity
       under its pillar of accelerating economic growth (CPS, Annex 1: Results Matrix). It emphasized that
       increased access to electricity was key to the countries’ poverty reduction, economic growth, and broad-
       based welfare gains, and also highlighted the need for considerable institutional strengthening in the sector.



       Rating
       High
   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To improve access of electricity services to households.

    Rationale
    Theory of change: The project’s theory of change was that through investments in the national grid roll-out,
    support to energy efficiency and affordability measures (e.g., efficient lightning, use of solar water heaters),
    and capacity strengthening for sector planning and financing, access would increase to reliable and cost-
    effective electricity services for households and priority public institutions. In particular, the infrastructure
    investments (including rehabilitation of transformers and installation of meters), complemented by energy
    efficiency measures (such as developing strategy, incentive structure and strengthening mechanisms for
    promotion of energy-efficient technologies), institutional development of ministries/regulators and
    utilities/operators, and developing customer feedback systems and establishing of service
    standards, would lead to improved sector planning and financing framework, improved customer service
    orientation of utilities/operators, improved network capacity and efficiency, and increased adoption of
    energy-efficient technologies/options. These activities were to lead to improved access to reliable and cost-
    effective electricity services measured through principal outcome indicators focused on the overall increase
    in connectivity and the decrease in monthly interruptions and average cost per connection. Energy efficiency
    investments were to lead to load reduction that was to be monitored at the intermediate results level (PAD,
    Results Chain, Figure A3.1, page 54).
    The results framework, however, had weak linkages between the project activities, outputs, outcomes and
    objectives. The substantial support for the sector reform and institutional development activities under the
    project were not captured at the outcome level. No activities were planned to improve the reliability of
    electricity services that was specifically stated in the objectives. The ICR (para 51) clearly indicates that the
    project did not have any direct influence over upstream investment decisions to improve reliability.



                                                                                                          Page 6 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)



Split Rating: A split rating is not used for the assessment of the achievement of the objective, as the project
outcome targets were revised upwards in line with additional investments. Targets for energy efficiency at an
intermediate outcome level were dropped with the cancellation of component 2.

Outputs


  • 7,136 km of transmission and distribution lines were expanded under the project from the baseline of
  1,800 km in 2008, significantly overachieving the target of 4,200 km (original target was 3,000km).


The ICR reports a number of factors that contributed to a faster connection rate, i.e., (i) the project financed
the extension of the existing national grid to previously unserved areas identified in the Investment
Prospectus (IP-2009) that used a geospatial prioritization for grid compatible areas prioritizing new grid
connections depending on demographic and cost factors, including proximity to the existing grid,
interhousehold distances, social infrastructure, access to road networks, and the ability of consumers in
each planning cell to afford electricity. Once the MV backbone was built, the PIU focused on connecting all
users within a 5 km distance of the backbone capturing many households and productive users. (ii) The local
contractors installed the LV line drops and house connections on the long MV lines, enabling a faster rollout
of the program; and (iii) a new connection policy was introduced in 2017 that allowed connections without an
advance payment and deduction of the connection fee from payments for purchase of units of
electricity, which alleviated constraints to connections and consumption by poorer households (ICR, page
19).


  •850 transformers were rehabilitated or replaced, below the revised target of 985 (the original target was
  40% of the overall number).


Under the institutional component, the following activities were implemented:

  •  Joint Annual Sector Performance Report was approved by SWG, as planned.
  • A grid electrification study, 'The Electricity Network Planning & Design', was produced, commonly
  referred to as the SOFRECO Report, and according to the project team, it was a key tool in the
  implementation of the Government Program (2012-2018).
  • The following sector-reform studies were prepared: (i) The EWSA Financial Performance Review and
  Outlook; (ii) A study to establish and advise on the legal framework for new companies to replace EWSA;
  (iii) A study to undertake the Energy Sector Functional and Organizational restructuring of EWSA; and (iv)
  A Study on Asset Verification and Separation between the two EWSA successor entities. According to the
  project team, the above studies became a blueprint for sector horizontal unbundling that led to the
  creation of Rwanda Energy Group (REG) and its subsidiary companies (Electricity Utility Company Limited



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 21
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)



        – EUCL and Electricity Distribution Company Limited – EUCL), incorporated under progressive Company
        Law.
        • The two studies – (i) A study to undertake scoping for Management Information System (MIS) and (ii)
        The review of proposed strengthening projects for the EWSA HV and MV Networks – provided guidance
        on capacity building and strengthening of the newly created unbundled electricity utility. According to the
        project team, these studies also informed project designs of interventions funded by other donors and the
        Government.
        • Capacity building was carried out for project staff and staff of the Implementing Entity in various areas of
        specialization including Finance, Project Management, Procurement, Environmental and Social
        Safeguards and Construction Management.


    Outcome

    Access to electricity services was provided to 275,714 households under the project, as compared to the
    original target of 100,000 and revised to 148,000. Under the overall Program, electricity access was
    expanded to 810,923 households.

    The total EARP contribution to percentage electrification rate during the project lifetime was 28.5%, of which
    10% was through the project funds. Overall, at project closure in 2018, the grid electrification rate was 31%
    in Rwanda. The ICR (page 17) reports that Rwanda’s annualized increase in access (percentage points)
    between 2010 and 2016 was the highest among the world’s 20 least electrified countries and much higher
    than the world average (3.28%, compared to the world average of 0.64%).

    The ICR also reports positive socio-economic outcomes in electrified households that were assessed as part
    of the impact study carried out between 2014 and 2016. The results showed a decrease in total energy
    expenditure, increased income, increased asset values, including for rural communities showing a general
    improvement in quality of life and increase in incomes.



    Rating
   High
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     Improve access of electricity services to priority public institutions.

    Rationale
    Outputs


                                                                                                             Page 8 of 21
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)




    The same as under Objective 1

    Outcome

    The achievement of access expansion to public institutions was measured at the program (EARP) level, as
    overall country connection rates.

    The access to priority public institutions improved as follows: schools connection to electricity increased from
    21% in 2009 to 77.2% in 2018, slightly below the revised target of 80% (original target was 50%); connection
    of administrative buildings increased from 38.7% in 2009 to 94.5% in 2018, below the targeted 100%
    (original target was 52%); connection to electricity of health centers increased from 38.4% to 92.1%, not
    achieving 100% (original target was 50%).

    The ICR (page 20) attributes a small shortfall in realizing the targets to lack of funding for the GoR
    electrification program. While all public infrastructure (health centers, schools, and public administration
    buildings) within a 5 km distance from the line were connected to the grid, other institutions were not reached
    beyond it. Overall, according to the ICR (page 20), 100% of the administrative offices in the country were
    connected to electricity by a combination of grid and off-grid methods at project closure.

    The impact study 2014-2016 has shown such results as increased time spent in school and improvement in
    health outcomes. With respect to gender, there was a decrease in mortality rate during childbirth in health
    centers that had been connected to electricity; increase in the number of females ages 16 and above visiting
    health facilities; enrollment of girls in schools with electricity; performance of girls in the final examinations
    improved; and there was increase in the female teaching population.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective

     Improve reliability of electricity services.

    Rationale
    Outputs

        •   The same as under Objective 1.




                                                                                                          Page 9 of 21
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)



        •Energy efficiency activities (i.e., compact fluorescent lights, solar water heaters), were cancelled under
        Component 2 that aimed to lead to load reduction (GWh); the relevant indicator was dropped.



    Outcome

     At the time of project closure, the rolling average of monthly interruptions per km of MV line was 61 percent
    higher than the baseline (ICR, page 23). The rolling average was 0.102 at closure (based on 730
    interruptions per month and 7,135 km of MV line, as compared to the baseline of 0.06338 (based on 270
    interruptions per month and 4,260 km of MV line). The revised target set was a reduction of 35% (0.0412),
    while the original target was 25%. This indicator was measured at the Program (EARP) level, relating to the
    country grid expansion program.

    The ICR (page 21) notes that the indicator monitored outages on the whole network and could not insulate
    the effects of the project implementation works from other activities being carried out on the electricity
    network. The indicator was not well designed, as clarified by the project team, due to data collection
    limitations at appraisal. At that time, reliability measurement tools based on SAIDI (System Average
    Interruption Duration Index) and SAIFI (System Average Interruption Frequency Index) were not available.
    However, in 2015, the utility installed a SCADA system, which allowed the recording and reporting of
    accurate customer-level measurements starting in 2016.

    The ICR and project team discussed with and provided IEG with more recent information, consisting
    of SAIDI and SAIFI data from July 2016 to December 2018. In its April 15, 2019 note, the ICR team
    indicated that the data "shows that the annual cumulative number and frequency of outages have steadily
    decreased, clearly demonstrating a continuously improving service reliability trend." The ICR also refers
    to results from the multi-tier framework energy survey (World Bank 2018), which found that 68.4 percent of
    the grid-connected households in Rwanda lie within a higher Tier 4 (on a scale of 1-5), with more than 14
    disruptions a week or more than 2 hours disruption a week and daily availability of 16–23 hours a day. Data
    from the survey indicate that only 5.7 percent of the population in Rwanda are constrained to relatively lower
    tiers due to low reliability, i.e., limited evening availability (less than 4 hours) and quality (such as inadequate
    voltage) (ICR, para 53).

    Given the trend that is evident from the latest available data, the achievement of Objective 3 is rated
    substantial, following IEG's guidelines (page 35) that the project almost fully achieved its objective or
    intended outcomes, or is likely to do so.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL




                                                                                                           Page 10 of 21
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)




             Objective 4
             Objective

              Improve cost-effectiveness of electricity services.

             Rationale
             Outputs

                  •   The same as under Objective 1.

                  • 60,000 low cost ready boards were delivered and installed to low-income households reducing the need
                  for internal wiring. The rest of the activities were cancelled under Component 2 that aimed to
                  improve affordability for the consumers and reduce the need for additional generation resources. While
                  energy-efficient CFLs (compact fluorescent lights) were delivered under the Government Program, without
                  project support, the support was cancelled for an incentive scheme to promote the use of solar water
                  heaters sold through private dealers by providing partial subsidies for households and a credit scheme to
                  cover part of the remaining investment cost. In addition, the support for productive users was also
                  cancelled. The project team subsequently clarified that the project did not monitor the productive users as
                  initially intended, but all customers, including productive users, were connected to the grid within a 5 km
                  radius.


             Outcome
             At project closing, the average cost per connection was US$ 411.12, around 60 percent lower than expected
             cost (target was US$ 1,090). The indicator was a program-level (EARP) indicator. During the implementation
             of the project between 2009 and 2012, unit connection costs ranged from US$300 (for fill-in connections) to
             US$840. At the time of the AF in 2012, the target was set at +9 percent from the original target (US$1,090).
             The scale-up of electrification implied considerable reductions in connection costs. In addition to the
             expansion of connections that drove connection costs down, the ICR (para 56) says that competitive
             procurement processes and using concrete poles and wooden poles instead of steel lattice poles and single
             wire earth return (SWER) technology on some of the MV lines helped cost reduction.


             Rating
     High
    PHREVDELTBL

PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale
The project significantly overachieved its access targets for households and was close to the access target for
public institutions. The most recent data (2016-2018) on monthly interruptions per km of MV line -- based on
more accurate SAIDI and SAIFI measurements made possible by the installation of a SCADA system -- show an
improving service reliability trend. The average cost per connection dropped dramatically during project


                                                                                                                 Page 11 of 21
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)



 implementation, due to the expansion of connections. In light of these positive achievements, the overall outcome
 rating is rated substantial.




 Overall Efficacy Rating
 Substantial
PHREVISEDTBL



  5. Efficiency


  Economic analysis

  At appraisal, the proposed financing was expected to fund about 100,000 grid connections during a five-year
  period (2009–2013). An economic net present value (ENPV) was estimated to be US$273 million at a discount
  rate of 12 percent and the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project was 40 percent. The economic
  benefits were derived from the consumer surplus from electricity consumption estimated for newly connecting
  households. The consumer surplus was estimated at US$0.46 per kWh for households consuming less than 20
  kWh per month and US$0.26 per kWh for households consuming above 20 kWh per month. For new
  commercial customers, the analysis used a consumer surplus of US$0.27 per kWh, derived from the cost of
  backup self-generation.

  In 2013, the World Bank approved AF US$60 million to support the connection of an additional 48,000
  households to the electricity grid as part of the second phase of the EARP. The EIRR estimated at this stage
  was 59 percent and the ENPV at a discount rate of 10 percent was US$75 million. The AF was also designed
  to support scaling up of ‘green connections’ associated with energy efficiency solutions, including uptake of
  solar products such as SWHs and CFLs. The economic benefits estimated during the AF were derived from (a)
  benefits from new household connections, (b) savings for households derived from the use of CFLs, and (c)
  savings from installing SWHs in public and commercial buildings.

  At project closure, the economic analysis estimated an EIRR of 55 percent and the NPV, at a discount rate of
  10 percent, at US$112 million. The ICR notes (Annex 4) that the excel model used to calculate the economic
  analysis during appraisal was not available, thus, the ex-post economic analysis was prepared using various
  sources as well as the information available from the two existing economic analyses (the one prepared for
  appraisal and for the AF). The analysis identified the main benefits of the project to be derived from (a)
  increased electrification (households and institutions), (b) savings in electricity connection costs, and (c)
  savings from green connections (increased use of CFLs and SWHs). However, the ICR (Annex 4, page
  63) erroneously estimates savings derived from the use of (a) efficient CFLs (131 kWh per household per year)
  and (b) SWHs (3,240 kWh per building per year). It reports that " all the connected households had received
  CFLs and 2,837 SWHs had been delivered until 2016 (after that the component was discontinued)"; no related
  activites were delivered under the project. While the benefits primarily accrued from the increased
  electrification among households, the estimated EIRR should be lower due to nonattainment of benefits
  under Component 2 that was cancelled.

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)




Operational/ administrative efficiency

While overall the project was scaled up adding another two years to implementation, other closing date
extensions were due to delays in effectiveness, weaknesses in design, and procurement issues that resulted in
cancellation of the whole component. The ICR also attributes some delays to a slow decision-making process
at the PIU. In addition, the efficient use of US$26 million is questionable under the institutional building
component that has no apparent benefits reported.

On balance, the overall efficiency rating is substantial in consideration of a high economic rate of return from
grid roll-out investments, albeit marginally due to significant operational and administrative inefficiencies.

* In Table a below, (a) the ex-post EIRR is not reported due erroneous estimation of savings derived
from energy efficiency activities (CFLs and SWHs) under Component 2, which were not implemented under
the project. It would be lower than the reported 55 percent, though not significantly. (b) The coverage/scope for
the ERR estimated at appraisal is the whole Program, therefore indicated as not applicable.



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                    Rate Available?         Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
Appraisal                                                  40.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome

Relevance of the project development objectives is rated high. Efficacy is rated substantial. The project
significantly overachieved its access targets for households and was close to the access target for public
institutions. The monthly interruptions per km of MV line -- based on the most recent and more accurate SAIDI
and SAIFI measurements -- shows the likely trend of improvements in the reliability of electricity services. The
average cost per connection dropped dramatically during project implementation due to the expansion of
connections. Efficiency is rated substantial in consideration of a high economic rate of return from the grid roll-
out investments and operational inefficiencies that led to cancellation of a full component.

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 21
          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)




The overall project outcome rating is satisfactory, based on high relevance, substantial efficacy, and substantial
efficiency.


a.       Outcome Rating
         Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


The main risks are:


     • Funding gaps to cater to increased electricity access to households and priority public institutions. The
     required estimated funding to meet the ESSP (2018/2019–2023/2024) targets are approximately US$1 billion,
     including a combination of funding from the GoR, development partners, and private sector. The risk that this
     funding is not available in its entirety to meet the targets of the current ESSP/NST poses a risk to PDO
     outcomes not being maintained in the related period. The GoR has included the sector goals in the draft
     NST1, which is an indication that the GoR would focus on raising funds to meet sector goals.




     • Decrease in system quality and reliability. The reliability of the electricity system is affected by a combination
     of sources of electricity, age and maintenance status of the transmission and distribution network, and quality
     of network operation. The GoR is aware of the risks and consequences of low reliability and has initiated
     several projects to strengthen the network.




     • Affordability related to high costs of electricity services. The cost of supply of electricity service in Rwanda
     remains high, at approximately US¢30 per kWh; however, the GoR is focused on addressing this problem in
     the medium to long term.




     • Sector financial sustainability and institutional capacity to plan and manage the utility prudently. The
     Government is aware of the financial and fiscal risks and has initiated a reform program, which is supported by
     a three-year World Bank Development Policy Operation during FY2018– 2020 (US$125 million each). The
     reform program includes a comprehensive set of measures to reduce the cost of service, including a transition



                                                                                                          Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)



  to fully competitive procurement, least-cost planning of power generation investments, least-cost planning of
  electrification investments, and utility reforms.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design reflected lessons from both the World Bank engagement in Rwanda and the World
  Bank’s experience in national electrification programs and SWAp framework development. The SWAp
  design, which led to an MOU between the GoR and leading development partners in the energy sector
  and setting up of the GoR Program, was instrumental in consolidating the design of the project.

  The Bank team acknowledged the capacity challenges in the areas of finance, technical, planning,
  procurement, communication, and stakeholder management that were identified in the IP-2009, and as
  clarified by the project team, considered those moderate relying on the capacity of the Project
  Management Directorate with experience in WB project implementation. The project kickoff was delayed
  due to the low implementation readiness. No substantial or high risks were identified at appraisal (PAD,
  Table E, pages 17-18), albeit during the project implementation, slow PIU decision-making and
  procurement (pages 34-35 and 38-39), and related delays resulted in the cancellation of a whole
  component and the necessity to expend the closing date four times (page 38).

  The ICR's account on Component 2 points to design shortcomings. As indicated in para 126 of the
  ICR, "The CFL and SWH activities under Component 2 may not have been properly analyzed at project
  preparation, leading to failure of the activities to be funded by the project." The utility already had a
  similar ongoing CFL project. Para 126 of the ICR also notes that it was also not clear from the existing
  documentation whether adequate analysis was carried out to support the design of the SWH activity
  involving private sector and financial institutions. These activities were subsequently dropped from the
  project implementation. In a follow-up discussion with IEG, the ICR team reiterated that the utility had
  adequate stocks of CFLs and was able to successfully distribute 800,000 CFLs, of which 600,000 were
  distributed during the project's lifetime. Moreover, GoR adopted a policy of banning imports of all non-
  CFL lighting accessories, which enhanced the success of 100 percent CFL use in Rwanda. Regarding
  SWH provision, GoR's decided to finance all SWH subsidies under the Nordic Fund grant financing, while
  reallocating IDA funds to access-related activities, hence SWH activities were dropped from the
  project. However, the PDO was still achieved, as follows: (i) SWHs were distributed to 3,459 households
  and public institutions; (ii) 34 local technicians were trained in the design, installation and maintenance of
  SWH systems. The program is also supporting IPRC North, a technical school, to promote SWH
  manufacturing. The ICR team also added that the project was designed to buy down the connection cost
  for poorer households (e.g., thatched roof dwelling that are not suitable for a connection) by reducing the
  need for household writing through the provision of ready boards, leading to the procurement and
  installation of 60,000 ready boards for the project's access activities.




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The project experienced a delayed start owing to the low implementation readiness and inadequate
  structure of the PIU. The project was approved in October 2009 and became effective eight months later.
  The first disbursement was four months after effectiveness, delaying the project start by one year.

  During project implementation, as reported by the ICR, the World Bank task team continuously monitored
  the project progress against the targets. The project was restructured four times to change the design
  (drop a component) due to implementation delays and the progress on these activities by the
  government. Three of the four task team leaders were resident in the country and accessible to the client
  to provide necessary hands-on support.

  With the position of co-chair, the World Bank was also tasked with coordination of the donors to the
  energy sector and leading sector dialogue on behalf of the donor community. It was also the de facto co-
  chair of the Sector Working Group (SWG), which also entailed overseeing the activities of the eSWAP
  secretariat. The SWG was responsible for approval of policy documents in the energy sector and
  reviewing sector reports. The World Bank task team oversaw the quality of information transmitted to the
  SWG for review and approval, including information generated from the M&E exercise of the project that
  reported both project and program results.

  With four project restructurings, the supervision team could have addressed weaknesses in the project's
  results framework and M&E design, in particular as Component 3 supported sector unbundling reforms
  and institutional strengthening that amounted to a total of US$26 million at project closure.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


                                                                                                 Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)



  There were four outcome indicators linked with the project objectives. These were defined to measure
  the increase in access for households and public institutions (disaggregated by type); improvement in
  reliability (reduction in monthly interruptions per km of MV measured for the whole network); and cost-
  effectiveness of electricity services (average cost per connection) (PAD, Annex 3). Under the access
  indicator, two sub-indicators were monitored: (a) households connected by the Program and (b)
  households connected under the project; for public institutions, there was a program-level results
  indicator.

  The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system for the project was to be in line with the proposed SWAp
  framework and M&E system within the National Electricity Access Program (PAD, page 57).
  There were, however, significant shortcomings in the project's results framework and M&E design, i.e.,
  :

    • No outcome indicators were defined to capture the institutional building and capacity strengthening
    activities, particularly for a US$10 million commitment under the related component.
    • No indicators were defined for various planned activities (efficient lightning, energy efficiency,
    solutions adapted for low-income households, and productive users) under Component 2 at the
    outcome level .
    • All outcome indicators were limited to the results from physical investments into the national grid
    rollout under Component 1.




b. M&E Implementation

  The project was managed under the SWAp concept. The GoR set up a reporting mechanism through the
  backward looking joint sector reports and forward looking joint sector reports (FLJSRs) that were presented to
  the SWG and approved by the GoR. The SWAp setup ensured the participation of all stakeholders in the
  energy sector by ensuring approval of major policy documentation through the SWGs.

  An impact evaluation was carried out during the project implementation. The project was part of the IDA16
  impact evaluation exercise, where the baseline (2014) and follow-up (2016) exercises were completed.

  The ICR (page 36) reports that the data on the PDO indicators were collected and reported in a
  methodologically sound manner, however the overall process of data collection was slow.
  No revisions were made to improve the project M&E design, in particular with respect to reliability and
  considering that the cost under the institutional strengthening component supporting sector reforms more than
  doubled to US$26 million, thus with no accountability for results.



c. M&E Utilization

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)




  The M&E data were used in sector annual forecasts related to electrification; project restructuring, and
  decision-making on reaching connections further downstream. The ICR reports that the results were also
  used to inform the setting of targets for the GoR’s Forward Looking Joint Sector Review, through which
  annual sector targets were set.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was assigned the Environmental Assessment Category B in accordance with the World Bank
  Operational Policy on Safeguards, due to limited expected adverse environmental and social impacts. The
  project triggered two safeguards policies on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary
  Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and
  Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared and disclosed both in country and at the World Bank
  InfoShop in February 2009. During the preparation of the AF, both the ESMF and RPF were updated and
  disclosed in Rwanda in November 2012 and at the World Bank InfoShop on November 20, 2012. The
  framework approach (ESMF and RPF) was adopted because the precise locations of project implementation
  sites were not known at the time of project preparation.

  The ICR reports (page 33) that the project was always in compliance during the implementation phase.

  According to the ICR (page 38), the PIU prepared a report covering the consolidated implementation
  progress of the eight subproject ESMPs throughout the project duration. This report points out the mitigation
  measures implemented in response to the negative environmental and social impacts encountered during
  project implementation. The report also shows that all anticipated negative impacts were short term, site
  specific, and managed through the implementation of the respective ESMPs.

  Involuntary Resettlement. One subproject (Rukarara substation funded by OPEC FUND) involved land
  acquisition and physical relocation. The other subprojects that were distribution lines had no land acquisition
  implications and thus involved only compensation for trees and crops. All compensation payments were
  completed by end December 2017. In total, 3,678 households were affected, including 75 households that
  lost land and 30 households that were physically relocated. The key challenge in the implementation of the
  RAPs was the delays in compensation because of unavailability of the required cash on time. A
  Resettlement Completion Report was prepared and shared with the World Bank. The report shows that the
  project was always in full compliance with rsettleme guidleniues during implementation (ICR, page 38).




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Procurement. Project procurement activity at project start was performing well and rated ‘satisfactory’;
  however, from October 2015, the rate was downgraded to ‘Moderately Satisfactory’. The major reasons for
  the downgrading were (a) the slow movement of the procurement plan owing to a slow decision-making
  process by the utility top management and (b) high procurement staff turnover. Restructuring of the
  implementing agency in the middle of the project implementation and subsequent move of the project to a
  newly formed agency also contributed to delays. A few contracts were not delivered by the time of project
  closure, and these were moved to under another project (ICR, page 39). The ICR does not discuss it but
  according to the project restructuring paper, in March 2017, the Project Implementation Unit terminated two
  contracts of an engineering, procurement, and construction (EPC) company that had declared insolvency
  (PRP, Nov 2017).

  Financial management. As reported by the ICR (page 39), the FM performance was rated moderately
  satisfactory during project implementation mainly because of (a) qualified audit opinions and (b) delayed
  adequate FM staffing, which affected the capacity to effectively monitor FM-related issues on time. The ICR
  does not discuss if the issues were adequately addressed.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                         IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                       Satisfactory                Satisfactory              ---
Bank Performance              Satisfactory                Satisfactory              ---
                                                                                    There were shortcomings in
Quality of M&E                Substantial                 Modest                    the M&E design that were not
                                                                                    fully addressed.
Quality of ICR                                            Substantial               ---

12. Lessons



                                                                                                      Page 19 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)



IEG selected three lessons from the ICR, with some modification:


  • A combination of grid and off-grid solutions based on geographic information system mapping
  techniques helps accelerate electricity access expansion. Rwanda was one of the first countries to
  prepare and implement a nationwide electrification program combining grid and off-grid means, based on a
  systematic and least-cost plan aided by geographic information system mapping techniques that combine
  technical, economic, demographic, and demand and supply data. The objective of this prioritization was to
  ensure that the program maximizes benefits of electrification, while minimizing program costs. The
  prioritization took advantage of Rwanda being a small country with high population density, making potential
  rollout faster than larger low densely populated countries.




  • Strong Government ownership of projects, and projects that are aligned with national priorities are
  in a strong position to succeed from the onset. When governments own the access agenda and
  incorporate it in their growth strategies, the access expansion agenda is most likely to be successful. The
  GoR participated in the design and preparation of the national program and geospatial plan, drew up clear
  results frameworks, and established M&E accountability under the overall institutional setup.




  • Well coordinated donor support can greatly enhance results from an inclusive sector effort, and is
  of particular value in a post-conflict situation. This energy sector project is an example of how
  development partners can come together in a constructive manner in a post-conflict country. The
  SWAp structure in Rwanda was built upon existing institutions and assigns clear responsibilities to the
  different parties in the sector working group, including government institutions, development partners, private
  sector, and other energy sector stakeholders.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR is outcome-oriented and written in line with the guidelines. It provides an extensive narrative on
Rwanda's electrification program and the project's implementation experience and results. Lessons are


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj. (P111567)



experience-based. The ICR would have benefitted from streamlining the text and being less defensive in
its narrative. A lot of issues were attributed to factors beyond the project control. While the efficacy section
focuses on outcomes, the ICR should be still clear what outputs were delivered to achieve those outcomes.
Not much is said regarding the institutional strengthening activities and related results, despite the US$26
million spent under the capacity building and implementation support component. More explanation
is needed with regard to procurement issues and unclean audits. The ICR (Annex 4, page 63) factors
calculations into the ex-post ERR results estimating savings derived from the use of (a) efficient CFLs (131
kWh per household per year) and (b) SWHs (3,240 kWh per building per year). However, the ICR does not
report on the progress and deliverables under these activities before the component was discontinued in
2016.

Editing mistakes include: (a) the ICR refers to CAS that should be CPS; (b) discrepancies in numbers, i.e.,
Table 1 on page 11 indicates actual cost for component B as US$3.6 million, while Annex 3 shows it as
US$0.028 million. (c) approval date of AF inconsistently shows December 2012 on page 13 and February
2013 on page 1. (d) Results chain mixes up the outputs and outcomes, i.e, under outputs on page 11 it lists
a number of households/institutions with access, average cost of connections, etc; and under intermediate
outcomes, it lists construction of MV distribution network, rehabilitation, etc.

Overall, the ICR Quality is rated substantial albeit on a margin.




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 21 of 21
