     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Regional Transmiss Line Reinforc (RI) (P124351)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0021509

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P124351                                    ZM:Regional Transmiss Line Reinforc (RI)

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Africa                                     Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-50900                                  31-Dec-2015                                         52,598,598.65

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 15-May-2012                                29-Jun-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            60,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             60,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         52,608,837.11                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 5) was:

   " To improve the reliability of ZESCO (ZESCO Limited, the national power utility) regional power trade
   transmission network infrastructure along the Kafue Town-Muzuma-Victoria Falls corridor"



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Regional Transmiss Line Reinforc (RI) (P124351)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                           PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   There were three components (PAD, pages 6-7). The actual cost of the components is as recorded in the
   ICR (page 36).

   Component 1. Upgrading of the existing 220kilo Volt (kV) transmission line. The appraisal estimate
   was US$24.00 million. The actual cost at closure was US$24.15 million. This component aimed at
   upgrading the existing transmission line from 220 kV to 330 kV to increase the capacity and reliability of the
   line. Activities included: (i) replacing the existing 341 kilometers (km) of 220kV transmission line from
   Kafue-town through Muzuma to the new Livingstone substation with a 330 kV transmission line: and (ii)
   reinforcing about seven km of the line from the Livingstone substation to the Victoria Falls substation. The
   existing bay and the line control and monitoring system at Victoria Falls substation were also to be
   reinforced.

   Component 2. Reinforcement and Construction of Substations. The appraisal estimate was
   US$71.00 million. The actual cost at closure was US$43.49 million. This component aimed at upgrading
   two existing substations at Kafue town and Muzuma and constructing a new 330/220 kV substation.
   Activities included: (i) reinforcement of substations at the Kafue Town and Muzuma: (ii) construction of a
   new substation at Livingstone with a total capacity of 500 megavolt-ampere (MVA).

   Component 3. Project Management, Environmental and Social Mitigation, and Training. The
   appraisal estimate was US$5.00 million. The actual cost at closure was US$3.22 million. This component
   aimed at providing support to the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). Activities included: (i) financing the
   environmental and social mitigation activities; (ii) technical assistance to ZESCO for designing and
   executing projects in electricity generation, transmission and distribution; support for monitoring; and (iv)
   financing the operating expenses of the PIU.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

   Project cost. The appraisal estimate (including costs of physical and price contingencies) was US$100.00
   million. The actual cost at closure was US$70.87 million. The actual project cost was lower than estimated
   at appraisal due to a combination of factors, including savings associated with the competitive tendering

                                                                                                               Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Regional Transmiss Line Reinforc (RI) (P124351)



   process and exchange rate changes of the US$ against the Special Drawing Rights
   during implementation.

   Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA credit of US$60.00 million. The amount disbursed
   was US$52.60 million. There was co-financing from the European Investment Bank for US$ 14.1 million.
   The appraisal estimate was US$30.00 million, and the amount disbursed was US$0.00 million. ZESCO's
   contribution was US$ 3.8 million.

   Borrower contribution. The appraisal estimate was US$10.00 million. The actual contribution was
   US$0.00 million.

   Dates. The project was approved on May 15, 2012, became effective on December 6, 2012 and was
   scheduled to close on December 31, 2015. There were two Level 2 restructurings. The first restructuring
   in October 9, 2015, extended the closing date by 18 months, for completing activities, which had been
   subject to initial procurement delays, due to the longer than anticipated time taken for
   preparing transmission line designs and bid documents and procedural delays associated with obtaining
   clearances from the relevant authorities. The second restructuring on June 8, 2017, extended the closing
   date by another 12 months, for completing ongoing activities which had been delayed due to a
   combination of factors including impaired accessibility to the project site on the Muzuma-Livingstone
   segment on account of heavy rains in 2016; weak performance by contractors, ZESCO's inability to grant
   outages requested by the contractor; and delays on the European Investment Bank-funded works at the
   Livingstone substation. The project closed two and half years behind schedule on June 29, 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  Despite average economic growth of over eight percent in the years before appraisal, 64 percent of the
  population were living on less than US$1.9. per day at 2011 international prices. In the energy sector, the
  overall national electrification rate was 22 percent, with 40 percent of the population in urban and peri-urban
  areas and only 3.1 percent in rural areas having electricity access. The industrial and commercial sectors
  accounted for 70 percent of electricity consumption and this limited supply to residential customers.
  Available electricity capacity in 2010 was 1,600 Megawatt, with peak demand recorded at 1,562
  Megawatt and projected to increase to 2,272 Megawatt by 2020. Zambia was also prone to hydrological
  risks, given that 85 percent of electricity was hydro-based. In the regional context, across the Southern
  Africa Power Pool, a combination of factors, including inadequate generation capacity and transmission
  constraints undermined the reliability of supply. By virtue of Zambia's location in the region bounded by
  eight countries, the government aimed at positioning the country for electricity trade through its
  interconnections with the Southern Africa Power Pool.


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            ZM:Regional Transmiss Line Reinforc (RI) (P124351)



       The PDO was consistent with the government strategy articulated in the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
       for Zambia. The strategy recognized the direct relationship between energy sector development and
       poverty reduction. The government's sixth National Development Plan for 2011-2015, highlighted the
       importance of reliable electricity supply for diversifying growth and enhancing rural development. The
       government's seventh National Development Plan for the 2018-2021 period identified the need for seeking
       a diversification of the electricity mix and improving energy production and distribution and aimed at adding
       an additional 960 megavolt-ampere by 2021 (ICR, para 28). In the regional context, the Southern Africa
       Power Pool generation and transmission plan of 2017 identified the need for strengthening the Zambia
       transmission corridor (ICR, para 31).

       The PDO was well-aligned with the Bank strategy. The Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the 2008-
       2013 period identified three priority areas in the energy sector: (i) financing new generation and
       transmission capacity and demand-side management measures to mitigate the power crisis; (ii)
       providing financing and technical assistance for access expansion; and (iii) providing investment and
       technical assistance to ZESCO to improve efficiency and service delivery. The second objective of the
       Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the 2013-2016 period (improving competitiveness and infrastructure
       for growth and employment), aimed at supporting the government's energy agenda through projects aimed
       at improving access to electricity and promoting greater regional integration and cooperation
       through regional transmission projects (ICR, para 27). The ICR (page 11) reports that the Country
       Partnership Framework (CPF) at present scheduled for Board discussion for the 2018-2021 period, aimed
       at supporting the government's energy agenda through focus areas, one (more even territorial
       development: opportunities and jobs for the rural poor) and three, (institutions for resilience). Under focus
       area three, the CPF aimed at supporting regional integration, including through regional transmission
       projects.



       Rating
       Substantial

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To improve the reliability of ZESCO regional power trade transmission network infrastructure along the
     Kafue Town-Muzuma-Victoria Falls corridor.

    Rationale

    Theory of Change. The ICR’s Project Results Chain (Figure 2, page 7) conceptualized the underlying
    theory of change and links among project activities, their outputs and their intended outcomes. The project


                                                                                                         Page 4 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ZM:Regional Transmiss Line Reinforc (RI) (P124351)



activities of upgrading the substations from Kafue town and Muzuma and upgrading and reinforcing the
existing transmission line, together with constructing a new substation financed by the European Investment
Bank, were aimed at improving ZESCO’s power transfer capacity. These activities together with technical
assistance to ZESCO were expected to contribute to the intended outcomes of reducing the frequency of
unplanned interruptions along the Kafue Town-Muzuma-Victoria Falls corridor. The results framework
appropriately noted that the full attainment of the intended outcomes of improving reliability of ZESCO’s
regional power trade transmission network infrastructure along the corridor, was contingent upon completion
of an activity not financed by the Bank.

Outputs. (ICR, pages 30-33).

• 348 kilometers of the existing kV transmission line were upgraded from 220 kV to 330 kV as targeted.
• Seven kilometers of the line from Livingstone to the Victoria Falls substations were reinforced as targeted.
• The two existing substations at Kafue town and Muzuma were upgraded as targeted. Activities financed
included the installation of a 330 kV transformer at Kafue town, and the replacement of two existing 220 kV
transformers with 330 kV transformers. The ICR (page 16) notes that before the commissioning of this
project, transformers at Kafue town and Muzuma were loaded between 62 to 70 percent during peak and
that peak loading has now been reduced to 26 percent.
• The new substation at Livingstone through European Investment Bank financing was constructed as
targeted.
• The power transmission capacity between Kafue town and Livingstone substations increased from
230,000 kilovolt-ampere at the baseline to 700,000 kilovolt-ampere as targeted.
• Eleven members of the ZESCO staff were trained in various topics including procurement. There were no
targets for this indicator.

Outcomes. (ICR, page 13).

• According to the ICR (page 12), the Zambia Bureau of Standards, which defines quality of service
standards in Zambia, assesses reliability of electricity services through the number of interruptions
experienced by the final consumer. The average number of unplanned transmission line interruption
frequency per year in the project area, declined from five at the baseline to two at project closure. This
exceeded the target of three.
• The duration of unplanned transmission line interruption along the Kafue town - Victoria Falls declined
from 33.54 hours at the baseline to 8.60 hours at project closure. This exceeded the target of 12.
• According to the System Operation and Electricity Trading Departments under the Transmission
Directorates in ZESCO, responsible for recording data on outages, there were no planned outages on
transmission lines from Kafue town to Livingstone substations at project closure. There were two unplanned
outages on the Livingstone-Victoria Falls segment due to accidental incidents. However, since there
were two transformers, on outage on one did not affect customers.
• The amount of electricity traded with Namibia increased from the baseline of 294 Gigawatt-hours (GWh) at
the baseline to 505 GWh. However, this could not be attributed to the project, given that the increase had
happened before any part of the project was commissioned.


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 14
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  ZM:Regional Transmiss Line Reinforc (RI) (P124351)



             Given that the outcomes were realized or exceeded, this review concludes that project activities significantly
             contributed to increasing the reliability of electricity supply along the Kafue Town-Muzuma-Victoria Falls
             corridor.



             Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale




Overall Efficacy Rating
---

     5. Efficiency


            Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted for activities which accounted for 95 percent of
            the appraisal estimate and about 68 percent of the actual cost at closure. The costs included, the capital
            cost, annual fixed Operation and Maintenance cost (assumed to be two percent of the total fixed capital cost)
            and the variable cost of energy delivered to the transmission line. The project benefits were assumed to come
            from: (i) increased energy consumption in the local market valued at the estimated consumer willingness-to-
            pay; (ii) the sale of energy to the Southern Africa Power Pool during peak periods; (iii) reduction in
            transmission losses; and (iv) wheeling charges (energy export taxes are often referred to as wheeling
            charges).

            The Net Present Value (NPV) at project closure taking into account the benefits associated with electricity
            trade was US$471.00 million as compared to the ex ante NPV of US$699.00 million and the ex-post
            Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) with electricity trade was 76 percent as compared to the ex-ante
            EIRR of 87 percent. The NPV at project closure without considering the benefits associated with electricity
            trade was US$24.00 million as compared to the ex ante NPV of US$145.00 million and the ex-post EIRR
            without electricity trade was 15 percent as compared to the ex-ante EIRR of 21 percent. The lower estimates
            in both cases (with and without electricity trade) were due to a combination of factors including, lower
            willingness to pay, and lower export volumes and wheeling prices used for the completion estimates (ICR,
            page 17).

            The actual project cost was 9.3 percent lower than estimated due to a combination of factors
            including, savings associated with the competitive tendering process, the use of existing towers for 98 percent


                                                                                                                Page 6 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Regional Transmiss Line Reinforc (RI) (P124351)



of the line, limiting compensation to Project Affected People in areas limited to crop damage for worker camps
and access routes to the line (ICR, para 48).

Administrative and Operational issues. Although envisioned at appraisal as a fast-track implementation
three-year project, procurement commenced only about 18 months later. These delays were due to factors
such as, delays in preparing design and tender documents, procedural delays in obtaining clearances from
the respective ministries and the weak procurement capacity of ZESCO. These factors contributed to the first
extension of the project closing date. There were delays during implementation due to factors such as weak
performance by the contractors, legitimate requirements to limit the duration and frequency of outages given
the brownfield nature of the project, and gaps in safeguards implementation by ZESCO (discussed in section
10a), These factors were exacerbated by factors such as delays in the component funded by the European
Investment Bank (which was required for fully realizing the project outcome of improving reliability of
electricity services along the corridor), over which the Bank had little leverage and heavy rains during 2016
which hampered construction of the transmission line. These factors contributed to the second extension of
the closing date. Despite these delays, all project activities were completed, albeit the closing date had to be
extended.

Given that electricity trade could not be attributed to the project, the table below reports the ex post and ex
ante EIRR without taking into account the benefits associated with electricity trade.



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                    Rate
                                                          Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                    Available?
                                                                                     95.00
Appraisal                                                21.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                     67.00
ICR Estimate                                             15.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


The current relevance of the PDO to the Bank and government strategy is Substantial. Efficacy of the single
objective, " to improve the reliability of ZESCO's regional power trade transmission network infrastructure along



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 14
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        ZM:Regional Transmiss Line Reinforc (RI) (P124351)



the Kafue Town- Muzuma- Victoria Falls corridor " is Substantial, as the outcomes were realized or exceeded.
Efficiency is Substantial, in view of the economic viability of the project, despite implementation delays.


a.    Outcome Rating
      Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


Technical risk. The technical risk is low, given that the technical design for increasing the transmission
capacity along the Kafue Town - Muzuma - Victoria Falls corridor utilized proven technology that ZESCO was
familiar with (ICR, page 19).

Institutional risk. There is risk whether ZESCO would continue to provide adequate resources for maintenance
of the completed facilities. It is also unclear if regional electricity trade can be supported without addressing
other constraints in the regional transmission network.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

     The technical design was straightforward and utilized proven technology already in use in similar
     installations by ZESCO (ICR, page 19). The project components were appropriately distributed among the
     funding agencies to limit the risk of interdependencies, with the European Investment Bank funding a link
     along the corridor (constructing a new substation at Livingstone). The implementation arrangements were
     appropriate, with a dedicated Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within ZESCO, responsible for day-to-
     day implementation. ZESCO had a pool of experienced staff with experience in implementing the prior
     Bank-financed Power Rehabilitation Project, and the PIU was staffed with personnel from this pool (PAD,
     page 10). Several risks were identified at appraisal, including substantial risks associated with
     governance. Mitigation measures were incorporated at design, including getting citizen feedback through
     other media, such as radio, television and newspapers. With mitigation measures, the project risk was rated
     as moderate at appraisal (PAD, page 18). The arrangements made at appraisal for fiduciary and
     safeguards compliance were adequate (discussed in section 10).

     However, the project’s design underestimated the following risks. (i) The originally envisioned time line of
     three years for implementation was too short in view of ZESCO's limited experience in fast-track
     implementation of projects (ICR, para 65). As discussed in section 5, factors such as the longer than
     anticipated time for preparing tender documents exacerbated by weak procurement capacity in ZESCO led


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Regional Transmiss Line Reinforc (RI) (P124351)



  to the first extension of the project closing date. The project underestimated the risk of delays with
  brownfield projects and the difficulties associated with synchronizing contractor schedules and
  outages (ICR, page 26).

  The project was not ready for immediate implementation, given that the bidding documents were only
  prepared after the owner's engineer was contracted for the project (ICR, page 26). There were also
  shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in section 9a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  Ten Implementation Status Results Reports (ISRs) were filed (implying missions of twice a year on average
  (ICR, page 3). The ICR (page 26) notes that some key supervision staff were residents in Lusaka and this
  aided in maintaining a productive relationship with the ZESCO staff. The ICR (page 22) reports that
  although there were three task team leaders between project design and project closure, transitions were
  adequately managed. Appropriate adjustments were made through project restructuring for addressing the
  shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in section 9b). As indicated in Section 10a, the supervision team
  worked with ZESCO to resolve the incidents related to social safeguards (discussed in section 10).

  The team did not proactively address issues associated with delays in procurement capacity earlier during
  project implementation (ICR, page 27). There were shortcomings in fiduciary supervision during
  implementation (discussed in section 10b). There were issues associated with social safeguards during
  implementation (discussed in section 10a).




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  Of the two key outcome indicators, the indicator pertaining to the frequency of outages was appropriate for
  monitoring performance with respect to improved reliability of electricity services in the project area. This



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Regional Transmiss Line Reinforc (RI) (P124351)



  outcome was in addition to the project activities, contingent upon successful completion of an activity by the
  European Investment Bank.

  The other key outcome indicator "electricity trade between Zambia and other Southern Africa Power Pool
  members" was not appropriate, given that such trade was dependent on several other factors outside the
  control of the project (such as electricity demand characteristics of Zambia and its neighboring countries).

  The data for monitoring performance was to be from the PIU, ZESCO's administrative information system
  (transmission unit and customer care unit), supplemented with information from the Energy Regulation Board, a
  key organization in Zambia's electricity sub-sectors M&E system (PAD, page 12). Baseline figures for the
  indicators were provided and targets were specified (ICR, page 23).



b. M&E Implementation

  The revised indicators following the June 2017 restructuring were appropriate for monitoring performance.
  These changes included: The indicator pertaining to the average unplanned transmission line interruption
  frequency along the Kafue Town-Muzuma-Victoria Falls corridor, was disaggregated as: (i) number
  of interruption frequency per year: and (ii) duration of unplanned transmission line interruptions. An additional
  indicator, the increase in transmission line capacity between Kafue Town and Livingstone substations, was
  added. The increase in electricity trade between Zambia and Southern Africa Power Pool members was
  dropped. The ICR (page 23) notes that the data on the indicators were regularly collected by the Project
  Implementation Unit and shared with the Bank during implementation.

  There were shortcomings in M&E implementation due to inadequate due diligence. The ICR (page 24) notes,
  until the indicator on electricity trade was dropped, " the same number (264 gigawatts, GW) was recorded for
  all years from November 2012 to 2016 in the Implementation Status Results Reports, although data collected
  from ZESCO showed that trade volumes varied between 392.6 GW and 504 GW during the project
  implementation period.



c. M&E Utilization

  The data provided was used for monitoring project performance. The ICR (page 24) does not provide details
  but notes that the indicators did not adequately provide information on progress during implementation. For
  instance, the ICR (page 24) notes two years into project implementation (when no works had started), the
  Implementation Status Results Reports rated both implementation progress and progress toward
  achievement of the PDO as Satisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Regional Transmiss Line Reinforc (RI) (P124351)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was classified as a Category B for environmental assessment. The project triggered two
  safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

  Environmental Assessment. Although no large scale or irreversible impacts were envisaged as the
  proposed upgrade was to use the existing towers, the safeguard was triggered due to the possible negative
  impacts from activities such as, upgrading of the transmission line between Kafue town and Livingstone
  and Kafue and Muzuma substations and construction of a new sub station at Livingstone. An Environmental
  Impact Assessment was conducted, and Environmental and Social Management Plans were prepared and
  publicly-disclosed at appraisal (PAD, page 27).

  The ICR (page 25) notes that the environmental performance of the project was deemed to be
  satisfactory. The ICR (page 25) reports that ZESCO's Safety, Health, Environment and Quality Unit,
  Environmental Coordination Unit and environmental coordinator ensured compliance with safety
  requirements and that no worker casualties were recorded on project sites.

  Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (page 26) notes that as the activities associated with upgrading of the
  existing transmission lines were to be within the existing right-of-way, land acquisition was not anticipated.
  However, there was the possibility of crop damage during implementation. A Resettlement Policy
  Framework was prepared at preparation and publicly-disclosed as required to address involuntary
  resettlement issues.

  The ICR provides no information on whether there was involuntary resettlement. The ICR (page 25) notes
  that there were gaps in the implementation of social safeguard instruments. The ICR (page 22) reports that
  an incident of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) was reported at one of the worker campsites at Chivna.
  The incident was reported to the Bank and ZESCO through the owner's engineer. The ICR notes that
  ZESCO responded to support the affected girl financially and that while the incident did not affect project
  implementation, it highlighted gaps in ZESCO's implementation of social safeguards. The ICR (page 22)
  reports that a post-incident investigation revealed a lack of adequate specialized expertise on the part of the
  client staff on how to anticipate and address gender-based violence issues.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Regional Transmiss Line Reinforc (RI) (P124351)




  Financial Management. An assessment was conducted at appraisal to judge the financial management
  capacity of the ZESCO accounting implementing unit. The assessment concluded that ZESCO's financial
  management arrangements were deemed to be satisfactory (PAD, page 25). The ICR (page 25) notes that
  financial management arrangements were satisfactory and were compliant with Bank policies and procedures
  and that annual audits were submitted in a timely fashion. The ICR however does not provide any information
  on the quality of audits.

  Procurement. An assessment was conducted at appraisal to judge the procurement capacity of ZESCO, using
  the Bank's Procurement Risk Management System - PRAMs. The assessment concluded that the procurement
  risk was moderate (PAD, page 43). The ICR (page 25) notes that an initial lapse in fiduciary supervision on the
  part of the Bank allowed 100 percent of payments to be made to ZESCO against submitted invoices contrary to
  requirements of the Financing Agreement that stipulated that ZESCO would pay the 10 percent retention on
  contracts. The ICR notes that this issue was resolved with the understanding that ZESCO would pay the 10
  percent retention on contracts.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                         IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                       Satisfactory                Satisfactory               ---
                              Moderately                  Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                     ---
                              Satisfactory                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                Modest                      Modest                     ---
Quality of ICR                                            Substantial                ---

12. Lessons


The ICR (pages 27-28) draws nine lessons from the experience of implementing this project. Of these, the four
most important lessons are the following, with some adaptation of language.




                                                                                                      Page 12 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZM:Regional Transmiss Line Reinforc (RI) (P124351)



(1) Advance preparation of major procurement packages can help in speeding up implementation. This
is particularly important for projects envisioned to be fast track implementation projects. Arrangements such as
project preparation advances or retroactive financing to advanced preparation of major bidding packages for
the project need to be considered for helping to increase the speed of project implementation.

(2) Project design for brownfield projects need careful planning for outages given the need to
coordinate the contractor’s plan with the ability to grant outages. Such projects may require longer project
implementation periods. The implementation of this project was subject to delays due to the reluctance on the
part of ZESCO to grant long outages on the transmission corridor for works on account of the importance of this
corridor for demand and export considerations. (This single line was the main transmission corridor from Kafue
Town to Victoria Falls and onward to Namibia).

(3) Projects, especially those with wider geographic scope like transmission lines, must include a
framework for assessing Gender-Based Violence risks and responding to such issues. Such a
framework should take into account the recommendations of the Gender-Based Violence task force of the
Bank.

(4) Insufficient coordination with co-financier development partners regarding their operating
constraints can delay implementation and undermine the attainment of project objectives. Project teams
should consider a clear split of objectives among development partners to minimize changes to the PDO if
delays ensue from constraints with the co-financiers. The full realization of the PDO of this project of
improving reliability of electricity services along the corridor was contingent upon the completion of an European
Investment Bank-funded activity.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR is reasonably clear and candidly discusses the delays that arose in the initial years of the project. It is
also candid in identifying the issues which the Bank could have addressed at design (such as delays in
preparation of bidding documents which could only be prepared after the owner's engineer was contracted
under the project). The ICR is technically well grounded and makes frequent references to internationally
accepted electricity industry standards. The ICR places adequate emphasis on the importance of maintenance
programs. In its Efficiency section, the ICR made the laudable effort to benchmark the transmission line’s cost-
effectiveness with other countries (for example, Azerbaijan and Ghana in Table 6.2), using the World Bank
transmission line estimator. As such, the evidence provided by the ICR consistently demonstrated a robust
technical basis. The ICR is consistent with the guidelines and draws relevant lessons from the experience of
implementing this project.

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM:Regional Transmiss Line Reinforc (RI) (P124351)




The figures provided in the ICR on total project cost (page 2) and Annex 3 (page 36) are confusing. It is not
clear from the ICR what the contribution of the co-financier was at closure and whether there was any
borrower contribution. The required information was also not provided by the team. The ICR is rather long (at
28 pages of the main text as compared to the recommended length of 15 pages).



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
