     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0021433

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P122194                                   PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Peru                                      Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82120                                01-Apr-2018                                         24,828,146.15

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 04-Dec-2012                               01-Apr-2018

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          25,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           24,828,146.15                                               0.00

 Actual                                       24,828,146.15                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Dale M. Hill               Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   Project Development Objective (PDO): to improve the Borrower’s higher education quality assurance (QA)
   system through the promotion of self- and external evaluations, the financing of improvement plans and the
   provision of information (Loan Agreement dated January 15, 2013, Schedule 1).




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                        PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   The project contained three components: A, B, and C (ICR, para. 12)

   Component A: Development of Methods, Instruments, Norms and Capacity for Evaluation and
   Accreditation (appraisal cost US$ 7.9 million, of which International Bank for Reconstruction and
   Development (IBRD) portion US$ 3.80 million; actual expenditure US$ 2.27 million).
   --A1: Enhancing management, planning, and evaluation capacity of public entities in charge of
   higher education QA by developing standards, norms, and procedures for evaluation and accreditation.
   --A2: Strengthening of the capacity of higher education institutions (HEIs) to engage in internal and
   external evaluation processes including learning from regional and international experiences.
   --A3: Provision of support for technical and administrative management of the project.

   At restructuring, the title of Component A was broadened in coverage and subcomponents modified to
   reflect institutional changes from the Government’s new University Law.

   Component B: Development and Consolidation of a Higher Education (HE) QA Information System
   (appraisal cost US$ 5.29 million, of which IBRD portion US$ 2.49 million; actual expenditure US$ 1.55
   million).
   Originally, Component B had two "graduate observatory" sub-components: B1, for collecting and
   monitoring information on standards, criteria, indicators, and the institutions’ uptake of them; and B2
   for collecting information on HE graduates and their success in job markets (employability, salaries).
   B3 was to finance sector studies, four of which were named in the loan agreement (one a before-
   after/with-without evaluation, hereafter "impact evaluation").

   At restructuring, the title of component B became more outcome-oriented: "Provision of Knowledge and
   Information about Higher Education". Restructuring also took account of the fact that the Government had
   taken over financing of the graduate observatory dealing with student data (B2), leading IBRD to provide
   complementary support to the broader system that subsumed it, the HE Information System (SAIS) (B1)
   and allowing development of more specialized information technology (IT) tools (see below). SAIS also
   came under responsibility of a different Government agency than originally planned at appraisal. Also, at
   Restructuring, the second system B2 was renamed the QA Information System (SAES), which became a
   module within the SAIS. Sub-modules were later developed to deal with special needs – e.g. SAES-L for
   licensing, and a Call for Proposals Management System (GPROC) for administration of the application and
   bidding process of the Fund for Quality Enhancement (FEC) (Part C below).These subsystems were
   identified separately, as separate Government entities were responsible for their operation and
   maintenance (TTL).


                                                                                                            Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)




  Component C: Fund for Quality Enhancement (FEC) (appraisal cost US$ 39.06 million, of which IBRD
  financing US$ 18.71 million; actual expenditure: US$ 21.15 million).
  --C.1: External evaluation of non-university HE institutes and schools participating in the project, by
  an accreditation agency of their choice, after completion of self-evaluation.
  --C.2: Implementation of improvement plans (PMIs) for higher education institutions (HEIs) based on
  the results of the self‐evaluations and external evaluations, to raise the standards that were not previously
  met under the Government’s quality model. A self-evaluation was required to be eligible for FEC
  assistance. Thereafter, an application process to meet quality standards was required.

  At restructuring, sub-components C.1 and C.2 were modified to include financing of Adjustment Plans
  required for university licensing and Strengthening Plans for emblematic universities (due to University
  Law) (ICR, para. 15). The initial quality of applications was low, leading to the provision of additional
  technical assistance (TA).




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Project Cost: For the original project, total project cost was US$ 52.17 million. The ICR does not provide
  information on the actual total project cost.

  Financing: US$ 25 million was to be financed by IBRD at project approval. At closing, actual
  disbursements of the IBRD portion were US $24.83 million (ICR, pp. 2, 70).

  Borrower Contribution: At approval, plans were for the Government to provide US$ 27.17 million. The
  TTL stated that Government financed part of Component B, but neither the Restructuring Paper nor the
  ICR provide data on actual Government counterpart funds spent.

  Dates: The project was approved on December 4, 2012, and became effective on May 8, 2013.The
  restructuring was approved on September 1, 2016. The amended Loan Agreement was dated October
  13, 2016. The mid-term review (MTR) was postponed, given implementation delays, and was eventually
  dated October 24, 2016. The original closing date of April 1, 2018, was not revised, though the ICR states
  that "the implementation period was extended one year" (ICR, para. 33).

  Restructuring: A Level 2 restructuring was approved on September 1, 2016 that responded to low
  performance ratings and disbursement rates resulting from University Law No. 30220 and the Ministry of
  Education’s (MINEDU’s) new organizational rulebook (approved by Supreme Decree No. 110-2013-
  MINEDU). In response, MINEDU changed the project’s responsible agencies in June 2015 and
  temporarily suspended implementation of activities under Components A and B as responsible officials
  considered the role their ministry wanted to play in the higher education system. The restructuring took
  steps to help the project regain momentum and make design conform to legal provisions: a) description
  and coverage of some components were broadened; b) Component B was redesigned to take account of
  expenditures GoP made on the SAIS; c) funds were reallocated to favor Component C; d) implementation

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 20
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)



         responsibilities were changed; e) the results framework (RF) indicators and targets were updated; f)
         affected legal provisions were amended; and g) the overall risk category was upgraded to substantial
         (ICR, paras. 13-16, TTL).




   3. Relevance of Objectives

       Rationale


       The PDO was consistent with both the previous Country Program Framework (CPF for FY12–FY16) and
       the current one (FY 17-21) (ICR, para. 18). Pillar 1, "Productivity for Growth," a part of the current CPF’s
       Objective 3, highlights that technology absorption and managerial capacity of business in Peru requires
       scarce skills not currently available, as the demand for secondary and tertiary workers continues to outpace
       supply. The PDO was also fully aligned with the Government's three strategic priorities as reflected in the
       Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY12–FY16 (Report No. 66187‐PE): (a) economic growth, (b) social
       development, and (c) modernization of institutions (ICR, para. 44). Specifically, in the education sector, the
       Government was committed to increasing the quality and relevance of tertiary education following the
       approval of its National Education Project 2021 (NAP21) that resulted in the legal creation of the Higher
       Education Quality assurance (QA) system, SINEACE, in 2006. (ICR, para. 20, 42). The TTL said NAP21
       laid out policy prescriptions but did not provide the necessary funding for implementation.

       IBRD had a comparative advantage to help address higher education QA issues. It had completed
       analytical work on such constraints in Peru ("Strengthening Skills and Employability in Peru," (Report No.
       61699-PE) and Policy Note 11 focusing on the challenges Peru faced in strengthening human capital. IBRD
       also had substantial experience with similar projects in the region (Chile, Argentina, Colombia) (ICR, paras.
       43, 45).

       Although the PDO was not overtly outcome-oriented, there had been no previous HE projects in the
       country. Thus, it was appropriate that the project focused on a significant foundational weakness: the lack
       of QA aside a multiplicity of institutions without adequate resources to perform their functions (TTL).



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective


                                                                                                         Page 4 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)




To improve the Borrower’s higher education QA [quality assurance] system through the promotion of self-
and external evaluations, the financing of improvement plans, and the provision of information.

Rationale

The PDO defines one objective, "to improve the Borrower's higher education quality assurance system," with
three main means of achieving this objective as promotion of self- and external evaluations (a), provision of
information (b), and financing of improvement plans (c). The assessment below considers the outputs and
outcomes arising from each of these three paths. The assessment also takes into account that the project
focused only on selected career programs in public institutions, 55% of all higher education institutions.

Some outputs and outcomes below are marked "partial attribution," "plausible attribution," or "full attribution,"
to indicate IEG's assessment of the strength of the case being made for attribution of the particular output or
outcome to project activities; see the table below for an explanation of each of these abbreviated
descriptions:

  Abbreviated        means IEG's assessment is that...
  description
  Partial            ...the ICR provides insufficient evidence to make a case that achievement of the
  attribution        particular output or outcome is solely and fully attributable to project activities
  Plausible          ...the causal logic explained in the ICR is strong enough to infer attribution, and
  attribution        some evidence supports the case that achievement of the particular output or
                     outcome is at least partly attributable to project activities
  Full attribution   ...the ICR provides sufficient evidence to make a case that achievement of the
                     particular output or outcome is solely and fully attributable to project activities

(a) Improve Peru’s higher education QA system through promotion of self- and external evaluations:
The results chain called for all public universities to undergo self-evaluations, according to standards
previously set by coordinating bodies. This first step was required to access the Fund for Quality
Enhancement (FEC), thus creating incentives for self-evaluation.

Outputs achieved:

--Enabling Intermediate Outputs included development of methods, instruments, norms and capacity of the
public entities in charge of Higher Education QA, as well as accreditation agencies (ICR, para.12). All
evaluations counted below are standards-base (TTL).

--Self-Evaluations: The ICR’s Annex 1 (which is the source of all data mentioned in this section unless noted
otherwise) recorded 1383 self-evaluations completed against a baseline of 0, and against a target revised
after restructuring (hereafter "revised target") of 1100 (PDO indicator 1) (full attribution).




                                                                                                      Page 5 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)



--External Evaluations: The PDO Indicator 2 recorded 456 external evaluations "finalized as part of the
process for higher education QA" compared to a baseline of 0 and a revised target of 190. However, the ICR
later identified in para. 21 only 60 "[public institutes] that required external evaluation as a final step in
…[SINEACE accreditation] as having received financing under the FEC (presumably for external evaluations
-C1). (ICR paras. 20, 21) This subset, measured in intermediate results indicator (IRI) 6, exceeded its
baseline of 0 and target of 54; full attribution is certain only for the 60 external evaluations financed by the
FEC.

Outcomes achieved:

The project results framework did not contain indicators on licensing or accreditation (the latter of which
would have been a higher standard). However, the ICR reported some figures which are difficult to reconcile:
the ICR (para. 21) states that nearly 80% of the 60 institutes receiving external evaluations financed by the
FEC achieved accreditation (suggesting that 48 institutes achieved accreditation), while (in para. 21), the
ICR cites figures which amount to 68 institutes and 29 universities reaching accreditation among those
receiving project service (full attribution).

(b) Development and consolidation of a HE QA information system:
The results chain incorporated improved information systems to provide incentives, promote accountability
and help ensure improved productivity was translated into student gains through better student/parent
decisions.

Outputs achieved:

--Development of the Higher Education Information System (SIES) (IRI 3): The project updated the
information in the GoP-funded Graduate Observatory and enhanced the system. Tailored subsystems of the
SIES were implemented in 15 institutes and 20 career programs in 11 universities. The ICR considered this
coverage as having met the target of being "fully functional and responsive." (partial attribution, since the
Government financed part of the development).

--Sector Studies Published and Consultancies: The project appraisal document (PAD) and Loan Agreement
listed 4 studies by name to be financed including the impact evaluation and a deeper social assessment as
part of the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). After restructuring, some changes were made to
the choice of studies (and financing added for implementation of the IPPF) and the target increased to five.
Actual achievement was six, although the ICR did not name them. Other consultancies were also financed
after requests by various agencies (ICR, para. 35) (full attribution).

Output partially achieved:

--Development of the QA information system SAES, with associated systems SAES-L and GPROC. The
project designed and established this QA monitoring system and provided training on its use (full attribution).
The ICR stated (p. 34) that SAES is being used for managing self-evaluations and accreditations and
contributing data to sector studies. The ICR terms this output "partially achieved" as plans for SAES-L to be

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)



transferred directly to HEIs were interrupted after uncertainty about which agency would host it. For
purposes of this ICR Review, however, this output is considered largely achieved.

Outcomes achieved:

--Improved Information and Capacity for Responsible Authorities’ Participating in and Monitoring QA. The
ICR refers in para. 38 to substantial institutional strengthening resulting from the project. The MTR reported
that: (a) the authorities and technical teams in the quality improvement system had come to a better
understanding and greater alignment among themselves (more specific evidence lacking); (b) the PCU’s
implementing capacity had been enhanced (evidence in improved ISR ratings); and (c) participation of HEIs
in all calls for proposals increased substantially, as had the quality of the proposals, due to the added TA
(ICR, para. 51). Whereas the HEI's with >5% bilingual students had been unable to meet standards in early
rounds, 29 of 36 applications were approved in the 8th call for proposals targeted at them, after TA. The
development of the SAES and SIES promises to provide increased information for measuring impact in the
future (plausible partial attribution).

--Improved Information Accessible to the Public on Quality of HEIs: This system potentially helps students
and parents make better decisions about their higher education. The number of website visits (PDO Indicator
4) was 785,033 against a baseline of 0 and a revised target of 300,000. (Partial attribution, since the system
was partly funded by government.)

(c) Fund for Quality Enhancement (FEC):
The results chain considered financing of external evaluations and improvements plans (PMIs) an important
stage on the path to accreditation. An enabling intermediate output was provision of technical assistance and
radio promotion between the 3rd and 4th call for proposals, to ensure an increased quality and diversity of
applications.

Outputs achieved:

--60 external evaluations financed by FEC (C1) were completed against a baseline of 0 and a target of 54
(IRI 6) (full attribution).

--257 improvement plans (PMIs) were financed (for 60 public universities and institutes) against a baseline of
0 and a revised target of 155 (IRI 6). Of those, 100% were satisfactorily completed, namely 257 against a
target of 108 (PDO Indicator 3) (full attribution).

--Two examples of the PMIs were provided in the ICR, with tables on the "factors and standards" used, and
detailed lists of outputs, e.g. assets and equipment, student centers, software, TA on branding/ image,
management strategy preparation, teacher training, curriculum development, study tours, and consultancies.

Outcome achieved:




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 20
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)



             --Broad equity in quality improvements: HEIs in all 25 regions of Peru benefited from FEC improvement
             plans. A decision was also taken late in the project to dedicate the 8th call for proposals to HEIs with >5% of
             indigenous students (see Section 10a) (full attribution).

             Other outputs achieved or partly achieved:

             Development and Implementation of the new HE Quality Model (IRI 1) was considered by the ICR to be met.
             However, the CAE evaluation mentioned key structural gaps in the institutional framework still needed at
             project-end (ICR, para. 62).
             Capacity building included training of Government officials, HEI staff, and authorization and training of
             accreditation agencies early in the project implementation (detailed data in Restructuring Paper (RP)). After
             restructuring, capacity building indicators were dropped from the Results Framework (RF), so Annex 1 had
             no updated quantitative statistics, although capacity building was mentioned as an output (ICR, p. 33, para.
             21). The project also provided support to the development of a University Quality Assurance Policy
             (September 26, 2015) (partial attribution).

             Reach/Coverage: HEIs that benefited from at least one quality improvement intervention were 411 against a
             baseline of 0 and a revised target of 350 (full attribution). It is not clear if the activities from which they
             benefited were all completed. The coverage in terms of percentage of all institutions varies by source-- from
             about 14% (ICR Annex 4, para. 3) to about 24% (CAE Evaluation, para.10), probably depending on the
             denominator definition. IRI 8 counted Student beneficiaries, acknowledged as indirect beneficiaries, as
             210,660, against a target of 200,000 (ICR, p. 32). These actual figures were not disaggregated by gender
             (49% was assumed).The precise definition of student beneficiary is inconsistent between the Restructuring
             Paper and different parts of the ICR. The ICR's economic analysis cited a different figure of 130,225
             beneficiaries (Partial attribution; some likely benefitted; others likely did not).

             Impact:

             One of the sector studies was an impact evaluation that involved self-evaluation scores before and after the
             project period of both HEIs benefiting from the project and a control group. For universities, quality improved
             on average by 15.91% (with support) against 0.62 percent (without support). For institutes, the comparable
             figures were 39.64% (with support) and 15.06% (without support) (ICR, para. 25.) Impact was not measured
             in terms of learning; a multi-variable quality index was used (TTL) (Plausible attribution; statistical
             significance of differences not reported).




             Rating
      High
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)




Summary:

The project succeeded overall in strengthening the higher education QA system, creating incentives, and
providing financing for self-improvement. For a significant number of institutions, the key indicator targets were
exceeded, suggesting a catch-up in implementation, and providing a convincing case for likelihood of further
improvements. Efficacy is therefore rated high.




Overall Efficacy Rating
High

5. Efficiency


 Economic Analysis at Appraisal:

 The ICR stated the following methodology for the PAD’s economic analysis (paras. 27–30): it assumed a 10%
 discount rate and a 20‐year time horizon because the benefits of accreditation could only be expected to
 accrue over time. The calculation of economic benefits considered the following: (a) the salary increase that is
 associated with the higher productivity stemming from quality improvements in higher education; and (b) the
 increasing number of graduates that would benefit from the wage premium. The stock of beneficiaries was
 determined by all those who graduated from an accredited institution five years after accreditation or later.
 The assumed wage premium for each depended on the income quintile to which they would belong had the
 accreditation process not taken place, as well as the number of years of accumulated professional
 experience. Results of the analysis were internal rates of return (IRRs) ranging from 30 to 42 percent. The
 economist co-author of the ICR later clarified that the factor translating quality improvement to student
 earnings was based on decreasing the variance of student earnings.

 Ex-Post Economic Analysis

 The ex-post analysis also used a 10% discount rate and 20-year time frame. The ICR stated that one
 important difference between the appraisal analysis and the ex-post analysis was the latter’s narrower
 definition of student beneficiaries, which "considered only direct beneficiaries" -- namely, those in institutions
 that benefitted from at least one of the following: TA, financing of improvement plans, or external evaluations.
 Although each of these interventions had a different impact, the project reported only average impact (para.
 31, footnote 13, Table 4.1). The other difference was that there were now actual data on the number of
 institutions affected by the project and estimates of the magnitude of the effects from the impact analysis.

 A sensitivity analysis was done, with the main focus of variation being the magnitude of the effects of the
 assumed productivity increase of institutions on "relevant learning" of students. A Mincerian equation, well
 known in the education literature, was then used to translate that productivity increase and relevant learning
 into earnings using benchmarks from studies of three developed countries. (ICR, para. 32). The scenarios

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)



tested 0.1 (conservative), 0.2 (middle) and 0.3 (optimistic) as the effect of the productivity increase in HEIs on
students’ earnings, resulting in an IRR of 11.4% and Net present value (NPV) of $7 million for the low case,
and an IRR of 16.7% and NPV of $45 million for the middle case. The other "conservative" assumption
employed was that university graduates as a proportion of the population between 23 and 25 years of age
would be constant (despite evidence to the contrary in neighboring countries, and a reasonable assumption
that some increase in demand for higher education would result from quality improvements) (Annex 4, para.
3).The other variable that might have been the subject of variation in the sensitivity analysis was the number
of beneficiaries, given inconsistencies in the ICR. The economist reported that a scenario assuming only half
the student beneficiaries (middle case) also resulted in an IRR of 11.4% and NPV of US$ 7 million.

Cost per Student Beneficiary:

If the definition of student beneficiary in the RF is accepted, the cost per student beneficiary – counting only
IBRD financing-- was $119 per student. Assuming that the Government fulfilled its counterpart funding pledge
and using the lower beneficiary number in the IRR calculations, this cost per student increases to $401.
Although neither the ICR nor IEG have compared this figure to benchmarks (e.g. those of similar projects in
the region), this seems a reasonable unit cost for the outputs and outcomes achieved.

Implementation Efficiency

Positives: The ICR stated the following qualitative evidence of efficiency: a) procurement processes of inputs
for several HEIs were consolidated, yielding more competitive proposals for the FEC; b) due to increased
efficiency, the FEC was able to hold two calls for proposals beyond the original Procurement Plan; and c) the
project was completed on time while achieving more outputs than originally included in its scope (para.33).
The first two of these assertions plausibly demonstrate efficiency of the third component, which was the
largest component. However, plausibility of the third assertion is, arguably, lower, based on the following: (a)
the implementation period was extended by one year, although the closing date was not extended (ICR, p.
33), and (b) the amount of actual Government funding, and thus the total costs of the project,
remain uncertain. It is known that the Government contributed to the second component; in comments from
the GP, the task team indicated the amount is small and therefore it is understood total costs did not change
much.

Negatives: There were substantial delays in implementation between effectiveness in May 2013 and the
passage of the University Law (July 2014) and MINEDU rulebook (January 2015) and between that time and
the time of restructuring in September 2016. Due to the two-stage restructuring process, it is difficult to
choose a peak in disbursement lags, or its recovery. Disbursements were 21% at March 2016 (Restructuring
Paper, p. 8). Government leadership changed, and responsibility for the project was shifted to different
agencies. Operations for the first two components were suspended. The ICR did not give the exact dates of
all these developments. The ISR record shows a downgrading to moderately unsatisfactory progress on
implementation in December 2014, and the same downgrade in the PDO rating in March 2015. The TTL
stated that Government leadership had unrealistic expectations of how long the adjustment of the project plan
to the new laws and institutional structure would take. While the delays would not have affected estimates of
benefits (assumed to begin only five years after project end), they may have affected the cost stream or the
synergy of different elements. Also, since information was not provided on actual costs incurred by

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)



Government, any inefficiencies suffered by the Government would not have been captured. The CAE final
evaluation stated that technical and administrative efficiency was sub-optimal due to the lack of enhanced
monitoring possible with a balanced scorecard (ICR, Annex 5, para. 50).

Summary: Efficiency is rated substantial (rather than high) due to: a) the lack of definitive information on
Government counterpart funding and the total costs of the project; b) the fact that, under the low and central
case scenarios in the economic analysis, the IRR meets expectations for a similar project in the sector
(consistent with a rating of substantial); and c) the likelihood that early delays meant the project was not
delivered under a least-cost scenario.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate
                                                        Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                   Available?
                                                                                   0
Appraisal                                              30.00
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
ICR Estimate                                           11.40
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


The project's objectives were highly relevant to country and sector conditions and to Government and IBRD
strategy at closing. Efficacy was also high, with key outcome indicator targets exceeded and evidence of
continued momentum toward the objective of an improved HE QA system. Efficiency was substantial. These
ratings aggregate to an Outcome rating of Highly Satisfactory.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)




The primary risks are twofold:

a) institutional: The ICR stated that the QA system is on a solid footing, and it would be difficult to reverse the
momentum achieved (para. 65); while this is plausible, the CAE evaluation (ICR, Annex 5, para. 62) stated that
there are still some structural gaps in the framework (confirmed by the project team)

b) financial: The demand and need for quality improvement services remains high among public HEIs; it is not
known if the Government can or will step in and take over financing from IBRD. The coverage achieved by the
project (various estimates as cited earlier) is < 25%. As for political risks, there are signs of continued political
will, although the project experienced one slowdown due to ministerial turnover in the past, illustrating the
possibility of impact from political shifts. Capacity risks exist because the reorganization of SINEACE under the
University Act made it necessary for the project to directly undertake much of the TA, without transitional plans
clearly in place (CAE evaluation, ICR, Annex 5, para. 47). The institutional framework for implementation of the
new QA model remains somewhat incomplete.

The ICR (para. 65) stated that "HEIs on their own are internalizing the use of improvement plans in their routine
business models," but it gave no further evidence. The likelihood that HEI outcomes already achieved under the
existing project will be sustained is more certain than the likelihood that the HEIs who have not completed the
path to accreditation will have adequate incentives to complete it. (The Government would have to provide
funds for PMIs.) Thus, there may be opportunities lost to continue momentum and expand coverage of HEIs by
the QA system if a follow-on project is not prepared. (According to the CAE evaluation, an Inter-American
Development Bank project was planned that would cover only institutes.)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  Positives:

  The objective rightly focused on the foundational impediments to improving Peru’s Higher Education
  system: a multiplicity of institutions with a lack of a QA system. The technical approach was based on both
  local and international experience (Argentina, Chile and Columbia) and evidence on its effectiveness (PAD,
  paras. 24-25). The components reinforced each other by providing the necessary norms, standards, tools
  and capacity-building combined with incentives and financing for improvement plans. The capacity risks
  were appropriately rated substantial at appraisal, and financial management and procurement
  assessments performed, followed by inclusion of activities and conditions to mitigate them (PAD, para. 39).
  An IPPF was drawn up according to IBRD standards to address safeguard issues. The monitoring and
  evaluation design were sound, and provided for appropriate checks and balances, though it was
  institutionally complex. Indeed, the whole project emphasized improved data collection and analysis of
  higher education performance. Provision for sector studies and an impact evaluation was laudable. Gender


                                                                                                       Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)



  disaggregation of indicators was planned. Finally, given capacity of institutions, the decision for FEC to
  provide direct implementation services rather than grant funding was a good one.

  Negatives:

  --RF indicators were largely output oriented. The definition of student beneficiary was too broad, inflating
  IRR estimates.
  --The decision to apply the IPPF only to component C may have meant that targeted institutions did not
  benefit from TA needed early in the project to compete for FEC services; and there was a lack of indicators
  monitoring the IPPF implementation in the RF. These two factors may have caused these institutions to
  only benefit from improvement plans late in the project.
  --There may have been missed opportunities to pursue studies aimed at confirming assumptions in the
  economic analysis, e.g. studies focused on actual learning (at least establishment of a baseline).


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  Positives:

  The project team responded promptly and flexibly to the challenges posed by the new University law and
  MINEDU rulebook and the temporary suspension of components A and B, while maintaining IBRD
  standards; the ISR ratings were appropriately downgraded below satisfactory. Three milestones were set
  for the reinstatement of satisfactory ratings, and conditions were monitored carefully. When it became clear
  that the project description and institutional arrangements were no longer aligned with the loan agreement,
  the team proceeded pragmatically with a two-stage restructuring (necessary for Peru's investment plan
  requirements (TTL)), and a level 2 Restructuring for IBRD.

  The design of the Restructuring was sound. The adjustment in allocation of proceeds among components
  responded to decreased need for financing for some systems financed by MINEDU (component B) as well
  as consistently high demand for improvement plan services. Showing flexibility in allowing adaptation of
  component B to include new modules (SAIS-L for licensing and GPROC for PMI procurement management)
  facilitated the catchup in implementation of the project. While the PCU continued to collect a wider range of
  data, the Restructuring team streamlined the RF indicators. The decision to make the website accessible to
  all, rather than to require registration, improved transparency. the decision to broaden financing for sector
  studies to include support for implementation of the IPPF was helpful. The decision to intensify TA, after
  initial responses to the call for proposals for improvement plans led to poor quality submissions, helped
  bring a solution to that problem.

  Supervision Reports: The ICR (para. 63) stated that ISRs were "timely, clear, and results‐focused and
  provided a strong basis for understanding the issues the Project’s implementation was facing and the



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)



  progress it was making toward its PDO." For example, after the MTR confirmed that GoP had met the
  prescribed conditions, the ISR ratings were upgraded.

  Negatives:

  -- The TTL stated that the IPPF implementation was monitored, but as of late 2016, no targeted institutions
  (those with at least 5% indigenous student populations) had benefited from FEC’s calls for proposals. Only
  then was action taken providing TA and reserving the 8th call for proposals for the targeted institutions.

  -- It is not known if the lack of ICR reporting on the following is grounded in lack of information in ISRs: (a)
  Government counterpart funding, (b) total project costs and (c) student beneficiaries disaggregated by
  gender. If so, this gap in ISR reporting is significant. In the GP's comments on this ICR Review, the task
  team addressed (a) and (b), although with some inconsistency. For purposes of this review, IEG accepts the
  assertion that changes in counterpart funding (and therefore in total project costs) were small as a share of
  the original total project costs. However, (c) remains an issue, given that the project financed systems to
  collect and analyze information on education quality and access. Despite the development of these
  systems, the task team stated (in the GP's comments on this ICR Review) that gender-disaggregated
  data on student beneficiaries were not available.
  -- The beneficiary definition in the Restructuring Paper was not retained, likely due to difficult measurement.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  Positives:

  The positive PAD assessment of M&E capacity was proven correct, and the specialized budget and M&E unit -
  situated properly outside the Executive Directorate of the PCU to ensure independence - collected a wide range
  of statistics, including some additional to those in the official project RF list of indicators. Baseline data was
  collected, as required by the project and the GoP. Although the RF after Restructuring had consolidated some
  statistics, the ICR cited statistics disaggregated by type of institution, so it is known such data was collected.
  Gender disaggregation of students was part of the design. Overall, targets for indicators seemed of appropriate
  ambition, given that, even with implementation difficulties in the early years, significant achievements were
  recorded by project closure. (A change in the basis of some indicators after restructuring made comparison of



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)



  the ambition difficult.)

  A major part of the project design was devoted to systems to collect and report statistics on both proximate
  achievements of the project (evaluations, improvement plan progress) and less direct results (employability and
  earnings of students.) Provision was made for annual reviews (possibly unrealistic), a mid-term review (MTR)
  and final evaluation conducted by Council of External Advisors (CAE), with members with respected credentials
  from both within and outside Peru. A with-without/before-after impact evaluation, as well as other important
  studies were funded by the project.

  Negatives:

  The RF indicators were output-oriented (except for the proxy measure for use of the website) and weighted in
  favor of indicators at the early stages of the results chain. Indicators on accreditation and licensing could have
  been usefully added, though the TTL stated that the project’s objective was not to promote a high level of
  accreditation per se, but to force HEIs to go through evaluations and quality assurance processes, expecting
  some not to succeed. Thus, targets would have been difficult to set for accreditation and licensing.

  --An issue with the RF indicators that may have affect implementation is the inattention to IPPF (Safeguard)
  progress Indicators.

  -- Finally, using an overly broad definition of beneficiaries that was student-based (as opposed to merely HEI-
  based) resulted in an overestimate of beneficiaries that arguably overstated the NPV and IRR.



b. M&E Implementation

  The ICR stated that "M&E was implemented routinely, and without issues….The implementation teams
  adjusted the RF in the September 2016 restructuring…in a timely manner" (paras. 56-58). As noted above, the
  PCU monitored some additional indicators to the project’s RF (Annex 5, para. 2), such as percentage
  coverage of the HEIs’ universe by project activities. Although project design called for the CAE to do annual
  evaluations, in fact, they did only the MTR (delayed due to restructuring) and the final CAE evaluation (TTL).
  The impact evaluation was implemented and yielded relevant results, though the measures of quality were
  not fully explained in the ICR (para. 25 – 28)(later elucidated by the TTL). Gender disaggregation of the count
  of beneficiaries was not reported in the ICR (a % was assumed). It is not known if gender-disaggregated data
  was collected.



c. M&E Utilization

  The TTL confirmed the use of the monitoring system for following progress of the project, identifying and
  resolving issues, and aiding in reporting in ISRs. The ICR provided several examples of use. For example,
  M&E information was used to spot check the submission of weak institutional improvement plans under

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)



  component C, resulting in major course correction between the third and fourth call for proposals to use radio
  communications and extend technical assistance to improve quality. M&E information was also used to
  determine whether conditions for upgrading of supervision ratings had been met, and for the MTR and final
  CAE evaluation. The impact evaluation findings were a key input to the ICR’s economic analysis.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The environmental category was C. No new construction was planned (PAD, para. 48).

  The safeguard triggered was OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples. Since the project had nationwide scope,
  it would affect higher education institutions with indigenous students. Accordingly, an indigenous peoples’
  plan framework (IPPF) was prepared, discussed extensively with stakeholders, included in the Operational
  Manual as required (loan agreement, p. 3), and disseminated (ICR, para. 59). However, The PAD team
  decided to prepare an IPPF for the third component only (FEC) and to have the targeted institutions
  develop their own indigenous peoples’ plans (IPPs). The draft IPPF was shared with indigenous leaders in
  Lima and indigenous students in Cusco, Iquitos, and Lima that attended HEIs. As a result, the threshold
  percentage of indigenous students for the mandatory elaboration of IPPs was lowered from 10% to 5%. The
  project’s IPPF provided guidance and a menu of possible activities for the targeted HEIs (PAD, paras. 45,
  47).

  The implementing agency had limited experience with IBRD’s safeguard policies. Thus, project activities
  included training and ongoing support from the IBRD team for the implementation of the IPPF and
  compliance with OP/BP 4.10, to: (i) prepare, consult, disseminate, and implement the IPPs; (ii) support HEIs
  with indigenous students to develop their IPPs; and (iii) monitor the implementation of the approved IPPs.
  The IPPF was formally disclosed on the higher education council’s website and plans made for it to be
  translated into Quechua (summary translated into 10 other languages (Integrated Safeguard Data Sheet, p.
  5)).

  Although the TTL stated that IPPF implementation was monitored, the RF indicators did not include such
  monitoring or disaggregation. The ICR did not discuss the decentralized IPP implementation. The ICR
  stated that, through late 2016, none of the higher education institutions’ improvement plans had addressed
  the issue of indigenous peoples (due to limited capacity of those HEIs to prepare competitive proposals
  (TTL)). After review of the MTR, an agreement was reached that the eighth call (of nine) for improvement
  plan proposals would be targeted at teaching programs specializing in bilingual education, and appropriate
  TA was provided (ICR, para. 59). In the end, 29 of 33 institutions that presented proposals in this 8th call
  were awarded funding for PMIs; all were completed satisfactorily by project closure.


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  At the time of project preparation, the specified implementing agency, the Higher Council of the National
  System for Evaluation, Accreditation, and Certification of the Quality of Education (COSUSINEACE), had not
  yet become a completely operational entity, though steps to become fully operational had been identified and
  an action plan designed. Thus, Financial management (FM) and procurement risk were judged substantial. To
  mitigate the risk, FM and procurement assessments were performed to determine the adequacy and
  mechanisms of COSUSINEACE’s arrangements to support project implementation (PAD, para. 39). In
  response, the project team set three conditions, reflected in the Loan Agreement, to ensure FM conditions
  acceptable to IBRD. In addition, IBRD specified the composition of the procurement team of the PCU based on
  number and frequency of transactions and stipulated that the Operational Manual was to include detailed
  information for procurement. Also, the borrower was to be required to prepare an acceptable procurement plan
  (PAD, para. 43).

  The ICR recorded that early ISR ratings of project implementation dipped below satisfactory in December 2014
  (not specifying it problems were related to FM or procurement.) According to the MTR, the project’s FM by
  October 2016 provided sound reporting and controls, and the project’s financial records adequately recorded
  expenditures. This is reflected in the ISR’s ratings for that time period – a return to satisfactory. The ICR also
  stated that the FM rating in the latest ISR was upgraded to satisfactory and concluded that the FM
  staffing/personnel, budgeting, accounting, internal controls, funds flow, financial reporting, and auditing were
  adhering to the standards required by IBRD at project closure (ICR, p. 2 and para. 60).

  With regard to procurement, the MTR concluded that contracting processes were adequately reflected in the
  electronic procurement system and made only minor suggestions regarding updating information in the system.
  At that time, in the fall of 2016, ISR ratings (both PDO and implementation) returned to satisfactory. The ICR
  reported specifically that the latest ISR upgraded the procurement rating to satisfactory and concluded that the
  PCU was working satisfactorily to manage and close the goods and services contracts signed (ICR, para. 61).



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
  --




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)



11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory       Highly Satisfactory        ---
                                                                                     Quality of supervision was
                                                                                     rated satisfactory (rather than
                                                                                     highly satisfactory) due to
                                                                                     moderate shortcomings in
                                                                                     monitoring finance
                                                                                     information, monitoring of
                                                                                     student benefciaries (including
Bank Performance                Highly Satisfactory       Satisfactory
                                                                                     gender disaggregation, and
                                                                                     late action on capacity
                                                                                     limitations of IPPF-targeted
                                                                                     institutions in accessing
                                                                                     project benefits. Quality at
                                                                                     entry was also rated
                                                                                     satisfactory.
                                                                                     Quality of M&E was rated
                                                                                     substantial rather than high
                                                                                     due to shortcomings in (a) full
                                                                                     implementation of evaluation
Quality of M&E                  High                      Substantial                plans; (b) clarity on student
                                                                                     beneficiary definition; (c)
                                                                                     disaggregation by gender; (d)
                                                                                     reporting on actual
                                                                                     Government contributions.
Quality of ICR                                            Substantial                ---

12. Lessons


1. Transfer of capacity for project implementation and coordination requires up‐front definition and attention.
The project counted on implementation services supported by a self‐standing project coordination unit (PCU)
within the ministry but financed by the project. The unit acquired invaluable experience and managed important
processes that will outlive project financing. IBRD has been informed that several project activities will be
entrusted to different units responsible for these activities both within and outside of the Ministry of Education,
but it is still unclear by whom the overall coordination and important technical assistance will be carried out after
the PCU loses funding. This could affect sustainability adversely.

2. For reliance on a large number of inexperienced institutions to implement diverse improvement plans,
provision of direct implementation services is preferable to grant funding, especially when supported by a
successful project procurement management and monitoring system. In this project, this procurement
arrangement helped monitor progress and ensure implementation faithful to proposals. The monitoring helped


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)



identify TA needs that could be filled by intensive attention by the PCU. As a result, the number of bidding
rounds exceeded plans, and the number of improvement plans completed by project end was 100%.

3. The best designed indigenous peoples planning framework (or other safeguard response) does not in itself
assure proper implementation, particularly if institutions responsible for implementation are multiple,
inexperienced and scattered. Monitoring is essential, and the results framework of the project should contain
some related indicators, to feed into supervision which needs to report on safeguards implementation. In this
project, a decision was made at appraisal to have the IPPF apply to only one of the project's three components,
which may have meant lack of access of targeted institutions to some early essential TA. As a result, the
targeted institutions lacked capacity to apply for services under improvement plans and were neglected in the
first seven rounds of competition. Late in project implementation, a decision was taken to reserve one of the
competitions specifically for them, and TA was provided to ensure adequate quality applications. A high
percentage of the applicants met the standards in that round, and 100% completed improvement plans.




13. Assessment Recommended?

Yes

Please explain
 Assessment is recommended, given substantial achievement of project results, success in flexibly
restructuring, and most importantly, improved data generated by the project on higher education and outcomes
(employability and earnings), which could be expected to increase over time and could spawn research. At the
same time, gaps in the results framework, as well as inconsistencies in the ICR, mean that more in-depth
assessment could be beneficial or even necessary to understand the factors that drove success. If there is a
follow-on project, it might be preferable to do an assessment after the follow-on project, as more higher
education institutions may have completed the quality assurance cycle, and coverage would be higher.




14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR was concise and results-oriented. It was strong in its provision of context, discussion of baseline
conditions, and explanation of the changes undertaken at restructuring. The ICR was also strong in its
explanation of the relevance of the project and its design. There was an excellent depiction of the results
chain. The section on efficacy cited statistics that went beyond the RF in disaggregating some data, and in
giving figures on accreditation. The ICR generally cited evidence to back up ratings and gave a comprehensive
description of factors affecting success. The inclusion of Annex 7, providing examples of improvement plan
results (with extensive detail on actual outputs), provided convincing evidence to supplement the efficacy
section. The economic analysis provided a thorough explanation of methodology, particularly in the separate
Annex. The inclusion of a sensitivity analysis was welcome.

                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE HIGHER EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT (P122194)




However, there were some minor shortcomings. The ICR discussed baseline conditions but not the
counterfactual. There was no information on Government funding, or total costs, which affected initial
assessment of attribution and of economic analysis. In addition, there were unacknowledged inconsistencies
within the ICR and between the RP and ICR, the most important being the definition of student beneficiary (in
the RF); others occurred in statistics not covered by the RF (coverage, accreditation). There were no gender-
disaggregated actual beneficiary figures cited.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 20 of 20
