     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WUAP (P107617)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0021491

1. Project Data



 Project ID                           Project Name
 P107617                              WUAP

 Country                              Practice Area(Lead)                         Additional Financing
 Azerbaijan                           Water                                       P147947


 L/C/TF Number(s)                     Closing Date (Original)                     Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80390,IDA-49130                 30-Jun-2016                                               75,864,343.22

 Bank Approval Date                   Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Apr-2011                          30-Jun-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           80,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            80,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                        75,864,343.22                                                0.00



 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   Both the Financing Agreement (IDA FA, p.5) and the Loan Agreement (IBRD LA, p.6), and the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 13) defined the Project Development Objective (PDO) for the Water
   Users Association Development Project (WUAP) as "to improve the effectiveness and financial viability of on-
   farm irrigation water distribution and management in the project area." ‘On-farm irrigation water distribution
   system’ included canal networks, which were formerly managed by kolkhoz/sovkhoz, each with their own
   brigade for canal operations and management (O&M).
   This review will assess the extent to which the PDO has been achieved by examining the outcomes of its two
   parts:

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WUAP (P107617)




     • Objective 1 - Improve the effectiveness of on-farm irrigation water distribution and management in the
     project area
     • Objective 2 - Improve the financial viability of on-farm irrigation water distribution and management in the
     project area




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                          PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (US$16.7 million at appraisal, US$15.9 million
   actual). This component financed capacity building of AIOJSC, training and capacity building of WUAs,
   provision of MOM equipment and management and offices for WUAs, strengthening the AIOJSC’s
   capacity for WUA supervision, and institutional capacity-building studies and pilots to improve the
   effectiveness of administration and on-farm water management by WUAs in about 27 raions.
   2: On-farm irrigation and drainage (I&D) Rehabilitation (US$89.9 million at appraisal, US$85.9 million
   actual). This component financed the rehabilitation of on-farm I&D infrastructure of eligible WUAs in
   selected districts or raions.
   3: Project Management and M&E (US$7.7 million at appraisal, US$5.8 million actual). This component
   financed project management, including monitoring and evaluation (M&E).




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The total project cost reached US$114.3 million and disbursed a total of US$107.8 million
   leaving a balance of US$6.5 million, US$4.1 million of which was from undisbursed IDA resources and
   US$2.5million from borrower contributions.
   Financing: The IBRD provided a loan in the amount of US$3.2 million. The International Development
   Association provided SDR48.90 million or the equivalent of US$76.8 million for a total of US$80 million
   from the World Bank Group. Of this total, US$75.9 million was disbursed.
   Borrower contribution: The Borrower committed US$34.3 million to the project and disbursed US$31.9
   million. The balance of US$2.5 million was undisbursed because gains from the SDR exchange rate as
   well as cost savings covered the cost of the expanded scope and corresponding cost (per clarification
   provided by the Task Team in a March 5, 2019 email).
   Dates: The project was approved on April 26, 2011 and became effective on December 21, 2011. A Mid
   Term Review was conducted on July 31, 2014. The original closing date was June 30, 2016. There were
   two Level 2 Restructurings to extend the closing date:



                                                                                                              Page 2 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            WUAP (P107617)



                • On June 27, 2016, to extend the closing date to June 30, 2017. There were two reasons for this
                extension. First, in 2015, after the European Games were held in Baku, there was a delay in the release
                of the Government’s contribution for civil works that resulted in three schemes to be completed beyond
                the original closing date. Second, the Azerbaijan manat devaluation resulted in a cost saving of US$7
                million that allowed the expansion of the project to rehabilitate additional irrigated areas.
                • On June 16, 2017 to extend the closing date to June 30, 2018 as requested by the Government to
                complete the remaining contracted additional rehabilitation works.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

       Rationale
       This review concurs with the ICR that the PDO was fully aligned with the Bank's Country Partnership
       Framework (CPF) for FY16–FY20 (ICR, paragraph 9) which focused on ‘supporting enhanced
       competitiveness of agriculture and rural development companies’. Focus Areas 1 and 2 (Economic
       competitiveness) promoted investments in infrastructure for better access to public services and
       infrastructure for growth. The CPF places special focus on rural development (Focus Area 2) through
       investments in quality infrastructure that would enhance the competitiveness of the rural economy. The CPF
       also focused on improved human development outcomes and increased prosperity through better access to
       water (irrigation) and improved quality of the environment. Access to improved irrigation services was critical
       for increased agricultural productivity and efficiency in water use. This would positively impact social and
       economic opportunities in rural areas where the majority of the poorest 40 percent of the population reside.
       The project supported the Government's commitment in this sector.

       The PDO was also fully consistent with the Government’s third State Program of Social and Economic
       Development of Regions for 2014–2018, which aimed to reduce regional inequalities and provide
       households in all raion centers with reliable basic services, such as water and sanitation and other
       communal services. The project objectives were in line with Government priorities and its state program for
       poverty reduction and sustainable development. The PDO was deemed highly relevant to contributing to
       increasing agricultural productivity and boost non-oil growth.



       Rating
       High
   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     Improve the effectiveness of on-farm irrigation water distribution and management

                                                                                                            Page 3 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WUAP (P107617)




Rationale
The theory of change for achieving improved effectiveness of on-farm irrigation water distribution and
management was through (a) rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage systems thereby improving the supply
of irrigation water, and (b) institutional strengthening and capacity building to improve management skills
(ICR, Figure 1).

The effectiveness of on-farm irrigation distribution and management was measured by comparing the actual
irrigation services delivery time with the farmers' requests for irrigation water delivery at the beginning of the
season and the subsequent expected increase in productivity of 15% in 8 of 10 cases of rehabilitated WUAs
vs. non rehabilitated WUAs. These are standard performance expectations for Bank-financed irrigation
projects (ICR, paragraph 14). In addition, a satisfaction survey was conducted in October and November
2016 with 25 rehabilitated WUAs who have been through two irrigation seasons after rehabilitating its I&D
systems.

OUTPUTS:

  • Rehabilitated 2,487 km of irrigation canal (target achieved) where (i) 2,252 km of open canal were
  cleared of vegetation and sediments excavated and sections re-formed to restore design flows and (ii) 236
  km of canals were lined to reduce seepage
  • Rehabilitated 915 km of drainage channel (target achieved)
  • Constructed new hydrotechnical works such as 7,412 structures (e.g., water measurement structure,
  offtake with check structure, bridge on canal and road crossing, etc) and rehabilitated 1,122 existing
  structures (e.g., offtake with pipe passage, bridge, etc.) (For details, see ICR annexes 7 and 9).
  • Completed 39 construction works contracts with a total cost of AZN 72,290,315 (or US$42.5 million) for
  the above works
  • 330,873 female water users were provided with improved irrigation and drainage services (baseline
  200,000 original target 330,000, exceeded)
  • 430,016 male water users were provided with improved irrigation and drainage services (baseline
  250,000, original target 430,000, exceeded)
  • 920,274 hectares improved their irrigation and drainage searches (baseline 530,000, original target
  900,000, exceeded)
  • 340 WUAs registered with adequate number of trained and experienced staff 10 from the Regional
  Support Centers, 82 from the Raion WUA Support Unit, and 3 from the Central WUA Support Unit)
  implementing good operational and maintenance procedures (baseline 22, target 340, achieved)


OUTCOMES:

  • 23 out of a sample of 25 WUAs achieved a 15% increase in agricultural output associated with
  corresponding increases in yield of agricultural products covering a total irrigated service area of 71,681
  hectares (target in hectares 59,200, baseline 0, exceeded target).


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            WUAP (P107617)



        •  Based on the end of project survey, 92.9% of farmers, representing 23 of 25 rehabilitated WUAs
        received more than 80% of the irrigation water they requested at the start of the season (target 80%,
        exceeded). Note that the original target for the number of WUAs was 30 compared with the 23 actually
        achieved or 77%. The sampling survey, which indicated that farmers received more than 80% of the
        irrigation water they requested at the start of the season supported the claim that water distribution was
        within 80% of the rehabilitated systems. This measure matched the crops irrigation water norms for the
        season after rehabilitation (ICR, Annex 1, Indicator 3) (target almost achieved).
        • 379 WUAs were operational and strengthened after over 1,500 members of the WUAs received capacity
        building technical assistance (baseline 208, original target 379, achieved)
        • 118,510 hectares of on farm Irrigation and drainage infrastructure were returned to operational condition
        or rehabilitated (target of 85,000 hectares, exceeded)
        • Overall, 73.4% of WUA members were satisfied with the managerial and operational perforamnce of
        their WUAs. (baseline 20%, original target 60%, exceeded).

    The project therefore improved the effectiveness of on-farm irrigation water distribution and management.


    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     Improve financial viability of on-farm irrigation water distribution and management

    Rationale
    The theory of change for achieving improved financial viability of on-farm irrigation water distribution and
    management was also through (a) rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage systems which improved the
    supply of irrigation water, and (b) institutional strengthening and capacity building to improve management
    skills (ICR, Figure 1).
    Financial viability of on-farm irrigation and water distribution and management was measured by comparing
    the Irrigation Service Fee collection rates of rehabilitated WUAs with the collection rates on non-rehabilitated
    WUAs and the recovery of costs that WUAs incurred for the management, operation, and maintenance of
    canal networks.
    OUTPUTS:

        •  27 of the 32 raions with rehabilitated WUAs registered 80% collection rates. This met 80% of the
        estimated requirements for on-farm system management, operation, and maintenance by WUAs after two
        irrigations seasons following rehabilitation (original target 20, exceeded)
        • 281 WUAs (target 379, almost achieved) achieved fee collection rates of at least 65% (baseline 22
        WUAs with collection rates above 65%)



                                                                                                         Page 5 of 15
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       WUAP (P107617)



                   • 361 WUAs prepared basic asset management plans approved by the WUA Representative or General
                   Assembly and contributed to setting the Irrigation Service Fee (baseline 22, original target 340, exceeded)
                   • 200 WUAs had proper offices (baseline 22, target 222, almost achieved)
                   • 379 WUAs had properly established Representative Zones with water users actively engaged in WUA
                   management through these Zonal Representatives (baseline 22, target 340, exceeded)
                   • 88 WUAs had business plans and were provided equipment under the project (baseline 0, target 90,
                   almost achieved)


              OUTCOMES:

                   • Rehabilitated WUAs achieved the 80% minimum collection rates, meeting the 80% estimated required
                   level for on-farm management, operation and maintenance needs after two irrigation seasons following
                   the completion of the irrigation and drainage rehabilitation.
                   • Achieved at least 65% WUA fee collection rates, meeting the 55% required level for on-farm system
                   management, operation, and maintenance in the year following the training and technical assistance.

              The project therefore improved the financial viability of the on-farm irrigation water distribution and
              management.


              Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL

 PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




 Rationale
 The project directly benefitted around 379 WUAs in 27 raions with approximately 330,873 female and 430,016
 male water users and farmers who managed and cultivated 920,274 hectares of irrigated land. There was only a
 minor shortcoming in achieving the second objective attributable to an overly ambitious target (281 WUAs vs. a
 target of 379 WUAs with 65% fee collection rates), which was not changed even after two restructurings. Overall
 the efficacy of the project’s achievements was substantial.




 Overall Efficacy Rating
 Substantial
PHREVISEDTBL



      5. Efficiency

      Economic and Financial Efficiency: The ex-ante economic analysis was replicated at project closing in the
      ICR. Benefits attributed to building institutional capacity were not quantified but were included in the overall
      costs of the project. Benefits included the following:

                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       WUAP (P107617)




  •   increase in crop yield for almost all major crops in the project WUAs;
  •   increase in cropping area
  •   change in cropping patterns to favor high value crops

Other benefits that were not included in the Cost Benefit Analysis were:

  • survey results attributed institutional strengthening and capacity building of WUAs that received training but
  not rehabilitated its WUAs showed improvements in better organization and improved managerial skills
  • estimated incremental income generated by the project (US$400 a month per hectare) was 3-4 times the
  monthly pension as of January 1, 2018 of about US$122 a month). The elderly and pensioners relied mainly
  on their land for livelihood. No information, however, was available on how many elderly or pensioners were
  WUA members. These estimates were obtained from the initial and final surveys conducted in 2012 and at
  the end of 2016 after the bulk of the rehabilitation works were completed (ICR, Annex 4, paragraph 5).

The EIRR at completion was 39% at completion compared to the EIRR of 31% at appraisal. An economic net
present value of US$236 million at closing used a discount rate of 12% (not justified in the ICR, only noting that
the range of 8-12% was a World Bank recommendation, see ICR, Annex 4, Table 4.9) compared to US$132
million at appraisal (no discount rate noted in the PAD). There was no financial analysis at appraisal. At
closing, the FIRR was at 41% and a financial net present value of US$296 million, also using the unexplained
12% discount rate.
Operational and Administrative Efficiency: The project was extended twice under two restructurings adding
another 24 months to its original completion date. Both extensions resulted in cost savings, which increased
the targets achieved and expanded the project area by 39%. The project's management and M&E costs
accounted for a modest 5% of actual total project costs.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                     Rate Available?         Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      78.60
Appraisal                                                   31.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                      79.80
ICR Estimate                                                39.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 15
          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          WUAP (P107617)




This review has rated the relevance of the project's objectives as high, and the efficacy with which both
objectives were achieved was rated substantial. The project's efficiency was also rated substantial. The project's
overall outcome was therefore rated satisfactory.


a.       Outcome Rating
         Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose moderate risks to development outcome:

     •  Technical: The technical improvements introduced in the rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage may not be
     carried forward into those water users associations that have not participated in the rehabilitation works under
     the project. Standards established under the project may also find obstacles in new (as opposed to existing)
     infrastructure projects in the sector. This was mitigated by the documentation of construction works on which to
     base future interventions. In addition, the Law on Amelioration and Irrigation, which established water users
     association transformed these from limited liability companies to voluntary community associations responsible
     for management of on-farm irrigation systems. The 2004 amendment allowed the associations to have the right
     to set their own irrigation services fees to cover all costs of managing the water users association.
     • Financial: There may not be sufficient resources to carry out the operations and maintenance of completed
     projects. This risk was mitigated by the virtuous cycle established under the project by increasing management
     capacity and improving water supply delivery. The water users associations that need rehabilitation will be
     using either the Government budget or external support for their sustainability. There were no firm
     commitments indicated in the ICR.
     • Social and stakeholder ownership: The participatory nature of irrigation management may not be
     sustained post project completion. This risk was mitigated by the improved capacity of the water users
     associations and commitment to improvements introduced under the project. However, moderate risk to
     outcome of improved capacity development for non-rehabilitated WUAs remained since the benefits arising
     from the project were significantly lower compared to those 39 WUAs, which benefitted from infrastructure
     improvements.
     • Environmental: The impact from climate change threaten the development outcomes of this project. This
     risk was mitigated by the government commitment to implementing an ambitious water resources development
     program that added storage and several large irrigation canals. The project recommended that future design in
     sector interventions need to address these external factors arising from climate change.
     • Government commitment: The Amelioration and Irrigation Open Joint Stock Company (AIOJSC), the
     implementation agency, is aware of rehabilitation needs. The AIOJSC conducted a feasibility study and
     submitted it to the Cabinet of Ministers; however, its implementation has not been decided yet. The
     Government and World Bank started discussing Additional Financing (AF) for the project in 2013, because of
     significant unmet demand for rehabilitation and the capacity building needs of other water users associations


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       WUAP (P107617)



    not addressed by this project or its predecessor project (IDSMIP). The AF was developed for Board approval
    before June 30, 2014. After a series of discussions, a feasibility study for the proposed AF was implemented
    based on the Ministry of Economy's request in 2017. However, the AF did not go ahead because the
    Government's medium- and long-term public debts management strategy for 2019–2025 did not include the AF
    for the project.

　


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
    The Government implemented three major World Bank projects in Azerbaijan in support of water user
    organizations (i) In 1997, the Farm Privatization Project (FPP) (P040544) established water users
    association (WUA). The FPP piloted six WUAs. (ii) The Rehabilitation and Completion of Irrigation and
    Drainage Infrastructure Project (RIDIP) (P008284) followed. That project focused on the rehabilitation
    and completion of major off-farm conveyance canals, structures, and collector drains. (iii) The Irrigation
    Distribution System and Management Improvement Project (IDSMIP) (P008286) followed and piloted 22
    WUAs on 52,000 ha of irrigated land. By the end of the project, the IDSMIP had formed more than 550
    WUAs. Measuring structures (hydro-posts) were installed, which allowed WUAs to charge water on the
    basis of actual quantities supplied.
    In early 2003, an appropriate legal framework was drafted for the AIOJSC and subsequently approved in
    June 2004. The amended Law on Amelioration and Irrigation (LAI) included a special chapter consisting
    of 15 articles regulating the foundation, registration, organization, and supervision of WUAs in
    Azerbaijan. The law transferred the previous on-farm irrigation systems to WUAs and for designated the
    WUAs to supply bulk water for irrigation using long-term (20 year) water supply contracts. The
    Government promoted the WUA concept and restructured existing WUAs according to the amended law.
    The Water Users Association Development Support Project (WUAP or this project), followed building
    upon the lessons learned from the three previous operations. Lessons reveal that investing in farm
    irrigation and drainage rehabilitation could (i) increase yields by as much as 23% (ii) increase irrigated
    areas by as much as 5,200 hectares in rehabilitated irrigated areas; (iii) lead to a shift to higher value
    crops; and (iv) foster a willingness to pay more for reliable irrigation service. Another lessons learned
    centered on the distance of the Central WUA Support Unit in Baku from the WUAs and Raion WUA
    Support Units. As a result, design created four Regional Support Centers to cluster neighboring RSUs
    and deliver customized training programs and a system to track support activities and define specific
    local support needs. This design feature ensured better links between the Project Implementation Unit
    and the programs of the participant WUAs as well as improved the system for tracking funds and M&E
    support. Recognizing that the Government could not be the sole provider of the maintenance needs of
    the rehabilitated WUAs, the design also introduced Participatory Irrigation Management in the WUAs.
    Finally, project design recognized the medium sized risk from the limited capacity of WUAs to finance the
    drainage system by excluding this responsibility from the agreement with WUAs undertake management,
    operations, and maintenance of the transferred infrastructure.
    The objectives were realistic and clear. The Results Framework included five outcome indicators that
    were measurable, designed simply, and followed a logical sequence in support of the project’s Theory of

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WUAP (P107617)



  Change, although a little bit complicated by the binomial terms in calculating how to achieve outcomes.
  This meant that each indicator had two criteria to meet. The first defined a desirable outcome as a
  minimum condition. A second defined another minimum condition that the first condition must fulfill. The
  indicators also included the World Bank’s sector’s indicators for irrigation projects.
  There were five outcome indicators and three core sector indicators required by the World Bank, the
  latter were expressed as outputs.
  Despite the minor shortcoming at appraisal with regard to the risk in availability of local counterpart funds
  (evidenced by the shortfall in borrower contributions at project closing), the quality at entry is rated
  satisfactory.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The World Bank team conducted 12 implementation supervisory missions over the 7 year life of the
  project with frequent technical and field visits in between. The first mission was conducted a year after
  effectiveness. Candor in the quality of implementation reporting was evident in the Bank’s report on the
  delay in implementing the first component (institutional strengthening and capacity building). The Raion
  WUA Support Units considered their support to participating WUAs as an addition to their regular
  functions and anticipated financial top up to their state salaries. The Bank team recommended a small
  financial incentive to resolve the misunderstanding. Strong government commitment was evident in the
  implementing agency’s management initiative in adopting corrective measures such as heightened
  coaching of the Raion WUA Support Units to better understand their role in WUA service delivery
  framework. With a focus on development impact, by the time of the third mission, (June - September
  2014) the Bank team had proactively identified the opportunities to address the threats to achieving the
  PDO including the possibility of Additional Financing to address the significant demand for rehabilitation
  and increased capacity building needs that were supposed to have been covered under the predecessor
  project. However, the country’s public debt management strategy for 2019-2025 did not envisage
  additional finance for the project.
  　
  There were only minor shortcomings in Bank supervision as evident in the three years it took to
  satisfactorily resolve the initial hiccup in the role of the Raion WUA Support Units in achieving the PDO.
  This as resolved by rearranging the support provided by consultants and intensified training and
  retraining activities.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WUAP (P107617)




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The Implementing Agency was the Amelioration and Irrigation Open Joint Stock Company (AIOJSC),
  established in 2006 from the State Amelioration and Irrigation Committee (SAIC). The company
  provided bulk water supplies to irrigation systems and developed and managed I&D systems
  throughout Azerbaijan. The PDO was clear. The Theory of change was supported by three key
  components and a robust results framework that consisted of 5 outcome indicators and 6 intermediate
  outcome indicators. However, the results framework included a couple of intermediate outcome
  indicators that the ICR acknowledged were not linked to the PDO - the number of WUAs with an
  adequate number of trained and experienced staff implementing good operational maintenance
  procedures, and the number of WUAs with established Representative Zones actively engaged in WUA
  management. The objectives were stated clearly and specific, although the M&E was designed only in
  2014 when the project had been in operation for a period of 3 years.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E system established for the project was implemented by the AIOJSC. A baseline survey conducted
  in August -October 2013. A Mid Term Review survey was conducted in September -October the following
  year. An end of project survey was conducted in October -November 2016. The company which conducted
  the survey developed the database on which the M&E was established. In 2015, the Implementation Support
  Mission raised issues on accuracy of the progress of outcome and results indicator and recommended
  strongly collaboration between the team of engineers, water management specialists and M&E specialist to
  develop better methods to measure outcome and results as well as design of survey questionnaires. The ICR
  reported that these concerns were resolved.



c. M&E Utilization
  Survey results were used to improve M&E and project management. Implementation progress were reflected
  in quarterly project status reports and highlighted both financial and physical progress of the project. There
  were no change in targets although two intermediate outcome indicators were found to be imprecise but
  remained unchanged during implementation to avoid project restructuring.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WUAP (P107617)



a. Safeguards
  ENVIRONMENTAL SAFEGUARDS: The following safeguards were identified at preparation: OP/BP 4.01
  Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.09 Pest Management, OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement,, and
  OP/BP 4.37 Safety of Dams and OP/BP 7.50 International Waterways. To avoid triggering OP/BP 4.04,
  Natural Habitats, and OP/BP 4.36 Forests, the project did not support rehabilitation that would adversely
  affect natural habitats and forests.
  The project triggered OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment because of anticipated environmental impacts.
  The project was assigned a category B because the anticipated impacts were not significant or irreversible
  and could be addressed by mitigating measures, At project preparation, the exact location of project sites to
  be rehabilitated were unknown hence the implementing agency developed an Environmental Assessment
  and an Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan to identify impacts of the infrastructure rehabilitation
  in project areas with corresponding mitigating measures. Site specific Environmental Management Plans
  were prepared for each subproject proposal and mitigating measures incorporated into rehabilitation
  contracts. In the course of subproject implementation, the following issues were noted: (i) inadequate waste
  management; (ii) inadequate sanitary and hygienic conditions at campsites, (iii) insufficient attention by
  workers in the use of personal protection equipment, and (iv) unavailability of all required permits and
  licenses during inspections. The implementing agency closely supervised the adoption of corrective
  measures by contractors. Since these issues were associated with individual contract performance and not
  system-wide, compliance with safeguards measures was deemed satisfactory. Good practices adopted to
  meet the satisfactory environmental management of construction sites included: (i) use of construction
  materials only from certified/licensed sources; (ii) proper rehabilitation of construction and campsites upon
  completion of civil works; (iii) safe reuse of dredged materials; and (iv) avoidance of the cutting of trees and
  vegetation along rehabilitated canals.
  The project did not procure pesticides but because the PDO stimulated action to improve agricultural
  productivity, there was an increase in the use of pesticides, triggering OP/BP 4.09 Pest Management.
  Adverse impacts from the increased used of pesticides were met through customized Integrated Pest
  Management Training Program under the capacity building component of the project. In addition to pest
  management practices, the training programs covered good environmental management practices in
  agriculture.
  The project drew irrigation water from five dams, triggering OP/BP 4.37 Safety of Dams. Experts deemed
  these operationally safe. An independent dam safety expert conducted a safety assessment of dams and
  overall safety of dams were rated satisfactory. Ensuring dams operational safety was assigned to the
  Ministry of Emergency Situations. The consultant’s assessment of dam safety was conveyed to the Ministry
  for further actions.
  The rivers which supplied most of the water to the irrigation systems rehabilitated by the project were
  international waterways, triggering OP/BP 7.50 International Waterways. At preparation, the project
  determined that there would not be significant impacts on the quantity or quality of water flowing thorough
  these rivers because (1) design was limited to rehabilitation of existing schemes and no new constructions
  were anticipated; and (2) rehabilitation activities would have minimal to no impact on the quantity or quality of
  water. There were no adverse impacts on the rights of other riparian states on international waterways, A
  notification exception was issued per paragraph 7(a) of OP/BP 7.50. Monitoring confirmed that there were no
  significant increases in either withdrawal from or discharge to the international waterways.




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WUAP (P107617)



  SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS: Specific project sites were unknown at preparation, triggering OP/BP 4.12
  Involuntary Resettlement. The project prepared A Resettlement Policy Framework to guide the preparation
  of Resettlement Action Plans including compensation measures for project-affected people. No Resettlement
  Action Plans were prepared because all rehabilitations works were conducted within existing rights of way.
  No Environmental and Social Safeguard Management Plans were prepared. An environmental and social
  safeguard specialist was employed during the first two years of the project but left afterwards and was not
  replaced. There was no evidence of any resettlement nor negative social impacts from resettlement and the
  social safeguard performance was rated satisfactory. Grievances were handled locally and were mostly oral.
  Some contractors maintained written grievance log but were not retained by the implementing agency. Some
  grievances reached the implementing agency and were resolved satisfactorily, including an appeal made by
  local waters associations to draw attention to the low quality of contracted works. This appeal was submitted
  to the World Bank and the President of Azerbaijan. The ICR reported the appeal to have been resolved
  satisfactorily. Social safeguards performance was created satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT: The overall financial management system complied with World Bank financial
  management requirement and was rated satisfactory. Financial statements, audit reports were submitted on
  time with unmodified opinions.
  PROCUREMENT: A dedicated procurement specialist ensured compliance with the World Bank
  procurement procedures. Procurement performance was rated satisfactory and procurement risk rated
  moderate. Other than the appeal mentioned under the social safeguards above, there were no reported
  issues with procurement of works.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                      ICR                      IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                      Satisfactory            Satisfactory              ---
Bank Performance             Satisfactory            Satisfactory              ---


                                                                                                 Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       WUAP (P107617)



Quality of M&E                 Substantial              Substantial                ---
Quality of ICR                                          Substantial                ---

12. Lessons

The ICR offered five lessons from the project. This review selected three that had broad relevance beyond this
project, they are presented below with some editorial changes.

  1.  Long-term support for Water Users Associations and the sector fosters sustainable service
  delivery models. This project benefited from a sequence of four World Bank projects beginning in 1997,
  each building on the outcome of the previous ones. These projects provided the building blocks in the sector
  which facilitated the outcome of this project - from establishing the legal framework to cumulative institutional
  support. Government willingness to partner in the reform of the sector is also crucial. The Government is
  implementing an ambitious water resource development program adding storage and several large irrigation
  canals. A secondary irrigation and drainage infrastructure will be developed but will depend on the
  Government priorities for irrigated agriculture in rural areas and response to the question of how economic
  benefits generated from water use in agriculture compare to those generated by other sectors. The National
  Water Resource Strategy of Azerbaijan sets a long-term goal, focusing on ‘sustainability and efficiency of
  water supplies to respective sectors, meeting environmental requirements while maximizing economic
  benefits’. If the irrigation and drainage programs were implemented as planned, secure water supply could
  be met by addressing both the secondary system level and the entire water management systems.
  Adjustments may include optimization of reservoir management, more efficient water conveyance and
  distribution, a shift toward adoption of advanced irrigation technology. Azerbaijan Water Users Associations
  are now well-established institutions and could expand their responsibilities to make them a preferred partner
  for local water resource management. The Azerbaijan model may be one that other countries could consider
  emulating.
  2 . Virtuous improvement cycles could be built on well-defined selection criteria for participation. The
  project developed a set of well-defined criteria, including performance of the WUAs. The associations
  participated in the design stage to identify priority needs. They also participated in the rehabilitation works to
  foster ownership. The associations also better appreciated the importance of maintenance of the on-farm
  system through training. The project approach combining investments with technical assistance showed the
  associations that rehabilitating the irrigation and drainage system improved the delivery of water supply,
  facilitated an increase in agricultural productivity, and enabled association members to pay their service fees.
  Increased collection rates of service fees led to improved financing of the operations and maintenance needs
  of the on-farm system. A participatory approach by all key stakeholders reflecting their commitment
  supported a virtuous circle and provided the incentives for the associations to improve their performance.
  3 . Sound construction control facilitates the management of large, decentralized investment
  programs. The project demonstrated that complex multiple site construction works can be managed without
  major delays by closely involving end users. Continued involvement by WUA chairmen facilitated timely
  resolution of issues. This enabled WUAs to improve irrigation service delivery to their members, who in turn
  acknowledged the improved services by making timely payments of irrigation service fees.


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       WUAP (P107617)




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a concise and detailed overview of the project. The narrative was consistent with the
OPCS guidelines, supported the ratings with available evidence. The story line was clear, particularly in
support of the virtuous cycle supported by the approach used in the sector. The ICR was candid, pointing out
that it took three and a half years for the project to recover from the early delay by amending the
implementation mechanism to address the capacity building needs of the project. In addition, the ICR noted
that even extensive preparations for Additional Financing (AF) because of significant demand for
rehabilitation works and training needs of WUAs, the AF was dropped because the government’s public debt
management strategy for 2019-2025 did not envisage this AF for the project. The ICR highlighted the
complementary activities of capacity building and infrastructure supported the impacts of the project to the
theory of change. The quality of evidence was adequate, with sources noted although there was no repeat of
the 2016 end of project survey following the extension of the project to end in 2018. The annexes provided
extensive information, particularly in support of project efficiency (Annex 4). Lessons referenced project
operations. The presentation in the report emphasized the various activities that supported the outcomes of
the project. The only drawback was the sustainability of project outcomes being subjected to government
prioritization.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 15
