        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)



                                                                                      Report Number : ICRR0021304

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                                    Operation Name
 P155962                                         Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,

 Country                                         Practice Area(Lead)
 Iraq                                            Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


 L/C/TF Number(s)                                Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-85770                                      31-Dec-2016                                    1,200,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                              Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Dec-2015                                     31-Dec-2016

                                                 IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                              1,200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                               1,200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                           1,200,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                     Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Antonio M. Ollero               Clay Wescott                  Malathi S. Jayawickrama       IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives

   According to the Program Document (PD, page 3), the program development objective of the Iraq Emergency
   Fiscal Stabilization, Energy Sustainability, and State-Owned Enterprise Transparency Development Policy
   Financing (DPF) was to "improve expenditure management, the sustainability of energy supply, and the
   transparency of state-owned enterprises" in the Republic of Iraq.




                                                                                                       Page 1 of 18
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation
   of the series?
  ---


c. Pillars/Policy Areas

   The DPF had three policy areas, corresponding to the three objectives of the operation, and several sub-
   areas under each:


   Improving Expenditure Management aimed to reform public wages, improve public investment, strengthen
   public debt management, and update the public pension system. (1) The DPF supported public wage
   reform, focused on lower top earnings and a flatter salary schedule. Iraq's public wage bill was inordinately
   high (17 percent of GDP in 2015), skewed toward the highest salary grades, and grossly misaligned with
   private sector pay particularly for skilled labor. (2) Iraq's public investment decision process was structurally
   flawed, hampered by faulty planning, low levels of fund utilization, and poor implementation. The
   deficiencies jeopardized plans to remedy the country's massive reconstruction needs, and required, in
   response, a public investment management (PIM) system focused on better investment planning and
   execution. (3) The DPF supported the creation of a debt management section at the Ministry of Finance and
   the drafting of a debt strategy to upgrade the government's debt management capacity. Iraq's large
   financing needs and rapid debt accumulation (the gross public debt-to-GDP ratio was 62 percent in 2015)
   posed a challenge to the government, which failed to complete a planned US$2.0 billion Eurobond issue in
   2015. (4) Iraq's social insurance and pension system was fragmented (the private scheme covered less than
   3 percent of private employees), lacked fairness (average pensions were 100 percent of average earnings),
   and was costly (pension spending was 4 percent of GDP). Cleaning the retiree registry of ineligible
   beneficiaries was necessary, after which more structural measures would be needed.

   Improving the Sustainability of Energy Supply focused on reducing gas flaring, expanding gas-to-power
   generation, and reducing electricity subsidies. (1) Lacking infrastructure, Iraq flared 60 percent of the gas
   associated with its oil production, a volume sufficient to support incremental generation capacity of 6.5
   gigawatts. Reducing gas flaring and increasing gas processing capacity instead could add 414 million
   standard cubic feet per day (MMSCFD) of usable natural gas and generate US$1.2 billion of fiscal savings in
   addition to reducing carbon release and air pollution. (2) Shifting to gas-fired generation would enable Iraq
   to reduce domestic oil demand by 1.2 million barrels per day by 2035 and raise oil exports by a cumulative
   US$520 billion (by redirecting domestic consumption toward exports). (3) Rationalizing the electricity tariff
   structure and reforming electricity subsidies, initially by applying full-cost recovery tariffs to intensive users,
   would help address the chronic and pervasive shortage of electricity in energy-rich Iraq (the deficit was
   estimated at 6 to 7 gigawatts of electricity), where the shortfall was exacerbated by physical and commercial
   losses, wasteful consumption, and poor revenue collection and management.

   Improving the Transparency of State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) to promote transparency of the finances
   and operations of non-financial and financial SOEs. (1) A huge number of non-financial SOEs (176,

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)



   employing half a million people), many of which had limited rationale beyond providing public
   employment, stifled private sector growth in a wide range of sectors in the Iraqi economy. They were non-
   transparent, weakly accountable, and undertook sizable quasi-fiscal activities that generated large fiscal
   liabilities. Restructuring the SOEs required the collection and publication of information on their finances and
   operations, and the creation of a body to monitor and manage their fiscal risks. (2) Meanwhile, seven
   privileged state-owned banks dominated a banking system that was small (asset-to-GDP ratio of 73 percent
   versus an average of 130 percent for MENA countries), poorly performing (credit expansion of 7 percent of
   GDP versus 55 percent on average for MENA countries), and not in compliance with international
   transparency standards. Removing constraints on the ability of SOEs to transact with private banks would
   promote competition in banking, while completing the action plan for Anti-Money Laundering and Countering
   the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT), as prescribed by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). This would
   support Iraq's access to the international financial system.


d. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates

   Program Cost: The program was estimated to cost US$1.2 billion at appraisal.


   Financing: The program was financed with an IBRD loan in the amount of US$1.2 billion. The full amount
   was disbursed in a single tranche.


   Dates: The program was approved on December 17, 2015 and became effective on December 19,
   2015. The program closed as scheduled on December 31, 2016.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives


  The DPF was relevant to economic conditions in Iraq at the time of appraisal. Oil prices had collapsed in mid-
  2014, harming Iraq's undiversified oil-dependent economy (oil and gas accounted for over 65 percent of GDP,
  90 percent of fiscal revenues, and 98 percent of merchandise exports). At the same time, the Islamic State of
  Iraq and Syria (ISIS) had made rapid inroads into Iraq in mid-2014, controlling a third of the country's territory
  including major cities and key international trade routes, seizing some oil infrastructure including the largest
  refinery, and displacing over 3 million Iraqis in a humanitarian crisis worsened by the arrival of a quarter
  million Syrian refugees.

  The twin shocks exacted heavy economic and social costs: the fiscal deficit worsened to 5.4 percent of GDP
  in 2014 and 12.3 percent in 2015; the current account surplus turned into a deficit of 6.5 percent of GDP in


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)



  2015; and non-oil GDP contracted by 7 percent in 2014 and 6.7 percent in 2015. Poverty rose from 18.9
  percent in 2012 to 22.5 percent in 2015, and to 41.2 percent in areas occupied by ISIS. In response, the
  coalition government, formed in September 2014, moved to protect the delivery of basic services, retake
  areas controlled by ISIS, and shore up the economy. International lenders assembled a support package,
  with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) providing a US$1.24 billion from the Rapid Financing Facility
  (RFF) in July 2015 and put in place a staff monitored program (SMP) in November 2015, which subsequently
  led to a US$5.4 billion stand-by arrangement (SBA) in July 2016, a US$300 million emergency operation from
  the Bank, for development project in July 2015 and the US$1.2 billion DPF in December 2015.

  The objectives of the DPF, as defined in three reform areas --- expenditure management, energy supply
  sustainability, and SOE transparency --- were relevant to the government’s "National Development Plan,
  2013-17" and "Strategic Priorities in Ministries: 2014-18 Action Plan": structural reforms to promote an
  efficient and more transparent public sector and a faster growing and more dynamic private sector.

  The program objectives to improve expenditure management, the sustainability of energy supply, and the
  transparency of SOEs were selected from the above strategic priorities as part of an international support
  package including budget support from the IMF and Government of Japan, and technical assistance from
  these and other donors (PAD, p. 4, 18). They were supportive of the goals of the development plan to
  "achieve a stable economic structure", to "practice sustainable exploitation of natural resources", and to "lay
  the foundations of economic partnership between the public and private sectors", respectively. They were
  also directly supportive of four of the six priorities of the action plan, in particular "upgrading service to
  citizens"; "encouraging a shift towards the private sector"; "increasing oil and gas production to improve fiscal
  sustainability"; and, "implementing administrative and financial reform of government institutions".

  The objectives of the DPF were similarly aligned with the goals of the Bank's "Country Partnership Strategy
  for the Republic of Iraq for the Period FY13-FY16", supporting Iraq's efforts to build a more diversified
  economy and stronger institutions that can create jobs and deliver services to the population. To achieve this,
  the Bank engagement is structured around three pillars: improving governance; supporting economic
  diversification for broadly-shared prosperity; and, improving social inclusion and reducing poverty. The
  Performance and Learning Review (PLR) introduced two objectives: (1) restoring and improving basic service
  delivery, especially in those areas affected by ISIS, to help reinforce the legitimacy of the State; and (2)
  managing the country’s critical fiscal situation and increasing opportunities for the private sector. The three
  DPL objectives are aligned with second objective of the PLR (PAD, p. 36).



  Rating
  High

b. Relevance of Design


  The program design was strong in the following aspects.



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)



The results chain was logical. Adjusting public wages, revamping public investment practices, strengthening
public debt management and reforming pension systems would improve expenditure management in a
public sector that was generally considered wasteful and inefficient. Reducing wasteful and polluting gas
flaring, shifting to gas-fired power generation, and rationalizing costly electricity subsidies would improve the
sustainability of energy supply in oil-rich Iraq, which ironically has endured chronic electricity
shortages. Monitoring the fiscal risks of non-financial SOEs would begin to improve the transparency of the
SOE sector which had remained largely unaccountable while dominating economic activity and stifling
private enterprise. And, leveling the playing field between private and state-owned banks would revitalize
the banking system dominated by under-capitalized and poorly-managed state-owned banks.

Iraq faced a deficit estimated at 14-18 percent of GDP for 2015, and the government had sought emergency
financing that would help to leverage other financing from development partners (ICR, p. 3).

The development policy loan (DPL) was a suitable instrument for the operation. Fulfillment by the
government of the prior actions would initiate the reform program. At the same time, the proceeds of the
US$1.2 billion loan, disbursed in a single installment, would flow to the general budget account.

The macroeconomic policy framework was adequate at the time of program appraisal. The "Memorandum of
Economic and Financial Policies" signed by the government with the IMF in mid-December 2015 (as part of
the IMF SMP) pointed to a large fiscal consolidation that the government had implemented in 2015 and
indicated the government’s intention to continue the effort into 2016. The document also described foreign
exchange policy, public financial management and banking supervision reforms that the Government
committed to implement in 2016. The IMF considered the baseline medium-term economic outlook to be
positive, driven by fiscal adjustment, an expansion in oil revenue, and improved security conditions. The
Bank and Fund agreed that macroeconomic policy and fiscal projections were appropriate, along with the
government's effort to deal with arrears and central bank borrowing (ICR, p. 2).

The program design was deficient in several aspects:

• The program was extensive for a one-year stand-alone operation, with 3 policy areas, 9 sub-policy fields,
10 prior actions, and 12 results indicators. A lighter design would have better suited the government's limited
institutional capacity, and the fragile, conflict and violence (FCV) affected environment in Iraq.

• The focus, in wage reform (under the first objective to improve expenditure management), on flattening the
public wage schedule appears to be only of secondary importance compared to the primary issue of an
inflated bureaucracy. The wage bill had exploded from 7 percent of total public expenditure in 2004 to 27
percent in 2014. Eliminating "ghost" workers would have been a more strategic intervention.

• The requirement to adopt a PIM framework (a prior action under the first objective to improve expenditure
management) to help improve public investment came well ahead of a necessary first step to upgrade
institutional capacity so that it can undertake efficient public investment, and hence make the new framework
operational. A capacity needs assessment has only been recently initiated, two years after the adoption of
the PIM framework.

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)




       • Organizing a committee to prepare a gas-to-power action plan (a prior action under the second objective
       to improve the sustainability of gas supply) proved insufficient to get the action plan drafted. The drafting has
       been mired in procedural disputes. As with the PIM framework, institutional capacity needs should have
       been assessed and addressed during program design.

       • Overall, the short time frame of the stand-alone operation constrained the implementation of institutional
       capacity building initiatives which were necessary, considering the low capacity of the government and the
       FCV affected environment in the country, to advance the structural reform program supported by the
       DPF.



       Rating
       Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To improve expenditure management.

    Rationale

    Public wage reform: Reducing spending on compensation for public employees would benefit expenditure
    management by increasing fiscal space for other priority spending. The target to reduce average annual
    senior-level wages in government from 1.9 times GDP per capita in 2015 to 1.7 times by Q1-2017 was met,
    as the ratio fell to 1.6 times GDP per capita, representing a 22 percent reduction from an average salary of
    US$9,251 in 2015 to US$7,253 in 2016. At the same time, salaries at the lowest grades were raised by 3
    percent in real terms. As a prior action, the Council approved the new salary scale for state employees
    beginning November 2015, lowering earnings at the top and flattening the pay distribution
    overall. Notwithstanding, the ICR (page 11) points out that the impact of the wage changes on expenditure
    management is difficult to evaluate, lacking data on benefits, which are in multiples of salaries, and on the
    differences in human capital, specialization, and experience among state employees.

    PIM reform: The target to raise the percentage of capital projects covered by a feasibility study and cost-
    benefit analysis from 3 percent of capital projects in 2015 to 5 percent in Q1-2017 was achieved. Data from
    the Iraqi Development Management System showed that 8 of 58 projects, or 13.8 percent, valued at over
    US$500 million satisfied the requirement in 2016. Earlier in 2015, the Ministry of Planning finalized a new
    PIM framework as part of the government's public financial management (PFM) strategy. In the ICR's


                                                                                                          Page 6 of 18
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)



    assessment, the link from the early PIM reform to better expenditure management remains tenuous,
    considering, for instance, that the 8 projects covered by a feasibility study in 2016 were valued at US$85
    billion, three times Iraq's annual investment budget. A positive impact on expenditure management would be
    achieved only if the government took the additional effort to prioritize, properly budget for, and efficiently
    execute the projects.

    Public debt management: The target for the Ministry of Finance to approve and publish on its website a
    Medium-Term Public Debt Management Strategy (MTDS) that was consistent with international best practice
    was achieved December 2017, one year after the program closing date (ICR, page 12). Previously, as a
    prior action, the Ministry of Finance established, staffed, and made operational a Debt Management Division
    in the Public Debt Directorate to manage and oversee Iraq's public debt and debt guarantees. The MTDS,
    which represents a good first step to better management of public debt in Iraq, was published by the MOF in
    December 2017. The Ministry of Finance has also published a report: Medium Term Debt Management
    Strategy, that IEG finds to be of good quality. These actions helped to ensure that debts and guarantees are
    prudently planned, approved, and monitored.
    http://www.mof.gov.iq/obs/en/Documents/Medium%20Term%20Debt%20Management%20Strategy.pdf

    Pension reform: The target was to achieve a 5 percent reduction of cash benefit spending by the National
    Board of Pension (NBP) by Q1-2017. Although the ICR (p. 13) finds that it isn't possible to prove the target
    was achieved, based on the evidence it is reasonable to conclude that the target at least nearly
    achieved. Data show that ineligible beneficiaries in 2015 accounted for ID82.0 billion or 4.8 percent of total
    benefit payments of ID1.7 trillion by the NBP. Based on this information, it is reasonable to conclude that the
    target was met in Q1-2017, considering that the NBP identified another 45,700 ineligible beneficiaries in a
    2016-17 audit. Earlier, as a prior action, the NBP cleaned up its retiree data registry of 37,000 ineligible
    beneficiaries, higher than the target of 30,000. The clean-up marks a good beginning for future fundamental
    reforms, including a restructuring of the public and private schemes and their merger with the broader social
    protection system.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     To improve the sustainability of gas supply.

    Rationale
    Sustainability was a national priority, and is defined in the PAD (p. 28) as a sharp expansion in natural gas
    processing capacity and a significant reduction in natural gas flaring in both absolute and relative terms, to
    ensure that the additional gas captured can be used for its power generation needs, and to reduce electricity

                                                                                                        Page 7 of 18
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)



    subsidies. The degree of achievement of the objective to improve the sustainability of the country's gas
    supply is rated as modest.

    Gas flaring: The target to reduce gas flaring--measured by the amount of additional (associated) gas
    processed from an average 656 million MMscf/day in 2014 to 1,070 MMSCFD by Q1-2017 was 87 percent
    met as of December, 2017. Initially delayed amid payment arrears to international oil companies, gas
    processing trended higher in 2016-17 and according to the ICR (p. 15) was expected to surpass the target in
    2018. As a prior action, the Energy Committee of the Council of Ministers approved a plan to reduce gas
    flaring in 2015-18 and eliminate it by 2030. The economic and environmental benefits from reducing and
    eliminating gas flaring were premised on the successful investment in gas capture, processing and
    transmission infrastructure in the Basra petroleum hub by the Basra Gas Company, an Iraqi public-private
    joint venture with Shell and Mitsubishi.

    Gas-to-power: The Inter-Ministerial Committee, composed of the Ministers of Oil, Electricity and Finance,
    was established by the Council of Ministers in October 2015, as a prior action; but the committee never met,
    and the plan has yet to be produced. Nonetheless, the target to switch from petroleum products to gas in
    power generation, reflected in the increase in the total gas volume supplied to gas turbine power production
    from 600 MMSCFD in 2014 to 840 MMSCFD by Q1-2017, was exceeded, with 992 MMscf/day produced by
    December 2017. However, the achievement was caused by other factors than the prior action supported by
    the operation.

    Electricity subsidies: The first target to raise tariffs for energy-intensive consumers (large continuous power
    users) by one percent from Iraqi Dinar (ID) 30.74 per kilowatt hour (KWh) in 2014 to ID 31.05 per KWh by
    Q1-2017 was met, with the authorities raising the tariffs to ID 94.6 per KWh. The decision by the authorities
    to raise tariffs by higher than the target appear to have been motivated by: the exceedingly low level of
    electricity tariffs (tariffs had stood below cost recovery levels since the 1990s) and the desire to boost
    incentives for consumers to use electricity efficiently (electricity consumption in Iraq is comparatively high by
    regional standards). Earlier, the government introduced a new tariff schedule aimed at reducing subsidies
    and increasing revenues in January 2016, meeting a prior action. However, the impact of the tariff increases
    on subsidies was small, pared by high technical losses and low collection rates. According to the IMF, the
    new higher tariffs will cover only 11 percent of production costs and subsidy levels have not changed,
    reaching 5.5 percent of GDP in 2017. The second target to improve service delivery and raise total
    electricity sold from 44 million megawatts per hour (MWh) in 2014 to 47.6 million MWh by Q1-2017 was not
    achieved. According to the Ministry of Electricity, electricity sold declined to 38.1 million MWh in 2017.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3

                                                                                                         Page 8 of 18
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)




    Objective
     To improve the transparency of state-owned enterprises.

    Rationale

    The degree of achievement of the objective to improve the transparency of SOEs is rated as substantial.


    Non-financial SOE reform: The target to publish a consolidated annual report on the financial and
    employment metrics of Iraq's non-financial SOEs was met, with the posting of the first report by the Ministry
    of Finance on its website in Q1-2017. Earlier, the Prime Minister had created an Advisory Committee to
    monitor the fiscal risks of non-financial SOEs and the Committee had prepared a detailed compendium of
    data on non-financial SOEs, fulfilling a prior action directed at institutionalizing SOE data collection and risk
    monitoring. While the report is considered a "milestone" in the measurement of fiscal risks, the ICR claims
    that the publication has generated little interest. Moreover, while data collection has continued, no new
    report has been published since, signaling that reporting will likely not be sustained into the future without
    further Bank support.


    Financial SOE reform: The target to shift at least five percent of government deposits to private banks was
    not met. While the government raised deposits at private banks, the amount never exceeded one percent of
    its total deposits. Previously, as a prior action, the Council of Ministers had issued a decision to allow private
    banks to expand the range of services they could provide to government ministries and SOEs in a bid to
    level the playing field between public and private banks. The Central Bank of Iraq, however, required a pre-
    approval of the use of private bank accounts; and, as the pre-approvals were difficult to obtain, state entities
    continued to use SOE banks. Recently, the Council of Ministers barred the Ministry of Electricity from using
    private banks because of the suspected collusion by private banks in the foreign exchange market, stalling
    banking sector liberalization.

    AML/CFT oversight: The target to complete five of eight actions of the FATF Action Plan was met, with the
    FATF determining by end-2017 and in February 2018 that Iraq had substantially addressed its action plan at
    a technical level, completing six actions. Earlier, as a prior action, Iraq passed the Combatting of Money
    Laundering and Financing of Terrorism Law No. 39 of 2015. The ICR reports that the FATF and the IMF will
    continue to monitor and verify implementation, develop supervisory capacity, ensure a fully operational
    Financial Intelligence Unit, and monitor cross-border cash payments.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




                                                                                                           Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)




5. Outcome


The objectives were highly relevant to the country context, and well aligned to the Bank Group’s Country
Partnership Strategy. Relevance of design, however, was modest, in part because the conversion of the multi-
year three-part programmatic reform series to a one-year stand-alone operation, while justified by the
requirement for emergency financing, constrained institutional capacity building initiatives which were necessary
to advance the reform plan (see Section 3.b). The efficacy of the first objective – improving expenditure
management – is rated substantial. Some redistribution in public wages was achieved; there are signs of
progress with PIM reform; public debt management was improved, with some minor delay; and, good
housekeeping has been achieved with the public pension rolls, setting the stage for fundamental reforms. The
efficacy of the second objective – improving energy supply sustainability – is rated modest. There was
satisfactory progress with reducing gas flaring, albeit with some delay; but, the gas-to-power action plan
remains pending; and, while there was progress with raising electricity tariffs, the impact on reducing subsidies
was small. The efficacy of the third objective – improving SOE transparency – is rated substantial. Preliminary
fiscal risk analysis was conducted for non-financial SOEs; AML/CFT was brought into compliance to the
satisfaction of the FATF; but there was limited progress with financial SOE reform, in particular with banking
sector liberalization. Overall, the shortcomings are considered minor, and the outcome is assessed as
satisfactory.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Satisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating


The risk to the sustainability of the development outcome of the DPF is assessed as high.


Security risk: The Iraqi Prime Minister declared a "final victory" against the ISIS in December 2017, but
international reports of small-scale attacks in the territory stretching across the Diyala, Kirkuk and Salahuddin
provinces though mid-2018 suggest that ISIS is creeping back into parts of central Iraq. The resumption of
armed conflict in Iraq will stall or reverse the achievements of the DPF and its follow-on operations.


Political risk: Political risk is rising in Iraq in mid-2018, where negotiations for the formation of a new
government are being delayed by a recount of the ballots in the fraud-tainted elections in May and the eruption
of widespread anti-government protests in the mainly Shiite provinces in the south. Political risk threatens to
overwhelm the ownership of, and the commitment to, structural reforms in Iraq.


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)




Macroeconomic risk: Despite the ongoing fiscal consolidation, fiscal pressures remain high. According to the
IMF Staff Report on the Iraq 2017 Article IV Consultation and Second Review under the Three-Year SBA
(pages 28-29), the economic risks remain very high: a decline in oil revenue or a shortfall in projected financing
would widen the financing gap in 2018-19 and could weaken growth, public finances, and the balance of
payments.


Political economy risk: The senior ranks of the bureaucracy, ineligible beneficiaries of the public pension
system, large subsidized commercial users of electricity, non-financial SOEs, and SOE banks have a vested
interest in maintaining the pre-reform system of preferences and privileges in the Iraqi
economy. They may resist the changes, exert pressure to reverse them, or stall further reform measures.


Institutional and governance risk: Institutions in Iraq are generally weak, having been degraded by decades of
war, sanctions, and conflict. Poor governance undermines social capital and the state's legitimacy. Institutional
and governance risks are serious threats to Iraq's ability to preserve the gains from the DPF and to advance
the next rounds of structural reforms.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
    High

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  The quality at entry is assessed as moderately satisfactory.

  The DPF was underpinned by extensive analytic work drawn from at least 32 reports prepared by the
  Bank, the IMF and other international agencies (Program Document, pages 35-36) and from at least 10
  technical assistance projects funded by the Bank and other development partners over several years
  (Program Document, pages 18-19). The DPF also drew lessons from the Bank's US$250 million Fiscal
  Sustainability DPL in 2010, which together with the IMF's US$3.8 billion SBA, also in 2010, aimed to help
  Iraq reduce its fiscal vulnerability to sudden drops in oil revenue following the fiscal crisis of 2009.

  The Bank collaborated and coordinated closely with the IMF to provide emergency financing to the country
  and to support a program of structural reforms. The DPF focused on reforms in expenditure management,
  energy supply, and SOE transparency while the SMP supported fiscal consolidation to reduce the non-oil
  primary deficit, apart from measures to strengthen public financial management, AML/CFT, and financial
  sector stability.


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)



  The Bank correctly recognized the program risk to be high overall and across a wide array of risk
  categories (Program Document, pages 43-46): political and governance risk (from political instability,
  social unrest because of inadequate public services, and corruption); macroeconomic risk (from any
  further decline in global oil prices); FCV risk (from any escalation of the ISIS insurgency); stakeholder risk
  (from capacity constraints, resistance from special interest groups, and changes in the directions of
  reform); and, fiduciary risk.

  The Bank, however, concluded that the risk of inaction far outweighed the risks faced by the DPF. Iraq's
  financial position, already burdened by a large accumulation of arrears and difficulty in
  accessing foreign financial markets at a reasonable interest cost, would deteriorate without the DPF
  financing. And, the macroeconomic framework would be weaker without the implementation of structural
  reforms supported by the DPF.

  The quality of entry would have been stronger, however, if the Bank paid greater attention to mitigation
  measures that addressed the risks resulting from the low institutional capacity of the government, its
  governance challenges, and the FCV affected environment.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  The quality of supervision is assessed as satisfactory.

  The Bank provided adequate supervision of the program, despite problems with logistics (office space
  constraints in Baghdad, primarily). The Bank staff combined supervision with work for the succeeding DPF
  operation and for other Bank technical assistance activities in Iraq. The arrangement allowed
  enough supervision missions to attend to implementation issues with the DPF.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance




                                                                                                      Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)



  Facing a fiscal deficit of 14-18 percent of GDP in 2015, the government considered the DPF to be vital to
  its financing plan and took active steps to facilitate the disbursement of the loan.

  The government successfully completed the ten prior actions between May and November 2015, paving
  the way for the approval and effectiveness of the loan in December 2015. The Ministry of Finance
  served as an efficient counterpart in negotiations with the Bank. The Prime Minister's Office created an
  Economic Reform Unit to liaise with the Council of Ministers, composed of the Prime Minister and the
  Cabinet, to complete the prior actions.

  Implementation was mixed, however. Six of the 12 results targets were met or exceeded and another
  three were met, with some delay. However, three of the targets were not met at all. The slippages were
  minor overall.


  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance

  The Council of Ministers (which was responsible for five of the ten prior actions), the Prime Minister's
  Office (for two), the Ministry of Finance (for one), and the National Board of Pensions (for one) performed
  creditably in initiating the reform program supported by the DPF and taking the DPF to effectiveness.

  Other bodies that were tasked to implement parts of the reform program did not perform as well as
  anticipated. The inter-ministerial committee composed of the Ministers of Oil, Electricity, and Finance was
  unable to develop an action plan to utilize gas for electric power generation. The Ministry of
  Electricity failed to raise the volume of electricity sold as targeted. And, the Central Bank of Iraq required
  that plans by government entities to use private banks be submitted to its approval, a process that took
  long and discouraged the agencies from dealing with private banks.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)



  The M&E framework was extensive --- 12 results indicators covering three policy areas --- and pertinent,
  overall, to the outcomes of the operation.

  Nonetheless, there were moderate shortcomings with some of the results indicators. The indicator for public
  wage reform --- "the reduction in the basic annual salary of top public-sector employees, as a ratio of annual
  GDP per capita", with a target of 1.7 --- was confusing, and could have been simplified, to "a twenty percent
  cut in nominal wages of top public-sector employees", for example. Moreover, the indicator also failed to
  reflect a second target of public wage reform --- to raise salaries at the lowest grade. The results indicators
  for PIM reform, electricity subsidy reduction, and banking sector reforms were originally designed to capture
  the cumulative impact of a three-part program. To measure progress at the one-year mark, the indicator
  targets were adjusted, but adjusted too far down "as if little impact was expected from the interventions"
  (ICR, page 7). Finally, the results indicator for improving electricity services --- an increase in the volume of
  electricity sold --- appeared to have been an imperfect proxy for the principal demand by consumers ---
  service reliability. More appropriate indicators for reliability for which data should have been available
  include: the number of customer service interruptions in a month, or the number of transmission network
  faults in a month.



b. M&E Implementation

  The Ministry of Finance, the implementing agency of the program, and the Prime Minister's Office, which
  coordinated prior actions with the Council of Ministers, collaborated to oversee M&E
  implementation. Progress toward the program objectives was formally monitored on four occasions,
  including during the supervision mission of mid-2016 and the preparation of the second operation in late
  2016.

  In practice, collecting data from the line agencies responsible for implementation of the reform agenda
  proved difficult, according to the ICR (page 8). Civil service salaries were not reported by grade and
  by ministry in Iraq, which made it difficult to trace the impact of the salary restructuring. Oil and gas
  production data had not been updated since June 2016, which forced the ICR to use provisional numbers.



c. M&E Utilization

  M&E for the DPF was highly useful for the preparation of a follow-on operation (the US$1.485 billion Second
  Expenditure Rationalization, Energy Efficiency, and SOE Governance DPF was approved by the Bank in
  December 2016). Publication of the debt management strategy previously prepared for the DPF was made a
  prior action to the second operation. Production of the gas-to-power action plan, an original but unmet target
  for the DPF, was also made a prior action to the second operation. And, data collected for the SOE fiscal
  risk report under the DPF helped design governance reforms under the second operation.



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects

  Environmental Effects: Following the requirements of Bank Environmental Policy OP 8.60 (paragraph 9:
  Poverty and Social Impacts, and paragraph 10: Environmental, Forests and Other Natural Resource
  Aspects) which govern DPLs, the Program Document (pages 39-40) made the following determination of the
  environmental effects of the program: (a) the policies supported by the DPF were not likely to have negative
  impacts on the country's natural resources; (b) any negative effect would likely be mitigated by the Ministry of
  the Environment which had the capacity to implement environmental and social management plans; (c) the
  target to reduce gas flaring would decrease environmental degradation by reducing the volume of methane
  released into the atmosphere; (d) the natural gas processing targets would reduce the emission of
  greenhouse gases; (e) the increased use of natural gas in power generation would displace the use of fuel
  oil and diesel, which were more polluting sources of power. Overall, the reduction in gas flaring and the use
  of cleaner gas would reduce greenhouse gas emissions from power generation by 6.9 million tons from 2014
  to 2016.


  Social Effects: The Program Document (pages 37-39) determined that the macroeconomic reforms
  supported by the DPF were unlikely to adversely impact welfare. Specifically: (a) the plan to cut the wages
  of senior public employees would not affect the welfare of the poor or the bottom 40 percent of the
  population; (b) improving the efficiency of spending would free up public resources that could be used for
  welfare-improving expenditures; (c) the substitution away from expensive fuel sources would lead to cost
  savings for households; and, (d) the expansion of electricity supply would benefit all households, where only
  a few received more than 12 hours, and a third received less than 8 hours, of electricity per day.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

Citing related Bank reports, the Program Document (pages 44-45) determined fiduciary risk to be high for this
operation. The document, however, cited efforts, including by the Bank and the United Kingdom's Department
for International Development, to help Iraq strengthen its public financial management system in the long-term.

The Program Document (page 42) stated that the DPF would follow standard Bank disbursement procedures
for DPLs. Moreover, an independent external auditor, acceptable to the Bank, would be hired by the Ministry of



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)



Finance to verify the accuracy of the loan transactions, including the exchange rate conversions, and to confirm
that the dedicated deposit account was used only for the purposes of the operation.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
    ---


d. Other
    ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                      Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                        IEG
                                                                                      Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory               Satisfactory               ---
Risk to Development
                                High                       High                       ---
Outcome
Bank Performance                Satisfactory               Satisfactory               ---
                                Moderately
Borrower Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory    ---
                                Satisfactory
Quality of ICR                                             Substantial                ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons


Three lessons are drawn from the ICR (page 19), with some adaptation.

Crisis lending can be consistent with longer-term structural reform. The DPF combined emergency financing,
in response to the oil price and ISIS insurgency shocks of mid-2014, with a program to improve expenditure
management, energy supply sustainability, and SOE transparency over the period 2015-17. The loan proceeds
helped Iraq meet its financing needs as oil prices plunged and security expenditures soared, while the reform
program enabled the government to take measures that would begin to meet the popular demand for reliable
basic public services in an FCV affected environment.




                                                                                                       Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)



A stand-alone operation strains the effectiveness of a medium-term policy and institutional reform dialogue,
when the programmatic approach is the optimal intervention. The Bank strove to maintain the medium-term
character of the reform program by picking interventions from the first year of the original three-part plan, by
designing the results framework to focus on intermediate outputs, and by rapidly preparing a follow-on
operation on the same three policy areas even as the government continued to implement the first
operation. However, the stand-alone operation also constrained the implementation of institutional capacity
building initiatives which were better suited to the longer timeframe of a programmatic series.

Planning and systematic technical assistance are critical for embedding policies in institutions. The DPF has
had to confront weak institutions and poor governance in a country damaged by decades of armed conflict,
political instability, and economic sanctions. Careful planning of the structural reform program
and the conveyance of systematic long-term technical assistance by multiple development partners aimed to
ingrain the reform agenda in government operations in a manner that would be, hopefully, difficult to reverse.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The assessment of the program's results is evidence-based. The ICR provides a useful summary and narrative
of the operations' performance, set within the results framework for the reform program (pages 11-15).

The analysis of the program outputs and outcomes is candid. The ICR cites how the program only partly met
the second objective to improve energy supply sustainability (pages 13-32) and almost fully met the third
objective to improve SOE transparency (pages 14-15). It also cites significant deficiencies with the relevance
of design (page 10), moderate deficiencies with the Government's performance (page 18), and high risks
across a wide array of categories (page 17).

The document provides a comprehensive record of the program. The ICR adequately documents the political
and economic context of the project (pages 1-3), the program design (pages 4-5), the status of prior action
(pages 3-4), and the results framework (pages 7-8).

The ICR team did not respond to requests for an ICR task team leader (TTL) interview.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial


                                                                                                      Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Iraq Emrgncy Fiscal Stabilization, Enrg,(P155962)




                                                                                 Page 18 of 18
