     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI: Agriculture Sector Support Project (P119308)



                                                                                   Report Number : ICR00004441

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P119308                                      CI: Agriculture Sector Support Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Cote d'Ivoire                                Agriculture


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52970,IDA-H8750                          30-Oct-2017                                         47,144,520.35

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 08-Aug-2013                                  29-Jun-2018

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              50,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                               50,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                           47,153,193.76                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Divya Kapoor                 John R. Eriksson              Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   As per the PAD (page 7), the project development objective (PDO) was to improve smallholder access to
   technologies and markets, and enhance governance of selected value chains supported under the project.
   The Financing Agreement had a minor difference and stated the PDO as follows: "The objectives of the
   Project are to improve access to technologies and markets for smallholder export crop farmers of the
   Recipient's territory and to enhance the governance of selected value chains supported under the Project".
   The key difference being the use of the term "export crop farmers" which exactly defines the target
   beneficiary group.

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI: Agriculture Sector Support Project (P119308)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

                                                        PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   Component 1: Promotion of public-private partnership (PPP) for sustainable cocoa development in
   South-West Cote d'Ivoire (Appraisal Estimate US$ 10.0 million; Actual at Project Closing US$ 9.7 million)
   The goals of this component was to support the 'Conseil du Café et du Cacao' (CCC) establish the
   coffee/cocoa PPP platform. The component had three subcomponents: (a) improving farmers’ access to
   market through parallel co-financing of 130 subprojects, and rehabilitating and maintaining 960 km of
   feeder roads; (b) supporting sustainable cocoa productivity including training programs of about 13,000
   farmers on good agricultural practices, enhancement of the cocoa disease control system, and increased
   access to improved planting materials; and (c) capacity building and institutional enhancement, including
   technical assistance to the CCC for the implementation of the PPP platform and restructuring of farmers’
   cooperatives.

   Component 2: Support to smallholder rubber and palm oil extension in South-East Cote d’Ivoire
   (Appraisal Estimate US$ 16.0 million; Actual at Project Closing US$ 16.0 million)
   The goal of this component was to support the 'Association des Professionnels du Caouthchouc Naturel de
   Côte d'Ivoire' - Rubber (APROMAC) and 'Association Interprofessionnelle de la Filière Palmier à Huile' -
   Palm Oil (AIPH) to implement their development programs. The subcomponents included: (a) improving
   access to markets based on parallel financing for rehabilitating and maintaining 1,800 km of feeder roads;
   (b) enhancing productivity through provision of matching grants to support establishment of individual and
   community nurseries; and (c) structuring farmers’ organizations and supporting institutional development
   through (i) strengthening fiduciary and operational procedures of the rubber fund (Fonds de
   Développement de l’Hévéa, FDH) and capacity building of cooperatives smallholders, (ii) piloting market
   links between two cooperatives and one processing company, and (iii) supporting AIPH to improve its
   governance structure, operational and fiduciary procedures.

   Component 3: Support to the cotton sector and promotion of cashew processing in Central and
   Northern Cote d’Ivoire (Appraisal Estimate US$ 16.0 million; Actual at Project Closing US$ 16.0 million)
   The goal of this component was to strengthen the cotton sector development strategy established since
   2008 and improve the overall performance of the cashew value chain. The subcomponents were (a)
   improving access to markets through parallel co-financing the rehabilitation and maintenance of 3,100 km


                                                                                                            Page 2 of 13
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CI: Agriculture Sector Support Project (P119308)



  and 1,140 km of feeder roads in the cotton and cashew areas, respectively (ii) extension of market and
  price information for cashew via FIRCA (Fonds Interprofessionnel pour la Recherche et le Conseil
  Agricoles); (b) improving agricultural productivity in cotton-based production systems ; (c) Improving
  cashew productivity; (d) Supporting cashew nut domestic processing; (e) Institutional development of the
  cotton and cashew sectors by reinforcing the Interprofession du Coton (INTERCOTON) and by re-
  establishing the cashew professional association.

  Component 4: Project Implementation and support to sector coordination (Appraisal Estimate US$
  8.0 million; Actual at Project Closing US$ 6.0 million)
  The goal of this component was to facilitate and ensure proper coordination of activities including (a)
  project coordination, management, and monitoring and evaluation; (b) support to sector coordination for
  the development of strategies and policy framework to coordinate and implement the NAIP (National
  Agricultural Investment Program). Activities would include support to the design of national strategies for
  maintenance of rural roads, and support to the professional associations to comply with Ordinance 2011-
  473 and the new Organization for the Harmonization of Corporate Law in Africa (Organisation pour
  l'harmonisation en Afrique du droit des affaires, OHADA) rules. The term "inter-profession" used frequently
  in the PAD and the ICR is an adapted French term used for professional associations mentioned above.
  The task team clarified that the term was used interchangeably with the term IPO in the document as well.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Project Cost:

  Total Appraisal Estimate: US$ 50.0 million
  Actual Disbursement: US$ 49.8 million (ICR datasheet page 6 reports US$ 47.1 million, and there is
  discrepancy with disbursement figure reported in ICR Annex 3 - the task team clarified that the final figure
  of $ 49.8 million included additional final disbursements at project closing, including during the grace
  period ending on Oct 31, 2018, while the data sheet number was from the last project ISR supervision
  report).

  Project Financing:

  World Bank Financing:

    •   IDA Credit original estimate US$ 23,820,000; Actual Disbursement US$ 22,519,130
    •   IDA Grant original estimate US$ 26,180,000; Actual Disbursement US$ 24,634,063

  Borrower contribution:

    •   Original Estimate US$ 15,750,000; Actual Disbursement US$ 0 (explanation not recorded in ICR)



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            CI: Agriculture Sector Support Project (P119308)




         Key Dates:

         Approval: 8 August 2013
         Effectiveness: 4 May 2014
         Original Closing: 30 October 2017
         Restructuring: 27 October 2017 (ICR page 13 states that the project’s closing date was extended from
         October 2017 to June 2018 to account for the project restructuring (level 2) during the midterm review and
         allow completion of the remaining activities, particularly maintenance of approximately 1,500 km of rural
         roads, originally scheduled to be rehabilitated)
         Actual Closing: 29 June 2018



   3. Relevance of Objectives

       Rationale


       At closing the stated project objectives were well aligned with the Côte d'Ivoire Country Partnership
       Framework (CPF) FY16-FY19 and specifically 'Objective 1: Improve Productivity in Agriculture/Agribusiness
       Value Chains' (CPF page 17). The PDO was also aligned with the national strategic priorities, as
       highlighted in the country's National Agriculture Investment Plan (ICR page 13). At project appraisal, Côte
       d’Ivoire was emerging from a decade of political instability, which undermined agricultural growth and
       exacerbated poverty. Thus, agriculture was expected to be the driver of post-conflict economic growth and
       poverty alleviation in the country, with the main export commodities - cocoa, rubber, palm oil, cotton, and
       cashew - expected to play a key role in agricultural growth (ICR page 9). Thus the Agriculture Sector
       Support Project (PSAC) aimed at supporting the country’s agricultural transition to becoming more
       competitive, sustainable, and private sector-led, and to ensure sustained increases in producers’ incomes.
       To achieve this goal, the project relied on three similar pathways across the commodity value chains aimed
       at (a) improving smallholder access to technologies; (b) increasing access to markets; and (c) enhancing
       governance for the five strategic commodities as stated in the PDO. However, the PDO did not include
       language around enhanced development outcomes for the beneficiary farmer groups. Thus, given the
       stated project objectives, the relevance is substantial, but given the focus on five agricultural commodity
       crop sectors in different regions across the country with variable value chain designs, it could have been
       more contained.



       Rating
       Substantial

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL



                                                                                                        Page 4 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            CI: Agriculture Sector Support Project (P119308)




    Objective 1
    Objective

     Objective 1: Improve access to technologies for smallholder farmers

    Rationale

    The ICR (page 14) reports that Objective 1 was surpassed. The total area planted or re-planted with
    improved material was estimated at 50,678 ha versus an expected target of 45,500 ha. This was achieved in
    the targeted value chains through the Project Implementation Agencies (CCC, APROMAC, AIPH and CCA),
    with the assistance of the technical executing agencies (CNRA, ANADER and FIRCA) involved in research,
    seed production and advisory services. The ICR does not provide a breakdown of how this hectarage was
    distributed across the five crops.

    The ICR (Annex 1) does not provide a break down of the results by outputs and outcomes. The ICR (page
    14) reports that informal interviews conducted with the project area cocoa farmers revealed that the cocoa
    hybrids disseminated produced 1.5T/ha of cocoa in 18 months against 500 kg/ha in 3 years for traditional
    varieties. For cotton, secondary data from INTERCOTON showed an increasing trend in cotton yields from
    the start of the project. Before the project (from 2005 to 2011) average yield was estimated at 937 kg/ha
    while during the project (from 2012 to 2017), it was 1037kg/ha. Concerning cashew nuts, an ex-post
    stakeholder survey revealed that farmers who adopted the new practices experienced a yield increase of 52
    percent (from 325 kg/ha to 521 kg/ha) compared to the non-adopters. As for rubber and palm oil, since
    maturity is achieved after 7 years of plantation, increased agricultural productivity due to the project's
    intervention were not observed. Productivity indicators were not adequately parsed out by crop and
    technology, hence on the basis of results framework presented in Annex 1, the improved access to
    technologies is rated substantial.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     Objective 2: Improve smallholder farmers’ access to market

    Rationale

    Improved farmers’ access to market was facilitated by road rehabilitation and maintenance. Outputs under
    Objective 2 were exceeded and 6482 km roads were maintained or rehabilitated (111 percent of original
    target 5860 km) as reported in ICR Annex 1.


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            CI: Agriculture Sector Support Project (P119308)




    The ICR (Annex 1) does not provide a break down of the results by outputs and outcomes. The ICR (page
    15) also reports that the after-project access to market considerably improved as the time to reach the main
    transportation road was reduced on average by 65 percent across the targeted value chains; as a result,
    farmers were able to easily transfer their commodities to the market; and the turnover rate to collect products
    from the farm and channel them to the main processing plants or markets was multiplied on average by a
    factor of seven; resulting in a reduction in post-harvest losses and an improvement in the quality of
    commodities marketed.

    Improving product quality via certification was an additional important pathway to increasing farmers’ access
    to market as per the document. However, the project fell short of making inroads into sustainable certification
    and traceability of value chains as highlighted in the ICR - some enhanced access for palm oil value chain
    but lack of implementation of cocoa certification initiatives. The ICR also reports that an activity relating to
    the cashew value chain was dropped from the results framework at the mid term review (page 16), however
    no explanation is provided. Overall, access to market indicators, other than road rehabilitation and
    maintenance were not clearly parsed out in the results framework, and hence are not given substantial
    weight in the rating. While significant opportunities were missed to improve market access via quality
    certification, a basic indicator of market access, timeliness of farm-to-market transportation, was
    substantially improved. Therefore, the efficacy of achieving this objective is rated substantial, although with
    shortcomings.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective

     Objective 3: Enhance governance of the selected value chains

    Rationale

    The ICR candidly reports that the process of organizing the professional associations/ cooperatives (also
    called inter-professions/ IPOs) and productive alliances in the target value chains as envisaged in the PDO
    did not made sufficient headways except in the cotton sector. The PDO indicator on total amount of funding
    from inter-professions investments funds established or strengthened with project support was not available
    in ICR Annex 1 Results framework.

    The ICR reports that results achieved in terms of governance were substantial in the cotton value chain, but
    modest in the other value chains. In the cotton sector, INTERCOTON established performance contracts


                                                                                                        Page 6 of 13
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  CI: Agriculture Sector Support Project (P119308)



             between producers and ginners for the delivery of extension services and the production of quality seeds,
             regulated by FIRCA and there was a formal recognition of INTERCOTON as an "IPO" - inter-professional
             association. In the cocoa sector, cleaning up of 'phony cooperatives' was initiated during last year of the
             project, and gains were not substantial. In the cashew sector, an inter-professional association/ IPO was not
             established. In the rubber sector, APROMAC did not get "IPO" accreditation. In the palm oil sector, AIPH
             secured accreditation.

             Given the mixed outcomes across the five value chains, the overall rating is modest.



             Rating
      Modest
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

Overall achievement of objectives is rated as weakly substantial owing to substantial achievement of two out of
the three sub-objectives as described above and modest achievement of the third.

However, it is important to note that the formation of inter-professional associations and their criticality for the
governance aspect was an important element of the project, and the absence of its achievement would pose a
substantial risk to the sustainability of project outcomes. The task team reiterated that all outcomes and objectives
were given equal importance, without a stated hierarchy. Without the effective governance of commodity value
chains, the gains in technology adoption and market access are not likely to be sustained. Hence, in the absence
of relative importance of objectives, the average rating assigned by the ICR is substantial.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

     5. Efficiency


            Economic Analysis: An economic analysis was carried out as part of the project preparation. The analysis
            compared the quantifiable benefits (incremental production, reduction in transport costs and losses) with the
            project costs. Production price and costs were valued at prevailing levels (second quarter of 2012). Economic
            costs and prices were assumed to be equal to financial costs and prices, in the absence of tax and
            distortions, except for cocoa and cashew, which were subject to export taxes. Activities related to capacity
            strengthening of value chain organizations, to sector coordination and to cashew nuts processing were not
            subject to a cost/benefit analysis, as the benefits generated, although important, could not be quantified. The


                                                                                                               Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI: Agriculture Sector Support Project (P119308)



cost of these activities was however taken into account in the calculation of the overall rate of return. The
economic rate of return (ERR) for the whole project was calculated to be 27% ex-ante, and the ex-post ERR
calculated was 29%.

Financial Analysis: The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) for the average production models per value
chains ranged from 16 percent for oil palm to 113 percent for cashew. The ICR reports (page 17) that subsidy
was necessary to support the uptake of technology. In the absence of funding from financial or other partners
in the value chains, the small farmers would have found it difficult to cover their early negative cash flows
without the subsidy.

Cost-effectiveness: The cost-effectiveness analysis showed that the project costs compared favorably with
standard for extension services, road rehabilitation and social infrastructure.

Administrative efficiency: At the start, the project experienced administrative difficulties leading to delays in
kicking off the project activities, delayed effectiveness and disbursement, and weak pro-activity on the part of
the PCU in anticipating and resolving problems. After the midterm review, there was improved project
management and coordination as per the ICR (page 18).

On the basis of the above, overall efficiency rating is Substantial.



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                     Rate
                                                          Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                     Available?
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                27.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                             29.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


The overall project outcome is rated as moderately satisfactory. The relevance of objectives was substantial,
efficacy was substantial, but there were important shortcomings in terms of objective 3 that ultimately limited the
project's overall impact. Efficiency was Substantial. Thus, the project's outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 13
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        CI: Agriculture Sector Support Project (P119308)




a.    Outcome Rating
      Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


As noted earlier, in the absence of effective governance of the commodity value chains, the gains in technology
adoption and market access will not be sustained.

Regarding access to technology, the ICR (page 24) notes that sustainability of rubber technologies could be
limited if the heavy subsidy of planting material is discontinued progressively. Developing other segments of the
selected value chains such processing is of paramount importance to sustain productivity and economic gains.
These issues are being considered in the new IBRD enclave cocoa project which is currently in preparation and
a cashew project that encourages processing innovations, under implementation. The ICR also confirms (page
24) the substantial risk entailed by the project’s partial failure to build strong producer associations and "IPOs"
as key elements in effective value chain governance.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

     The ICR presents a candid assessment of Bank Performance. As background, the project was strategically
     relevant for the country and was presented at the Board of IDA as the ‘laboratory of Côte d’Ivoire’s new
     21st century agriculture’ because of the original design components with private sector led development
     activities on a contractual basis with other public and private actors. It affirms that there was less
     consistency between the substance of the PAD, which stressed PPP and institutional development as the
     drivers of market and technology access, and the PDO statement, which focused on the three areas of
     productivity enhancement, access to markets, and institutional governance on an equal footing. This led to
     some ambiguities in implementation pathways and what the project would be held accountable for in terms
     of the hierarchy of the PDOs. The Results Framework did not have well-defined outcome indicators. M&E
     arrangements were an additional weak point. Therefore Quality-at-Entry is rated as moderately
     unsatisfactory.


     Quality-at-Entry Rating
     Moderately Unsatisfactory


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI: Agriculture Sector Support Project (P119308)



b. Quality of supervision

  The ICR highlights that the World Bank supervision team faced difficulties in clearly identifying the priority
  areas of focus. Emphasis was placed on implementation progress characterized by the achievement
  of outputs not linked to development outcomes. After the Midterm Review (MTR May 16, 2016), the World
  Bank was more proactively involved in closely monitoring the project implementation. The project had three
  different task team leaders during its duration, but this did not have a negative impact on ensuring the
  activities moved along and key achievements were recorded.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The project design included a Results framework with outputs indicators along with some outcome measures,
  which, however, were not well defined. To provide rigorous evidence about the project impact, three impact
  evaluation studies had been initially planned to span all three main project components and regions and led by
  the Gender Innovation Lab (GIL) of the World Bank. However, the scope of the studies was limited to only two
  value chains (rubber and cotton), leaving out the other three value chains.



b. M&E Implementation

  In the initial stage of the project, some weaknesses were observed in M&E because of the project
  coordination unit's poor ability to perform regular monitoring and inform progress on some outputs as well as
  limited supervision support from the Ministry of Agriculture. Later, a web-based software for M&E was
  developed and used to monitor output and outcome indicators as well as procurement and financial activities.
  To provide information on project impact, several surveys and evaluation studies were conducted. The first
  was a baseline survey carried out by the National Institute for Statistics and Applied Economics (CIRES). This
  was followed by the World Bank study that focused on the impact of subsidized rubber seedlings and the
  impact of cotton animal traction kit on several outcome variables. However, the scope of the studies was
  limited to only two value chains (rubber and cotton), leaving out the other three value chains.



c. M&E Utilization

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI: Agriculture Sector Support Project (P119308)




  The ICR reports (page 21) that given the limitation of the M&E framework to track outcomes or development
  objectives, secondary information had to be used to inform the Implementation Completion and Results
  Report, beyond the findings of the impact assessment study from the GIL and the CIRES Final Project
  Evaluation commissioned by the project coordination unit.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  At appraisal, the project was classified as environmental category B in the PAD. An Environmental and
  Social Management Framework (OP/BP 4.01), a Pest Management Plan (OP/BP 4.09) and Resettlement
  Policy Framework (OP/BP 4.12) were prepared and disclosed in-country and on the World Bank’s website.
  OP 4.04 - Natural Habitats and OP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources were marked as triggered in the PAD
  and mentioned in the Basic Integrated Safeguard Data Sheet (ISDS), but not mentioned explicitly in the
  ICR. As per the ICR, during the execution of activities, there were minor cases of road encroachment into
  crop plantations established in the road right-of-way, and partial crop damages that were promptly
  addressed.

  Concerning social safeguards, at the beginning of the project, there were some shortcomings in
  implementing the social safeguards in the cocoa sector as per the ICR (page 22). For instance, voluntary
  land donation for physical or social infrastructure was supported only by individual commitment forms,
  instead of a comprehensive resettlement plan. These issues were addressed by the project’s social
  specialist and the focal points in the implementing agencies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial Management arrangements of the project, including the funds flows and financial reporting, was
  designed based on the implementation modalities described in the PAD. Most of the FM teams of the
  implementing agencies faced some challenges over the project implementation period, including delays in the
  recruitment of the dedicated accountants of the project implementation agencies, technical capacity constraints
  of these accountants on the Bank procedures, and delayed establishment of the project steering committees.
  To address this issue, some training on World Bank FM procedures and capacity development initiatives
  (installation of computerized accounting system, manual of procedures, and so on) were provided.



                                                                                                 Page 11 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI: Agriculture Sector Support Project (P119308)



  In the first phase of the project, knowledge and ownership of procurement procedures were not optimal as
  none of the implementing agencies had experience with the World Bank’s procurement procedures, as per the
  ICR (page 22). Setbacks were sometimes encountered with regard to the procurement of goods and services.
  Overall, after undertaking the corrective measures during the project reviews, procurement performance
  improved markedly.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  N/A



d. Other
  Gender: The PAD had a PDO indicator 'number of direct beneficiaries disaggregated by gender' and
  achieved results below target (12 percent versus 17 percent target for women). As part of these efforts, a
  comprehensive social inclusion study was conducted with the recommendations integrated into the project
  implementation manual to better target women and other vulnerable groups in the selected value chains.
  Moreover, under the project-sponsored gender action plan, a gender focal point was hired in each of the five
  value chains and a gender platform was established to exchange and define gender actions.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                       IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately               Moderately
Outcome                                                                            ---
                               Satisfactory             Satisfactory
                               Moderately               Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                   ---
                               Satisfactory             Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                   Modest                     ---
Quality of ICR                                          Substantial                ---

12. Lessons


A few lessons, adapted from the ICR are below:

Longer term governance goals are often lost in the context of project implementation in fragile and/or
post-conflict situations, whereby focusing on short to medium term objectives of building
infrastructure and capacities appear to produce immediate results - The project was successful in building
the productive infrastructure and assets but fell short in enhancing institutional organization, decision making,
and strategic stakeholder alliances / IPOs.


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CI: Agriculture Sector Support Project (P119308)



It is important to choose an appropriate financing instrument to achieve the goal of institutional
transformation - for example would the use of Program-for-Results (PforR) financing be more effective
than Investment Project financing (IPF) for the stated goal - The two IPOs that secured accreditation
(INTERCOTON and AIPH) from the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MINADER) had the
advantage to be institutionally advanced compared to the other value chains. To have a full impact, specific
institutional changes needs to be conceived and imbedded as part as country reform programs with a longer-
term horizon, and hence a PfoR type of financing instrument may be more appropriate.

It is important to have clear delegation from the Government for institutional strengthening of the
"inter-professional" organizations or IPOs - Strong involvement of the Government in development
operations limits the ability of IPOs to flourish and also limits the agricultural sector's efforts towards private
sector led growth. This lesson seems to be relevant to the country context as per the task team.

A sole focus solely on achievements that can be easily measured is likely to ignore monitoring of the
extent to which the project is achieving its development outcomes - When implementing a project, the
final development outcomes to be achieved should always be kept in mind as well as the process to achieve
the required changes.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


This is a comprehensive, well-written ICR with good quality of evidence and analysis, as well as useful
lessons. There are however some gaps in the narrative around why the PDO and Results Framework were not
revised during the mid term review if the governance aspect was important to the achievement of the
overall development outcome. Also, some clarification on the definition of "inter-profession" upfront would be
useful to a non- Francophone/ West-African audience. During the course of the preparation of this review, the
task team provided prompt clarifications.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                         Page 13 of 13
