     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0021485

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P098459                                   MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Morocco                                   Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-79250                                31-Dec-2015                                         36,374,818.29

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Jun-2010                               31-May-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           43,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            43,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        37,511,568.81                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   According to the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1), the Project Development Objectives (PDOs) were: (i) to
   increase access to sewerage services and reduce wastewater related pollution in selected small and medium
   towns in the project provinces; and (ii) to pilot non-conventional technologies for wastewater systems in
   selected locations. The Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page ii) identified the project provinces of Azilal,
   Benimellal, Khourigba, Safi, Yousoufia, and Settat.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)



   Restructuring in 2014 revised the PDOs to (I) increase access to sanitation services; and (ii) reduce
   wastewater related pollution in selected small and medium towns in the project provinces which divided the
   first element of the original PDO into two parts. The piloting of non-conventional technologies for wastewater
   systems in selected locations was dropped to simplify the project and consolidate the infrastructure
   component following the recommendations of the 2014 Mid Term Review (MTR).

   At the time of restructuring in June 2014, or four years into the project, only 5% of project funds were
   disbursed (Restructuring Paper, page 1). This review has assessed the achievement of the two revised
   objectives and the piloting of non-conventional technologies for wastewater systems until that objective was
   dropped at restructuring in June 2014. These three objectives were to:

   (I) Increase access to sanitation services in selected small and medium towns in the project provinces
   (ii) Reduce wastewater related pollution in selected small and medium towns in the project provinces
   (iii) Pilot non-conventional technologies for wastewater systems in selected locations

   IEG concurred that a split evaluation of the project's achievements was necessary because the PDO was
   changed by reducing the scope of the project (removal of the piloting of non-conventional technologies for
   waste water systems in selected locations) while other project objectives remained the same.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  13-Jun-2014
                                                          PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components

   1. Wastewater Collection and Treatment: (US$64.1 million at appraisal, revised to US$66.8 million at
   restructuring, and US$63.7 million actual). This component financed the rehabilitation and expansion of
   existing sewerage systems including collection network and treatment plants, equipment for the
   maintenance and operations of the systems for 11 selected small and medium towns in the six project
   provinces in the Oum Er Rbia river basin. The 2014 restructuring added the provision of odor-controlling
   technologies for these towns. These 11 towns included Afourer, Beni Ayat, Boujinaba, Boulanouare,
   Chemaia, Demnate, El Brouj, El Ksiba, Hattane, Ouaouizeght, and Youssoufia. These towns were selected
   based on population, current impact of raw wastewater discharges on human health and the environment,
   availability of feasibility studies, and provision of potable water by the implementing agency.


                                                                                                              Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)




  2. Piloting Wastewater Technologies and Implementation Support: (US$5.7 million at appraisal,
  revised to US$4.0 million at restructuring, and US$3.3 million actual). This component financed:

  (i) strengthening the capacity of the implementing agency through a twinning arrangement to pilot low-cost,
  non-conventional technologies for wastewater treatment in small towns (US$0.4 million at appraisal,
  removed at restructuring, US$0 million actual). This subcomponent was supposed to finance a twinning
  partner selected under a South-South exchange to provide expertise in low-cost and non-conventional
  wastewater treatment technologies. The implementing agency would disseminate the knowledge through
  workshops and conferences. This sub component was dropped at the 2014 Restructuring.

  (ii) piloting odor-control and methane-capture technology at two selected treatment plants (US$1.8 million
  at appraisal, removed at restructuring, US$0 million actual). This subcomponent was supposed to finance
  anaerobic ponds in two pilot cities to reduce odor and capture methane. This sub component was dropped
  at the 2014 Restructuring.

  (iii) implementation support for project management (US$3.5 million at appraisal, revised to US$4 million at
  restructuring, US$3.3 million actual). This component financed construction supervision, monitoring and
  reporting, monitoring of environmental management plans, community awareness campaigns, promotion
  of wastewater reuse, and a strategic plan for sanitation activities.

  The 2014 Restructuring removed (i) and (ii) from this second component, adopted piloting as an
  implementation strategy in the first component, and changed "sewerage" to "sanitation" in line with
  Millennium Development Goals.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Project Cost: The total project cost, inclusive of borrower contribution (see below) reached US$75.1
  million but the actual total cost was US$67.05 million.

  Financing: The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development provided an Investment Project
  Financing for this project in the amount of US$43 million. The amount actually used was US$34.95
  million. Unused funds were returned to the Bank.

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower committed and disbursed US$32.1 million in counterpart financing.

  Dates: The project became effective on February 15, 2011 and was completed by May 31, 2018 following
  two extensions that added 29 months to the project period. A Mid Term Review was conducted from
  January 27, 2014 to February 5, 2014, which led to one of four restructurings:




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)



     • On May 9, 2013, a level 2 restructuring acknowledged the government's reorganization of the sector
     and a change in implementing agency;
     • On June 13, 2014, a level 1 restructuring revised the PDOs, results framework, components, costs,
     and reallocated funds among disbursement categories;
     • On September 30, 2014, a level 2 restructuring extended the closing date for the first time from
     December 31, 2015 to June 30, 2017
     • On May 23, 2017, a level 2 restructuring extended the closing date a second time to May 31, 2018,
     changed the implementation schedule, revised the results framework a second time, and reallocated
     resources between disbursement categories. The extension allowed the completion of the remaining
     contracted activities (completing the sewage collection and treatment works, and reducing the
     wastewater related pollution in 13 project towns).




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  The PDOs remained relevant to the World Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, 2014-2017). The
  PDOs supported two of the three results areas in the strategy - building a green and resilient future, and
  strengthening governance and institutions for improved service delivery to all citizens. Under Results Area 2
  - the first strategic outcome was to "strengthen management of soil, coastal and water resources", and the
  Bank's support served to expand access to improved sanitation, wastewater treatment, and reuse. Under
  Results Area 3 - Strengthening Governance and Institutions for Improved Service, the PDOs directly
  contributed to Strategic Outcome 3.4 Expand Access to Basic Services - such as sanitation (CPS, Figure 3,
  p. 19).

  A new Country Partnership Framework (CPF 2019-2024) was under consultation when the project closed.
  The focus areas for the new CPF were: (i) Promoting Job Creation and Private Sector Growth; (ii)
  Transforming Human Capital; and (iii) Promoting Inclusive and Resilient Territorial Development.
  Governance and Citizen Engagement formed the foundation of the CPF, while Digital Economy and Gender
  were cross cutting themes. The PDOs would remain relevant and contribute to the third focus area -
  promoting inclusive and resilient territorial development - because this focus would increase access to basic
  sanitation services, water resources planning, and reliance on wastewater reuse.

  The PDOs also remained relevant to the country's Programme National d'Assainissement (PNA or national
  sanitation program). The Government's PNA aimed to meet the sanitation needs of 80 percent of
  households and treat 60 percent of wastewater by 2020. This project was designed to finance PNA's
  planned activities in the project locations. The PDOs expanded the coverage area and volume of treated
  wastewater by adding new construction, and rehabilitating existing infrastructure. In addition, the project's
  use of innovative, low cost technologies in wastewater treatment increased treatment capacity, reached
  more households, and addressed the funding gap in implementing the PNA. Although the PDO was

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 21
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)



       amended to drop investigations into these pilot technologies, the project successfully piloted a limited
       number of these low cost technologies in seven beneficiary cities and towns.



       Rating
       Substantial

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     Increase access to sewerage services in selected small and medium towns in the project provinces.

    Rationale

    The theory of change for this objective was that expanding the access to sanitation services would lead to
    improved service delivery performance in the participating towns and provinces, and contribute to the
    government's objective under its National Sanitation Program (PNA). To increase access to sanitation
    services, a total of 11 towns were originally identified as part of the provinces surrounding the Oum Er Rbia
    river basin. During implementation, this target was revised to 14. Specific towns were changed due to
    difficulties in acquiring land in Afourer, Beni Ayat, and Boujniba and due to local opposition in Demnate. As a
    result, the following cities were added - Azilal, Zaouiet Cheikh, Aghbala, Oued Zem, Khouribga, Berrechid,
    and Boukaad.

    OUTPUTS:

        • Completed 10,239 new (original target 13,000, almost achieved)
        • Completed 15 Environmental Impact Assessments (original target 10, exceeded)
        • Signed delegated management conventions (original target, 8, revised to 10 contracts);
        • Consultative meetings with stakeholders were carried out in 14 sub-projects (original target 9, revised to
        10, hence target exceeded);


    OUTCOMES:

        • The new and rehabilitated sanitation (total of 23,973 connections achieving revised target) benefited
        231,964 people (no original target, revised target 220,000, exceeded). This included 50.4% female
        beneficiaries exceeding the revised target of 50% (this target was added at restructuring) and 15%
        extremely poor beneficiaries, achieving the revised target (target added at restructuring).
        Documentary source was 2014 province and city level data (ICR, footnote 4).


                                                                                                          Page 5 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)



   • 144,000 urban residents were provided access to improved sanitation, exceeding the revised target of
   130,000 (target added at restructuring).
   • To save on cost, household surveys were conducted in only two cities - El Brouoj and Aghbala.
   Households were randomly selected, with quotas to ensure representation by all relevant quarters of the
   cities. 220 households were surveyed or 1,078 interviewees (ICR, footnote 6). 92% of the households
   surveyed were satisfied with the project vs. 3% before the project. None of the households surveyed at
   project end reported problems with management compared to 17% prior to the project. Households
   continued to report problems with grey water management, 33% reported new or ongoing issues down
   from 50% prior to the project (ICR, paragraph 38).


 The project resulted in meeting the majority of original targets, resulting in substantial efficacy rating.


 Rating
 Substantial
PHREVDELTBL
 PHINNERREVISEDTBL
 Objective 1 Revision 1
 Revised Objective

 Increase access to sanitation services in selected small and medium towns in the project provinces.

 Revised Rationale

 The theory of change was the same as for the original objective. The 2014 Restructuring did not revise this
 objective but updated targets of the outcome indicators. In addition, "sewerage" was changed to "sanitation"
 to conform with the Millennium Development Goals’ terminology. The full sanitation service chain covered
 household access, conveyance, treatment, and end use/safe disposal (ICR, footnote 2).

 OUTPUTS:

   • Completed 10,239 new (target reduced to 2,200, but later increased to 9,000, hence, the more recent
   target was exceeded) and 13,374 rehabilitated (target introduced at June 2014 restructuring to 20,000,
   but reduced to 13,000, hence the target was exceeded) sanitation connections or a total of 23,973
   connections (revised target 23,973, achieved)
   • Laid 385.5 km of sewer lines (target introduced at Restructuring was 400 km, revised down to 360 km,
   hence target exceeded)


 OUTCOMES:




                                                                                                        Page 6 of 21
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)



        • The new and rehabilitated sanitation (total of 23,973 connections achieving revised target) benefited
        231,964 people (no original target, revised target 220,000, exceeded). This included 50.4%female
        beneficiaries exceeding the revised target of 50% (this target was added at restructuring) and 15%
        extremely poor beneficiaries, achieving the revised target (target added at restructuring).
        Documentary source was 2014 province and city level data (ICR, footnote 4).
        • 144,000 urban residents were provided access to improved sanitation, exceeding the revised target of
        130,000 (target added at restructuring).
        • To save on cost, household surveys were conducted in only two cities - El Brouoj and Aghbala.
        Households were randomly selected, with quotas to ensure representation by all relevant quarters of the
        cities. 220 households were surveyed or 1,078 interviewees (ICR, footnote 6). 92% of the households
        surveyed were satisfied with the project vs. 3% before the project. None of the households surveyed at
        project end reported problems with management compared to 17% prior to the project. Households
        continued to report problems with grey water management, 33% reported new or ongoing issues down
        from 50% prior to the project (ICR, paragraph 38).


    The project resulted in exceeding revised targets resulting in high efficacy rating.


    Revised Rating
    High
PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     Reduce wastewater related pollution in selected small and medium towns in the project provinces.

    Rationale

    The theory of change for this objective was that adopting a few innovative wastewater technologies would
    reduce wastewater related pollution in the participant towns and provinces, improve sector performance and
    lead to cost effective service delivery.

    OUTPUTS:
    The following intermediate outcome indicators were proposed at appraisal, but were dropped during the
    2014 Restructuring:

        • Implementing agency operation teams equipped with adequate operation and maintenance (O&M);
        equipment: (target 10 teams);
        • Odor control in existing wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs): (target 2 WWTPs, achieved).




                                                                                                       Page 7 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)



The following outputs were achieved:

  • Construction of 6 new WWTPs (original target 10 WWTPs revised target 12, further revised to 6 WWTPs
  to address only new constructions and not include 4 pre-existing WWTPs) (ICR, paragraph 43, and Annex
  9).
  • 5 of all WWTPs constructed under the project complied with national discharge standards (original target
  0, revised target 12, almost achieved) (ICR, paragraph 43, and Annex 9)
  • Established 74.2 percent average Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) abatement rate from the 6
  WWTPs constructed (target introduced at restructuring 75 percent, achieved) (ICR, paragraph 42, and
  Annex 9)
  • 1,353 tons/year of BOD pollution was removed (original target 1,830 tons/year, revised to 800 tons/year,
  and hence target exceeded (ICR, paragraph 42, and Annex 9). There was no justification for the
  downward revision of the target (ICR, Table 1, footnote c).
  • The implementing agency monitored the results of the 7 pilot technologies (original target 4, exceeded)
  to better understand which option to implement post project completion (ICR, paragraph 75).


OUTCOMES:

  •  Wastewater generated by 96.3 percent of households was collected and treated (original target 90
  percent, exceeded). The Government’s national target was 80 percent (ICR, paragraph 37).
  • On average, 74.2% of effluent Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) pollution loads were removed by the
  new treatment plants (original target 75%, achieved) (ICR, paragraph 41)
  • Only one of the 6 new waste water treatment plants (original target 100%) complied with national
  standards at project closing, but it was likely that they would comply. The WWTPs needed to operate for
  12 months to assess compliance with effluent (organic and suspended solids) concentration levels. The
  ICR projected that 3 other newly constructed WWTPs (or 4 out of 6 or 66.7% of target) should eventually
  comply with national discharge standards after a 12-month operation (ICR, paragraph 43). The ICR also
  noted that "five of the plants associated with the project (including plants that already existed and those
  constructed under the project) are currently compliant (of 12 total plants under the project). With the
  additional three plants becoming officially compliant in the coming months, a total of eight plants will be in
  compliance (66.7 percent achieved). Additionally, it is likely that the positive results from the pilots will help
  ONEE improve the overall performance of the WWTPs that are currently not in compliance" (ICR,
  paragraph 43).
  • The waste water treatment plants constructed under the project resulted in an additional 115,891
  population equivalents of treatment capacity exceeding the target of 115,000 (ICR, paragraph 43).
  • In Boujaad and Oued Zem, plans were in place at closing to create small-scale treated wastewater
  irrigation schemes for use by local farmers. However, there were no agreements by the closing date due
  to lack of funding. In Khouribga, Youssoufia, and Boulanaouare, the former Office of Cherifien des
  Phosphates or OCP operated the WWTPs and used the treated wastewater for mining operations (ICR,
  paragraph 44).

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 21
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)



        • The implementing agency monitored the results of the 7 pilot waste water treatment technologies
        (original target 4, exceeded) to better understand which technologies to use after project completion (ICR,
        paragraph 75).



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL
    PHINNERREVISEDTBL
    Objective 2 Revision 1
    Revised Objective

    Reduce wastewater related pollution in selected small and medium towns in the project provinces.

    Revised Rationale

    The theory of change was the same as for the original objective. Outputs and outcomes were also basically
    the same as for the original objective. The 2014 Restructuring did not revise this objective but expanded its
    scope by including piloting of low cost, innovative non-conventional wastewater treatment technologies (odor
    control pilots) in seven beneficiary towns listed below and added relevant targets for outcome indicators.


        • Piloted 7 non-conventional systems, exceeding target: (original target 2 pilots aimed at reducing odor
        and 2 other plants with non conventional wastewater technologies, or a total of 4 pilots) (ICR, paragraphs
        47-49).
        • In El Ksiba and Azilal, anaeorbic ponds were covered with hexagonal plastic covers to reduce odor,
        achieving target for the pilot of technologies to reduce odor.
        • In El Brouj, Zaouiet Cheikh, and Chemaia, floating baffles and mixing systems were piloted but
        effectiveness was reported mixed for both pilots.
        • In Boujaad, one channel of anaerobic ponds was converted to aerated ponds which reduced the BOD to
        between 66% and 77% in total suspended solids (TSS)
        • In Ouaouizeght a rock filter was piloted to remove algae, which reduced TSS by 68%




    Revised Rating
    Substantial
PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective

     Pilot non-conventional technologies for wastewater systems in selected locations.


                                                                                                        Page 9 of 21
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)




             Rationale

             The theory of change for this objective before the 2014 restructuring was that innovative and low cost
             technologies could be adapted for use in the participant towns and provinces to improve the cost
             effectiveness of delivering sanitation services. This objective was, however, dropped as a result of the
             recommendations in the context of the project's Mid Term Review (MTR). The original design called for a
             twinning arrangement to manage the adoption of low cost innovative technologies for wastewater treatment.
             However, the twinning arrangement did not materialize (ICR, paragraph 47) with no reason provided in the
             ICR. One twinning contract signed to implement the pilots for non-conventional technologies but the
             target was not achieved and the twinning contract was dropped at the 2014 restructuring.

             The outcome of this objective was negligible before the 2014 restructuring.



             Rating
      Negligible
     PHREVDELTBL
             PHINNERREVISEDTBL
             Objective 3 Revision 1
             Revised Objective

             Objective 3 was dropped

             Revised Rationale

             This objective was dropped as a discrete and separate objective. This outcome of this dropped
             objective was therefore not rated. Nevertheless the objective continued to be pursued under the project in
             Objective 2 as revised.



             Revised Rating
             Not Rated/Not Applicable

PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

The first of the original three PDOs achieved a "high" efficacy rating and the other a "substantial" rating at the end
of the project. The third PDO was not rated when the project closed. The project's overall efficacy rating is
therefore "substantial" because of sufficient evidence that the objectives were almost fully achieved and
that outcomes were assessed as being attributable to the project.




                                                                                                              Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

5. Efficiency


 Ex Ante Economic Efficiency: At appraisal, the economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated at 11% with a
 Net Present Value of US$4 million for the investment based on two benefit streams: (i) a producer surplus
 through a sewerage tariff; and (ii) a consumer surplus through estimated increases in property value because
 of new sewerage connections. For reference, this NPV calculation used a discount rate of 10% while at the
 time of appraisal the International Monetary Fund referred to a 14% global lending rate in its 2016 Morocco
 Financial System Stability Assessment report. Neither of these benefit streams materialized (ICR, Annex 4,
 paragraph 2) because (i) sewerage revenues did not cover costs of providing the sewerage service
 hence, there was no producer surplus; and (ii) there was only a modest increase in residential property values
 in nominal terms and a decrease in real terms. Real estate data gathered showed no indication that
 property values have increased more in towns with access to sewerage than those with less access.

 Ex Post Economic Efficiency: The economic analysis at project completion in the ICR included a broader
 "range of benefits identified but not quantified at appraisal" including the direct costs of emptying septic tanks,
 wastewater reuse in agriculture, reduction in environmental pollution, and health benefits (ICR, paragraph
 51). On the recommendation of one of the Bank's chief economists (see ICR, footnote 10) that for project
 analysis benefit streams be discounted at 6%, the present values of: (I) savings from emptying septic tanks;
 (ii) wastewater reuse in agriculture; (iii) reduced environmental pollutants; and (iv) health benefits were
 estimated in the ICR. Based on the costs of emptying household septic tanks, benefits from lower costs for
 services were estimated at about US$200 per year per household, the present value of total savings of
 sewerage connections to households was estimated at US$2.0 million. Benefits linked to wastewater reuse
 for agriculture, and reduced environmental pollution (including removal of BOD, nitrogen, and phosphorus)
 were estimated to be between US$1.5 to US$2.2 million per year, and US$2.4 million per year, respectively.
 There were no health data collected at project sites, but estimates published in the literature indicate annual
 benefits of about US$10 per person living in the project area, based on reductions in sanitation-related
 diseases (e.g. diarrheal diseases), equivalent to a total of about US$2.1 million per year. These elements add
 up to an estimated US$8.0 to US$8.7 million per year to project benefits (ICR, Annex 4, paragraphs 4-8).

 Using three scenarios post completion, with sanitation tariff rates at (a) existing rates, (b) at a rate indicated in
 the PAD, and (c) at US$1 per cubic meter, the ICR estimated the ERRs for the project at 9.4%, 9.5%, and
 15.7% respectively. The combined benefit streams over a 40-year project period, at the 6 percent discount
 rate resulted in an economic net present value (NPV) of US$33.6 million. The combined ERR was estimated
 at 9.4 percent.

 Financial Efficiency: The ICR stated that the implementing agency’s operating cost coverage ratio for water
 and sewerage operations was above the regional average. The implementing agency generated a positive
 cash flow, reporting an operating cost coverage ratio of under 2 for the period 2010-2015. On the other hand,

                                                                                                        Page 11 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)



under the existing tariff structure, since sanitation services have been cross subsidized by the implementing
agency’s other operations, the agency had a deficit of about US$13 million in 2016. The cross subsidization
needs of the sanitation sector were expected to increase over time with the expansion of coverage unless
sewerage tariffs were increased. Debt relating to water and sanitation investments were reported to have
doubled in 8 years and debt service was acknowledged to be unsustainable. Tariff rates and subsidy reforms
would be required to solve these problems..

Operational and Administrative Efficiency: The project was designed to be implemented over 4 years.
Delays in procurement caused disbursements to reach only 5% by the time of the MTR in early 2014. These
early challenges led to a number of actions including a citizen engagement process such as action on land
acquisition and grievance redress mechanisms and a more rapid rate of implementation as explained
below. The 2014 restructuring removed one of the PDOs.

A Land Acquisition Focal Point was appointed. A Local Monitoring Committee was established. Consultations
and public information campaigns on the project were held. A strong Grievance Redress Mechanism was
established following local practice such as oral methods of grievance collection. The implemented Grievance
Redress Mechanism was rated as one of the best regional practices and was adopted by the implementing
agency for use in all its sanitation projects. The Mechanism contributed to improving the project's
operational efficiency by helping reduce the social impacts of land acquisition, build local support for the
project, and reduce the risk of opposition.

The project was extended twice for a total of 29 months to accommodate the adoption of the corrective
measures reached at the 2014 MTR, such as reducing the original number of beneficiary towns from 11 to 7
but adding 7 more for a total of 14 beneficiary towns; piloting low cost technologies aimed at reducing odors
implemented in El Ksiba and Azilal even though a level 1 restructuring dropped this objective (of conducting 4
pilots in low cost, non-conventional technologies for wastewater treatment) following the MTR.

Conclusion. The project's estimated EIRR at 9.4% was a modest result compared to 10% typically used as a
benchmark in the Bank and well below the 14% cost of capital in global markets that the IMF cited applied to
Morocco during the project's implementation period. This result, together with ONEE's financial inefficiency in
the context of continued arguably low sanitation tariffs, indicate that the efficiency of this project was modest.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate
                                                          Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                   Available?
                                                                                    85.00
Appraisal                                                11.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)



                                                                                     95.00
ICR Estimate                                             9.40
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


The relevance of objectives was substantial and efficiency was modest. There were moderate shortcomings in
the project's achievement of its objectives. The efficacy of Objective 1 at the project's close was high and that of
Objective 2 was substantial but that of Objective 3 was not rated since the original objective was not achieved
and it was then dropped. All these considerations supported this review's conclusion that the project's overall
outcome based on the achievements of both the original and revised objectives was moderately satisfactory as
shown in the table below:
                                    Assessment of Overall Outcome Rating
 Item                                         Original Objective                  Revised Objective (at the
                                                                                  project's close)
 Relevance of Objective                       Substantial                         Substantial
 Efficacy
   Objective 1                                Substantial                         High
   Objective 2                                Substantial                         Substantial
   Objective 3                                Negligible                          Not rated
 Overall Efficacy                             Substantial                         Substantial
 Efficiency                                   Modest                              Modest
 Outcome Rating                               Moderately Satisfactory             Moderately Satisfactory
 Outcome Scores                               4                                   4
 Disbursed Percentage at Restructuring        5%                                  95%
 Outcome Scores Weighted by                   0.2                                 3.8
 Disbursement Percentage
 Overall Outcome Score                                                            4.0
 Overall Outcome                                                                  Moderately Satisfactory



a.   Outcome Rating
     Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


Based on the information in the ICR, the following issues posed risks to development outcome:

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)




  • Technical, Financial and Government Ownership. The implementing agency (ONEE) is responsible for
  operations and maintenance (O&M) in each project municipality. Given its history in sanitation, the agency is
  well positioned to continue to provide O&M support for the constructed networks and treatment systems.
  However, its financial status poses risks in the long run since the sanitation sector is highly cross subsidized
  by revenues from its electricity and water supply activities. To mitigate these risks, ONEE expects to receive
  budgetary subsidies because of the externalities derived from the sector. The Government's current National
  Sanitation Program reflects a strong commitment to the sector aiming to achieve 80% household
  sanitation coverage and treat 60% treatment of wastewater by 2020 (ICR, paragraph 33).
  • Environmental Compliance. The risk of non-compliance with established national standards of older
  WWTPs, especially those not built under the project continues. This risk is mitigated by the outcomes
  provided by the piloted non-conventional new technologies in wastewater treatment (e.g., anaerobic ponds
  covered with hexagonal plastic pieces to reduce odor, floating baffles, mixing systems, anaerobic ponds
  converted to aerated ponds, and a rock filter to remove algae, ICR, paragraphs 47-48) that the implementing
  agency is scaling up old, non-compliant plants. Additionally, the implementing agency continues to
  experiment with alternative treatment options – including its first Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB)
  reactor and aerated lagoons, first encountered during the Brazil study visit and received as "just-in-time
  technical expertise" from the Bank (ICR, paragraph 94).
  • Social. There is a risk that the consultative processes and community engagement introduced under the
  project may not be replicated after the project's completion. This risk is mitigated by a range of tools now in
  place including appointment of a Land Acquisition Focal Point, establishing Local Monitoring Committees,
  and a strong Grievance Redress Mechanism that allows for multiple channels of grievance collection
  following local practices (ICR, paragraphs 12 and 61).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  At entry, the Bank designed the project to address a Government priority using lessons from international
  best practices and other similar operations. For example, an earlier European Investment Bank-funded
  Sebou River Basin Sanitation Project in Morocco found that only 40% of households were ready to pay for
  connection after project closing (PAD, paragraph 13). Based on this experience, project design included a
  needs assessment of end users and their willingness to pay for connections, communication campaigns to
  highlight the benefits of sanitation services, and improved communications between the implementing
  agency and beneficiaries. Other lessons included the need to shorten the period between project
  completion and start of fee collection; and the need for improved coordination and communication between
  the implementing agency and beneficiaries. At the technical level, the project looked to the Brazil
  condominium model and decentralized wastewater treatment as a practical and low cost approach.


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)



  Twinning efforts were included in design and experts from the implementing agency participated in a study
  tour to Brazil to pilot innovations learned from the Brazil operations (ICR, paragraph 94).

  However, the project did not provide the implementing agency with support to determine a long-term
  strategy for financing the sector. The economic analysis at appraisal was not robust as evidenced by the
  lack of alternative scenarios or assumptions in calculating the benefit streams. The project piloted the Use
  of Country Systems (UCS) under a Bank project but did not consider the accompanying risk associated
  with an implementing agency unfamiliar with the process of adopting measures to address gaps in
  safeguards compliance. These issues could have been addressed by additional time during preparation to
  help the project proceed in a timely implementation (see Section 12, Lessons Learned). Land acquisition
  issues were not sufficiently appreciated during design and opposition to the project by beneficiaries in
  Demnate led to its being replaced in the list of participant towns (ICR, paragraph 22). These land related
  issues were not fully addressed until a few years into implementation indicating that local communities
  were not adequately consulted at design (ICR, paragraph 63).


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  The ICR (paragraphs 87-90) stated that Bank project team was led by a series of five task team leaders
  (TTLs), marked by adequate hand overs. Supervisory missions were regularly conducted at least twice a
  year, and in some cases three. The first disbursement only occurred after nearly two years of loan
  effectiveness. Slow disbursements early on were due to land acquisition and procurement issues that could
  have been addressed during preparation (e.g., procuring the project implementation support Technical
  Assistance, incomplete design studies) and because of a lack of readiness to implement UCS for
  safeguards compliance. These candid observations were duly noted in the project Implementation Status
  and Results Reports (ISRs).

  As mentioned already, an MTR was conducted in early 2014, three years after loan effectiveness.
  Implementation challenges were documented and addressed in a timely manner following the MTR. The
  Bank team effectively used the MTR to scale back and re-prioritize activities to ensure the likelihood of
  achieving the PDOs at project closing. This included mobilizing technical assistance in 2016 to develop the
  implementing agency’s capacity to design, operate, and maintain innovative wastewater treatment
  technologies. Piloting the innovative technologies using a twinning arrangement was dropped as an
  objective in favor of its actual use in some of the more receptive participant cities, without the originally
  envisioned twinning arrangement. In response to the delays due to opposition in land acquisition and initial
  experience with use of country systems for safeguards compliance, the Bank team partnered with the
  implementing agency to focus on effective citizen engagement and a strong Grievance Redress Mechanism
  that became a model for future projects in the sector in the country.

  The Bank’s social safeguards consultants provided critical on-the-ground support to help ensure timely land
  acquisition following both Bank requirements and Moroccan law, and timely completion of construction

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)



  activities in line with the PDO. Through close monitoring and regular engagement with key stakeholders –
  especially local communities – implementation challenges were documented and addressed in a timely
  manner, especially following the MTR.

  The Bank team mobilized private sector participation in Youssoufia and Boulanouare where the Office
  Cherifien des Phosphates (OCP) Group operated the wastewater treatment plants. The OCP Group funded
  both capital investments and O&M of the WTTPs in these sites and co-funded operational expenditures in
  exchange for the unlimited use of treated wastewater for its mining operations.

  Supervision focused on development impact, particularly following the MTR. Technical assistance needs for
  using the country systems, although belatedly recognized, were nevertheless implemented. Adequate
  supervision of inputs and processes was reflected in the candor and quality of performance reporting in the
  ISRs. A moderate shortcoming was reflected in the lack of a plan for an adequate transition after project
  completion nor a plan for reducing risks to project outcomes such as, for example, a roadmap for tariff and
  subsidy reform in the water and sanitation sector.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The implementing agency was originally the Office National de l'Eau Potable (National Potable Water Office or
  ONEP). The Government merged the original implementing agency with the Office National de l'Ectricite
  (National Electricity Office or ONE) to create a new implementing agency, the Office National de l'Ectricite et de
  l'Eau Potable (National Electricity and Potable Water Office or ONEE). This change was acknowledged in a
  loan assumption agreement. ONEE as implementing agency was responsible for project monitoring and
  evaluation (M&E).

  There were no project baseline data. A baseline was created for two of the 14 beneficiary cities during
  implementation (see below). The M&E design was simple and was based on the output and outcome indicators
  in the Results Framework (RF) identified during appraisal. The outcome indicators in the original RF were
  mostly outputs and not outcomes. The original RF also did not include intermediate results indicators for the full
  range of planned activities but were adequately updated in two of the four restructurings to include specific,
  measurable and achievable intermediate indicators The theory of change identified the two key components to
  achieve the PDO - increase access to sanitation services by rehabilitating and expanding sewerage systems in
  the beneficiary cities and reduce wastewater related pollution by piloting appropriate technologies.


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)




b. M&E Implementation

  The M&E embodied in the project's results framework (RF) was implemented with the support of a TA firm
  and the Bank team. However, ONEE’s team relied on the TA firm and the associated indicators in the RF to
  measure project implementation, in addition to other M&E carried out by ONEE specifically for the pilots in
  seven beneficiary cities and towns (ICR, para 70).

  Initial challenges of the project M&E were addressed during the MTR. The project refocused activities for the
  remaining years of the project and the RF regularly updated to reflect the changes in the project focus/scope
  as well as experiences using the RF in practice, using triangulation methods and where possible, updates
  reflected in the ISRs. For instance, intermediate results indicators were added to track construction progress
  of the sewer networks and new versus rehabilitated household connections.The implementing agency
  collected data beyond the scope of the RF – including a baseline and endline household survey in Aghbala
  and El Brouj, monitored the land acquisition processes, as well as the wastewater treatment technology pilots
  in the 7 towns (ICR, para 71).

  One ISR (ISR4) noted poor M&E quality (poor quality of the progress report by the implementing entity), but
  subsequently reported as resolved. While the original RF did not include intermediate results indicators for the
  full range of planned activities, these were updated in two of the four restructurings to include specific,
  measurable and achievable intermediate indicators although the indicator on WWTP compliance with national
  standards required a 12 month performance beyond the project period and could not be achieved in time.
  There was also a reported lack of data on the WWTPs operated by the OCP Group.

  The implementing agency's project management team coordinated closely with the local offices and
  communities in each project area. The project implementation support TA helped the different parts of the
  project management team (e.g., fiduciary, safeguards, technical) in this coordination and communication role.
  The project team was well equipped and staffed with high capacity individuals. Consequently, the team
  responded quickly to implementation challenges as they arose. Through close monitoring and regular
  engagement with key stakeholders – especially local communities – implementation challenges were
  documented and addressed in a timely manner, especially following the MTR.



c. M&E Utilization

  The project RF was an effective basis for measuring the project's progress, particularly following the
  restructuring of the RF after the MTR. Project ratings were updated to reflect the results in the RF. For
  example, early in the project the Implementation Progress (IP) rating was kept at Moderately Unsatisfactory
  to reflect the lack of progress on household connections, which were being tracked separately from
  kilometers of network laid. The ability to separately track length of network and number of household



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)



  connections is particularly important given international experience with low household connection rates in
  other countries.

  The M&E for the piloting of wastewater treatment technologies remained in use by ONEE to justify which
  interventions to scale up or use post project completion. Following the MTR, the project utilized the RF and
  related M&E activities to link the project activities to the PDO in line with all fiduciary, safeguards, and
  technical standards.

  Minor shortcomings in the initial M&E design led to regularly updating or revising the RF (as evidenced by
  the restructurings in 2014 and 2017) and reflecting these changes in the ISRs. M&E results informed priority
  actions focused on achieving the PDOs. Following the MTR, land acquisition was carefully monitored and
  helped limit further project delays.

  The M&E system as designed and implemented was generally sufficient to assess the achievement of the
  objectives and test the links in the results chain, but there were moderate weaknesses in a few areas, such
  as the acknowledged lack of reporting from WWTPs operated by OCP and proxy indicator for compliance
  with the government’s own environmental standards.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  Environmental Safeguards: The project was a Category B and triggered the following safeguards: OP/BP
  4.01 Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources, and OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary
  Resettlement. The ICR noted that the project complied with all applicable environmental and social
  safeguards (ICR, paragraph 77). This was the first project in Morocco to pilot the Use of Country Systems
  (UCS) for environmental and social safeguards complemented by the improvements recommended
  following environmental and social systems assessments.

  Early delays were associated with low capacity and limited experience with UCS under a Bank project. The
  implementing entity (ONEE) carried out Environmental Impact Assessments for all 14 towns. The ICR
  mentioned some minor concerns regarding the quality of reporting, but the Bank team noted compliance
  with relevant workers health and safety issues, signage, waste concerns about groundwater table.
  Groundwater water table quality was found stable except for one station which was not yet operational, and
  two dry piezometers were noted. The project also resolved an issue with raw waste flowing into the
  environment by building a collection network and a pumping station, both completed and operational by
  October 2018.



                                                                                                  Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)



  OP/BP 4.11 was triggered after the 2014 Mid Term Review and included in the 2014 Restructuring but there
  were no antiquities found in the national heritage site of Old Medina in Boujaad. Protocols under the law
  established by the Government to address cultural heritage and historic conservation were therefore not
  triggered.

  Under OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Settlement, compliance was documented in the report "Piloting the Use of
  Borrower Systems to Address Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-Supported Projects."
  The March 2010 Diagnostic Safeguards Review noted that ONEE developed, implemented, and ensured a
  close follow-up on an action plan to assist beneficiary municipalities with land acquisition processes for
  each sub-project. All land acquisition protocols were developed under the project and are now in use for all
  sanitation projects of the implementing agency outside of Bank financing and were being considered for use
  in water supply projects as evidenced by training of water personnel in safeguards compliance (ICR,
  paragraph 80). Overall, the UCS succeeded although its use called for capacity building early in project
  implementation (ICR, paragraph 81, see also Section 12, Lessons Learned).




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial Management: The project generally complied with the Bank's financial management requirements.
  Commitments and payments were addressed favorably, particularly in the last two years of the project. Issues
  raised in Aide Memoires and ISRs were addressed as evidenced by a quick response to an overdue audit
  mentioned in an ISR and the subsequent meeting of deadlines for audit reports. The implementing agency
  complied with annual requirement for its debt ratio to remain below the 4.5 limit as evidenced by the 3.01 ratio
  reached in 2016.

  Procurement: There were some procurement delays at the project's early stages due to internal
  disbursement processes of the implementing agency. Early contract management of the project was rated
  Moderately Unsatisfactory but this was addressed by strong senior management commitment. Consequently
  project procurement was rated Moderately Satisfactory to Satisfactory from 2014 until the project closed.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)



                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                       IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately               Moderately
Outcome                                                                            ---
                               Satisfactory             Satisfactory
                               Moderately               Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                   ---
                               Satisfactory             Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Substantial              Substantial                ---
Quality of ICR                                          Substantial                ---

12. Lessons


Five lessons from this project listed in the ICR (with some editing by IEG) may apply to similar operations
(paragraphs 95-99):


  •  A well-structured results framework (RF) that captures a project's results chain provides a
  framework for monitoring a project's achievements. In this project's sanitation components, attention to
  household connections led to identifying intermediate outcome indicators that further refined and adjusted the
  RF to better document how to achieve the PDOs. This strategy used the restructuring mechanism to adjust
  the RF twice, redefine outcome indicators previously missed at appraisal and punctuated by implementation
  problems.
  • Piloting technologies calls for a robust M&E system that provides the evidence about new
  technologies to adopt in improving system performance. Just in time training, study visits, and south-
  south knowledge exchanges as well as continuing innovations learned led this project to construct a
  first Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket for domestic wastewater treatment.
  • The use of country systems, under OP/BP 4.00 "Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
  Environmental and Social Safeguards Issues in Bank-Supported Projects" for environmental and
  social safeguards can succeed with additional time and support during project preparation and
  implementation. In this project, when gaps between World Bank requirements and the country systems
  were identified, mitigation measures were agreed during preparation, but sufficient understanding of what
  ‘use of country systems’ meant needed to be reinforced and given adequate time for counterpart
  participation.
  • Projects that require land acquisition can effectively recognize and resolve citizen concerns during
  preparation. In this project addressing these concerns early through the adoption of local practices
  to resolve grievances resulted in an effective citizen engagement, allowed for smooth implementation,
  and avoided significant construction delays.
  • Coordination and constant communication among the various actors are key to trouble free project
  implementation. The key stakeholders in this project - namely the implementing agency’s project teams,
  communes in the 14 participant cities and towns, the technical assistance consultants, and the Bank’s own



                                                                                                    Page 20 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MA-Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)



  team – learned that a workable institutional framework that uses mutually agreed appropriate technically and
  financially sustainable solutions can lead to successful project implementation. .




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR provided a concise, detailed overview of the project following OPCS guidelines. The internally
consistent narrative also provided candid and reinforcing evidence to support the ratings and results that
contributed to achieving the project development objective. The theory of change was easy to follow although
it could have highlighted that piloting wastewater treatment technologies was meant to strengthen the
implementing agency with its newly acquired mandate of managing sewerage operations previously built and
managed by municipalities. This rationale was included in Annex 4 of the ICR to highlight project efficiency.
Analysis sufficiently linked findings and outcomes. For example, the piloting of waste water treatment
technologies in receptive cities and towns served the implementing agency with the evidence to convince other
towns of appropriate technology. Together with the annexes, the ICR provided evidence to support the
outcomes reported. Annex 7, for example, provided a narrative on citizen engagement while using country
systems. A number of sound lessons were based on evidence from the project.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 21 of 21
