     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0021525

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P099979                                    IN: CBldg for Urban Development

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                      Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-49970                                  30-Jun-2016                                           22,253,370.81

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Jul-2011                                30-Jun-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             60,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              44,999,999.87                                               0.00

 Actual                                          20,759,256.87                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Victoria Alexeeva          Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   Original Project Development Objective (PDO):
   “To assist the Recipient in improving the systems and skills of select urban local government bodies [ULBs]
   with respect to urban management and urban poverty reduction, as well as to support the Recipient’s
   implementation of various urban policy and institutional reforms” (Financing Agreement dated December 8,
   2011, p.4). According to the project appraisal document (PAD, p.5), the PDO was “that: selected ULBs will
   have improved their systems and skills for urban management and urban poverty reduction”.



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)



   Revised PDO:
   “To assist the Recipient improve planning for urban management in select urban local bodies and in the roll
   out of national urban missions” (Restructuring paper dated June 27, 2016, p. 6).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-Jul-2015
                                                         PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Original components

     1.  Capacity Building for Strengthened Urban Management (appraisal US$37.5 million; actual
     US$14.2 million). This component was to provide demand-driven technical assistance for States and
     urban local government bodies on various urban management topics, including financial management,
     urban planning, improvement in service delivery, and local governance.
     2 . Capacity Building for Effective Urban Poverty Alleviation and Monitoring (appraisal US$18.5
     million; actual US$0). Activities focused both on central- and local-level support and included (1)
     Preparing poverty reduction strategies for States and urban local bodies. (2) Establishing, administering
     and operating a challenge fund for urban poverty alleviation whose objectives were to: (i) assist eligible
     entities with recognizing and implementing innovative practices regarding urban poverty alleviation; and
     (ii) support government departments, institutions, and parastatals in adopting and scaling up “best
     practices” associated with these innovative practices. (3) Creating a network of practitioners from among
     the urban local bodies participating in the Challenge Fund to promote information sharing and capacity
     building in urban poverty alleviation. (4) Developing training materials on urban poverty and service
     delivery. (5) Strengthening the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (MOHUPA) capacity
     for policy analysis and monitoring and evaluation.
     3 . Implementation Support (appraisal US$4 million; actual US$6.5 million). This component was to
     support a national Project Management Unit (PMU) for providing overall technical and managerial
     assistance to the two implementing ministries the Ministry of Urban Development (MOUD) and
     MOHUPA during implementation, in the areas of (i) pipeline development; (ii) quality assurance; (iii)
     procurement and procurement advisory services; (iv) FM; (v) reporting; (vi) M&E; and (vii) project
     administration.



                                                                                                             Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)



  Revised components
  At the time of project restructuring in December 2013, Components 1 and 2 were revised in terms of size
  and scope, due to significant delays in the implementation. By the time the project became effective in
  January 2012, the Government’s urban development program supported by the project was reaching
  completion (March 2012). While the project preparation began in 2006, it was approved only in July 2011.
  Initially there were two projects planned (US$40 million Credit to the MoUD and a parallel US$20 million
  project was being prepared to support MoHUPA); the combination of these two projects led to subsequent
  delays. As several activities (i.e., double entry accounting and city development plans) had
  been undertaken by the government on their own, both components were downsized, and activities
  removed and new added. US$15 million was cancelled across two components.
  Specific changes included,

    • Under Component 1, the provision of training to municipal officials was added along with direct support
    to the MoUD for strengthening the ministry’s capacity for policy analysis, monitoring and evaluation.
    • Under Component 2, the ULB-level activity for preparation of urban poverty alleviation strategies was
    removed, as these had already been completed under the Government’s national poverty mission.The
    activities implemented by MoHUPA were re-oriented towards support for strengthening various
    institutions involved in capacity building of ULBs and implementation of the Ministry’s schemes
    (Restructuring Paper, 2013).

  At the time of the project restructuring in 2015, the following changes were made:

    • Component 1 was revised in response of the Government’s request to support the new national urban
    missions of the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) and Smart Cities by
    (a) providing access to ULBs to consultants to assist them in the planning exercises; (b) funding
    activities which enabled cities to increase own revenues (property tax, advertisement tax, and Value
    Capture Financing [VCF]); and (c) facilitating access to private finances through credit rating reports and
    transaction advisory support. The funding of Component 1 was increased form the revised US$30.5
    million to US$41 million using cancelled funds under Component 2.
    • Component 2 was dropped, as no implementation had commenced under Component 2, and the
    Government had undertaken urban poverty reduction-related measures on its own.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Total project cost: The total project cost at closure was US$20.8 million or 1/3 of the originally committed
  funds of US$60 million. The project scope was significantly reduced during implementation for the slow
  pace of implementation.
  Financing: The project was financed through an IDA technical assistance (TA) credit in the amount of
  US$60 million. US$15 million was cancelled in 2013, and only US$20.8 million was utilized out of the
  revised amount of US$45 million at closure.


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)



   Borrower contribution: None was planned, and none materialized.
   Dates: The project was approved on July 21st, 2011 and effective on January 27th, 2012. The original
   closing date was June 30th, 2016 and the actual closing date was June 30th, 2018, i.e., the project was
   extended for two years.
   There were three project restructurings with significant changes to the design and scope of the project.
   Below are the details:

     • Under the 1st project restructuring in December 2013, the key changes were: (i) partial cancellation of
     US$15 million from the Credit to reflect the likely savings estimated based on variation of exchange
     rates and reduction in the scope of activities under Component 2; (ii) revision of the activities under
     Components 1 and 2; and (iii) corresponding revision of the project's results framework and
     disbursement schedule (see M&E section).
     • Under the 2nd restructuring approved in July 2015, the key changes were (i) revision of the PDO; (ii)
     cancellation of Component 2 (implemented by MoHUPA) and transfer of Component 2 funds to
     Component 1 (implemented by MoUD); (iii) revision of the results framework; (v) addition of the
     description of activities to be undertaken to support national urban programs under Component 1; and
     (vi) extension of the project closing date by two years to June 30, 2018.
     • Under the 3rd restructuring in July 2016, the key changes were: (I) change in institutional
     arrangements to allowing decentralized procurement to address delays in procurement, and (b) change
     in intermediate indicators.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale
  Original PDO
  The Government of India launched its flagship urban development program-the Jawaharlal Nehru National
  Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) in December 2005 to address the country’s urbanization challenges to
  help manage the urban space and alleviate urban poverty. The Mission targeted ULBs that could access
  funds for investment and capacity building in return for a commitment to adopt the obligatory reforms over a
  period of seven years. As of March 2011, the Government of India (GOI) had committed to provide US$
  14.43 billion in federal resources for these investments for qualifying ULBs for a seven- year period. States
  and ULBs were then expected to match the federal grants from own-source funds, the capital markets,
  public private partnerships (PPP), and bilateral and multilateral agencies (PAD, p.4).
  The program was managed by India’s Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) and mandated reforms at the
  state and local level. The main elements of the reform program related to urban management were: (i)
  adoption of modern accrual based double entry system of accounting; (ii) introduction of a system of e-
  governance using IT applications, such as Geographic Information Systems (GIS); (iii) reform of property
  tax; and (iv) levy of reasonable user charges for municipal services. In addition, the JNNURM was designed
  to assist in pro-poor development of Indian ULBs by enabling the provision of basic services to the poor and
  supporting integrated development of slums. It was identified at appraisal that the weak capacity of ULBs

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 18
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)



       was slowing the implementation of both the urban management and poverty reduction reforms in many
       ULBs (PAD, p.4).
       This World Bank project was designed to support the GoI’s flagship program to promote urban reforms. The
       project was prepared under the framework of the World Bank Group’s FY9–12 India Country Assistance
       Strategy (CAS). Building institutions was one of the key priorities of the CAS, as it recognized the
       importance of (a) sound governance and institutional arrangements and (b) capacity of local governments,
       which together promote an enabling environment for the provision of public services. The project objectives
       were also aligned with the GoI’s Eleventh Five-Year Plan (2007–12), which prioritized strengthening
       decentralization and empowering local governments for service delivery and improved governance.
       However, by the time the project was approved, it had few linkages to the JNNURM, the national reform
       program it was intended to support. Due to delays in the project approval and implementation, the
       Government had already undertaken urban poverty-related activities and was nearing the completion of the
       JNNURM.
       Relevance of the original objective is therefore rated modest.

       Revised PDO
       The urban poverty alleviation-related activities were dropped, and the PDO was revised to reflect these
       changes. MoHUPA received a grant of US$19 million from the U.K. Department for International
       Development (DFID) for capacity building that overlapped with the project and it was no longer interested in
       IDA's credit financing. Furthermore, the term "reform" was dropped due to the JNNURM completion , and
       the Government of India announced the Smart Cities Mission and the National Rejuvenation Mission as
       part of a set of four new national urban programs.
       The revised objectives were relevant to the reduced project scope and new priorities of the government
       following completion of the JNNURM. They were consistent with the Bank Group’s India Country
       Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY201-17, which stated that “accelerating urbanization is central to India’s
       growth, development and poverty reduction”. It would contribute to CPS Engagement Area 2, Spatial
       Transformation: strengthened institutional capacity of urban governments and improved urban services.

       Relevance of the revised objective is rated substantial.



       Rating
       Substantial

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     Improving the systems and skills of select ULBs in urban management.

    Rationale


                                                                                                       Page 5 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)



This was a technical assistance (TA) project that included a range of capacity building activities in financial
management, urban planning, service delivery, and governance that were expected to improve systems and
skills of select ULBs in urban management and urban poverty reduction, as well as implementation various
urban policy and institutional reforms. The original theory of change was premised on the notion that the
above capacity building activities and support in implementation would lead to 20 ULBs having implemented
(i) at least two urban management reforms; and (ii) urban poverty reduction strategies.
TA outputs and related results

  • Under the JNNURM, City Development Plans (CDPs) were prepared for 63 cities in 2007–08. These
  were updated for 30 cities as targeted under the project and were to form the basis for further plans.
  However, these Plans were dropped as requirements from the new national programs of AMRUT and
  Smart Cities and thus not utilized by the cities in a manner initially envisaged. The project team
  subsequently clarified that the national government pre-identified water and sanitation as the priority
  investment area under AMRUT and asked cities to provide investment plans largely focusing on this
  priority area.
  • Training was provided to 28,000 of municipal /elected officers on urban governance and
  management (target was 2,500) in 22 ULBs (target was 20). The ICR (page 34) clarifies that this was part
  of individual training plans where 6 institutes were shortlisted by the ministry and State/ULBs sent their
  officials on a needs basis.
  • Studies for reduction in non-revenue water (NRW) supply were completed in six cities originally (the
  target was five) with the objective of assisting the cities in developing a strategy for reduction of NRW. All
  the six cities, developed and implemented performance-based contracts for water supply. The findings of
  these studies also became the model provided by the Ministry for the Request for Proposal (RFP) for
  water supply contracts under AMRUT. Thus, any of the 500 cities that proposed to fund water supply
  contracts under AMRUT were to follow guidelines of this RFP. Based on demand, NRW studies were
  completed for an additional 61 cities under the project.
  • Studies were undertaken for sixteen cities to conduct a comprehensive assessment of the status of
  sanitation services in the cities and to undertake a city-wide sanitation planning exercise which can be
  incorporated in future investment plans. However, due to changing investment priorities of the cities, the
  sanitation plans remained largely unused.
  • The property tax assessment was conducted in six cities with a view to improve property tax collection
  (without increasing rates of tax) through widening of tax base by detecting under-assessed and non-
  assessed properties and included improvements to tax administration by computerization of property tax
  records, introduction of online assessment and collection, and establishing a dispute redress mechanism.
  This exercise resulted in an average of 73 percent increase in the property tax base and an over 300
  percent increase in the property demand. All six cities implemented the reports under the state/central
  funds, albeit this was below the targeted 10 ULBs. In response to the demand, studies were later
  conducted in over 50 cities under the project.
  • The project introduced the double entry accounting system in 8 ULBs, which was below the targeted 15.
  Double entry accounting was a mandatory reform under the JNNURM; however, it was only partially
  implemented in most ULBs.

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)




 There were mixed results in relation to the targets; while some were underachieved, others were significantly
 overachieved. On balance, provided evidence-related findings under the property tax assessment and
 demand-driven studies that led to implementation of the performance-based contracts for water supply, the
 achievement of this objective is rated substantial.


 Rating
 Substantial
PHREVDELTBL
 PHINNERREVISEDTBL
 Objective 1 Revision 1
 Revised Objective
 Improve planning for urban management in select urban local bodies.

 Revised Rationale
 The revised results framework had a narrower focus on the activities related to improving planning for urban
 management. Technical assistance in preparation of city plans, GIS mapping, credit rating exercise, and
 training were to improve planning for urban management in select ULBs.

   • Trainings Needs Assessment was conducted and an ‘Integrated Capacity Building Framework’ was
   prepared by the MoUD. The framework detailed training in four key municipal areas: (a) Finance and
   Revenue, (b) Engineering and Public Health, (c) Town Planning, and (d) Administration. The ministry
   short-listed 6 institutes across states to conduct training in these areas. By the end of the project, about
   28,000 ULB personnel had been trained under the project, as compared to the original target of 2,500.
   The ICR (page 57) reports that on average, around 90% of the participants felt confident to apply the
   knowledge gained with or without further revision, according to the evaluation carried out by the National
   Institute of Urban Affairs (NIUA).

 The following studies were carried out to improve planning for urban management:

   • Property tax studies were undertaken in six cities that, according to the assessment carried out under
   the project, resulted in significant increases in the property tax base and demand, consequently resulting
   in the overall increase in the ULB's own source revenues (ICR, Appendix 1). Property tax contracts were
   implemented across 55 cities in 12 states. Studies were carried out in 88 ULBs for the preparation of
   comprehensive Advertisement Guidelines to improve revenues from advertisement tax. The project also
   provided TA to ULBs in preparing and maintaining a computerized database of all advertisement sites. An
   assessment was conducted on a sample of five cities that showed a median increase of 52 percent in
   advertisement tax revenue on the implementation of study recommendations (ICR, Appendix 2).
   Advertisement tax was implemented across 88 cities in 11 states. Double entry was implemented across 8
   cities in 5 states. Overall, this was a total of 151 ULBs, surpassing the project target of 15 ULBs having
   prepared plans for improved delivery of financial systems-property tax/double entry accounting.



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)



        • Reports were prepared for the following areas: (a) non-revenue water studies were completed for a total
        of 67 cities under the project in response to the demand; (b) city sanitation in 16 cities; (c) city wide
        drainage in one city; and solid waste management in 9 cities. Overall, 93 ULBs had prepared plans for
        service delivery- water and sanitation/drainage; this was significantly higher than the targeted 20 ULBs.

        • For credit ratings, detailed terms of reference were prepared and rolled it out across 300 cities. While all
        300 cities commenced the credit rating activity under the project, eventually the project funded 117
        reports. The remaining were funded by the cities out of their own funds. The cities of Pune, Bhopal, and
        Indore undertook credit rating and issued municipal bonds in 2018.
        • A Livability Index calculation was prepared to rate and benchmark 116 major Indian cities. The cities
        were rated on parameters such as local governance, social infrastructure, education, employment, health,
        safety, security, physical infrastructure such as housing, availability of open spaces, land use, energy,
        availability of water, solid waste management, and pollution. The objective of the index was to help ULBs
        determine their livability status and to improve their score on the index. The Livability Index is planned by
        the ministry as an annual exercise and incentive funds in AMRUT are linked to the improvement of the city
        in the index rankings.
        • Geographic information system (GIS) mapping was cancelled.


    On balance, based on the achievement of targets as well as the utilization and assessment results of the
    studies, the achievement of this objective is rated substantial. While the ICR (page 19) notes that most
    studies were expected to require approvals and additional steps from states/ULBs for further implementation
    that may involve institutional and regulatory reform, it is reasonable to conclude that the project contributed
    substantially to improving planning for urban management in selected ULBs.


    Revised Rating
    Substantial
PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     Improving systems and skills of select ULBs with respect to urban poverty reduction.

    Rationale
    The related activities on the implementation of urban poverty reduction strategies in 20 ULBs were dropped
    and not implemented under the project. The project did not have any direct impact on poverty reduction in
    the urban sector in India.



    Rating
   Negligible
  PHREVDELTBL
    PHINNERREVISEDTBL
    Objective 2 Revision 1

                                                                                                          Page 8 of 18
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)



    Revised Objective
    Assist in the roll out of national urban missions.

    Revised Rationale

        • A total of 39 cities (against the target of 50 cities) under the project prepared the City Strategic Plans and
        all were financed under the Smart Cities Mission. The Smart Cities Mission was a competition-based
        program by the MoUD, in which 100 cities were invited to apply through a detailed proposal, i.e., the City
        Strategic Plans. Eventually, the Government financed almost all of the 100 cities.

        • Technical assistance was provided to cities for developing a Value Capture Financing (VCF) framework
        (including procedural, legal, and institutional aspects), to effectively capture the additional land/property
        value being generated through their public investments under the Smart Cities Mission. At the time of
        preparation of the ICR, the VCF studies in 70 cities had been initiated under the project and the final
        reports were produced by June 2018. Ghaziabad had already implemented impact fees based on the VCF
        study. However, the activity was eventually not funded from the project.
        • The project financed the credit rating of 40 cities. The cities of Pune, Bhopal, and Indore undertook credit
        rating and issued municipal bonds in 2018. The ICR (page 30) adds that the issuance of municipal bonds
        has been limited in India with only 30 municipal bonds issued by 15 ULBs by 2018. This is due to a lack of
        credit assessment and proper fiscal management. Of these 15 ULBs, the project assisted three ULBs.

    Overall, apart from the target of cities with City Strategic Plans, other targets are not available, and it is
    unclear from the project's results framework what the planned key activities were. Overall, the project
    underachieved its target of funding the preparation of 50 Smart Cities Proposals (39 were funded), and the
    Value Capture Activity initiated under the project was not financed due to contract management issues. The
    rating is modest for lack of evidence for the achievement of this objective.


    Revised Rating
    Modest
PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective
     Supporting implementation of various urban policy and institutional reforms.

    Rationale
    A total of 5 national-level studies were funded by the project, as targeted, to contribute to national urban
    policy and programs. A Rapid Baseline Assessment of Urban Management Capacity was carried out that
    included a detailed survey of 30 cities. It was followed up by a Training Needs Assessment that surveyed 15
    cities. The study eventually formed the basis of the ‘Integrated Capacity Building Framework’, which trained
    ULB personnel under the project in municipal finance, planning, and governance. A study on Land-Based
    Fiscal Tools was carried out; it became the basis of the Value Capture Finance Policy which was rolled out
    by the ministry in 2017 under AMRUT and provided ULBs with a framework to leverage land resources to


                                                                                                            Page 9 of 18
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)



             finance infrastructure. A Municipal Cadre Study was done; by 2017, 21 of 29 states had formed municipal
             cadres based on the guidelines and recommendations from this study. A Livability Index to rate and
             benchmark 116 major Indian cities was completed (discussed under Revised Objective 1).
             Overall, as noted by the ICR (page 16), the project provided guidance and inputs towards urban policy and
             institutional reforms, however it did not support their implementation as specified in the objective. Urban
             development falls under the control of state governments in India and central framework documents are only
             guidance documents for the states. The final adoption and implementation of these are to be done at the
             state and local level. The project did not provision for support to assist states and ULBs to roll out the
             outputs.



             Rating
      Modest
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale
The overall efficacy under the original objective is assessed as modest; while the achievement of the first
objective of improving the systems and skills of select ULBs in urban management is rated substantial, the
achievement of the second objective related to urban poverty reduction is negligible, and the third objective of
assisting in the roll out of national urban missions is rated modest for lack of evidence.
The overall efficacy under the revised objective is assessed as modest. The support of rolling out of national
urban missions was not clearly defined and the target for city plans was only partially achieved. So while the
project significantly contributed to improving planning for urban management in select urban local bodies, as
evidenced by utilization of the studies and findings from relevant assessments, there were substantial
shortcomings for two of the objectives.




Overall Efficacy Rating                                             Primary reason
Modest                                                              Low achievement

     5. Efficiency

            No analyses to measure efficiency were carried out to under this TA Loan at both project appraisal and
            closure. The ICR (page 21) explains that economic analysis was not undertaken at appraisal, as while the
            areas were outlined, no studies had been identified, and thus, no clear link could be established between
            costs and expected economic benefits. At closure, the ICR only addressed such issues as efficiency in the
            use of project resources, project execution compared to plans, and the opportunity costs of delays and no
            execution.
            Under the original PDO
            Operational/Administrative Efficiency


                                                                                                            Page 10 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)



There were several factors that contributed to the low efficiency before the project restructuring and revision
of the PDO: (i) delays in the appraisal and effectiveness led to significant changes in the project design and
scope, and cancellation of the whole component as the related activities had been carried out by the
Government; (ii) there were substantial delays in the project implementation for reasons that included
frequent changes of staff that affected the decision making at the MoUD, lack of coordination between two
ministries, and slow procurement processes. Considerable time and costs were expended in the technical
preparation of terms of reference and specifications during implementation. After three years of
implementation before the project restructuring in 2015, only 17 percent of the funds were disbursed.
Efficiency under the original PDO is rated negligible.
Under the revised PDO
Operational/Administrative Efficiency
The project pace of implementation speeded up with decentralized procurement, however, it was not
sufficient to utilize the full amount of the already reduced funding. About half of the revised commitment was
not utilized by closure (out of US$ 24 million that remained unutilized, US$12 million accounts for savings due
to devaluation of the rupee). With the reduced scope, the project was still extended by an additional two
years.

Efficiency under the revised PDO is rated negligible, largely for operational and administrative inefficiencies
but also for lack of other measures of efficiency. The project team could have attempted to estimate cost
effectiveness or carry out a comparative analysis with respect to similar activities in other projects, in
particular taking into account the reported benefits under selected TA activities (e.g., property tax increase,
impact fees, municipal bonds).




Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate
                                                         Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                   Available?
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 18
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)




Under the original PDO, with modest relevance and efficacy, and negligible efficiency, the overall rating is
Highly Unsatisfactory.
Under the revised PDO, with substantial relevance, modest overall efficacy and negligible efficiency, the overall
rating is Unsatisfactory.
Based on a split rating methodology prior and after the project restructuring, when a disbursement share was at
17 percent, the overall project rating is Unsatisfactory.




a.    Outcome Rating
      Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional. The Government commitment to the urban agenda remains strong as evidenced by the
continuation of the national programs until 2021. However, as many studies provided inputs to central level
policy, they may not trickle down to the state level, unless supported by the government.
Financial. The project -financed studies need additional funding requirements to support the implementation,
which, as noted by the ICR, may be difficult to raise by some ULBs.
Technical. Enhanced capacity through the training of central, state and ULB officials conducted under the
project may be affected by routine rotation and reassignment of personnel.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     The project was the first Bank engagement with the Ministry of Urban Development. Consultations were
     held at both national and local levels starting from 2004, and project preparation began in 2006. It took
     almost five years to prepare involving three Bank TTLs and several changes of the main point person at
     the counterpart Ministry. Combining two separate projects with different ministries also contributed to the
     extended preparation time involving coordination efforts and a change in the implementation structure.
     Despite the long preparation period, there were major shortcomings related to project design:

       • Project design was too ambitious, spanning two ministries, which required coordinated implementation
       efforts and significantly diverse areas of support.

       • The project risk assessment and mitigation measures were inadequate. Most of the risks identified in
       the PAD were related to the poor procurement capacity and contract management. The mitigation

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)



    measures of the project to address coordination issues by (a) clearly earmarking funding and activities
    under different components, (b) agreeing on a set of 20 cities for the project, and (c) sharing a common
    PMU proved to be inadequate. Significant emphasis was given to the PMU as a solution to the majority
    of the key issues raised.

    • The procurement capacity of the ministries was underestimated. While the target ULBs were
    determined after consultations and a needs assessment exercise, the procurement decisions on
    contracts were retained at the central ministry, resulting in little ownership at the local level. While a PMU
    was put in place to assist the ministries, the design was not consistent with their internal fiduciary
    systems.

    • The project was only partially ready for implementation at the time of approval. The identification
    process of the ULBs began only after the project approval. Consequently, the first two years
    of implementation were devoted to the start-up of the project activities, including finalization of the
    selection of participating cities by the implementing ministries, signature of memoranda of understanding
    with the cities, and hiring of consultants to provide TA to the ULBs.

    •   The M&E design had significant shortcomings (see Section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  As reported by the ICR (page 28), the project was closely monitored by the Bank team throughout the
  implementation period. The three TTLs and all core team members were based in Delhi for almost the
  entire duration of the project. Implementation status reports (ISRs) were regularly filed (a total of
  13). Starting from 2014, the implementation ratings in the ISRs continued to remain moderately
  unsatisfactory to highly unsatisfactory.
  The initial period of implementation was characterized by a slow pace of disbursement. In addition to
  continuing preparatory activities as discussed above in Quality at Entry, no significant activities were funded
  under the project for almost a year and half when the ministry was planning to roll out new urban programs,
  and the cities were to identify activities to implement.
  The team restructured the project three times to keep the activities relevant and expedite the project
  implementation. After the second restructuring, there was a demand for project activities, however the
  ministry did not have enough capacity to procure a large number of contracts (the aggregate number of
  these studies were estimated at over 300) or monitor their quality and outputs . As procurement and
  consequently disbursement was an issue through the project duration, supervision focused extensively on
  how to expedite it. The third restructuring put in place a decentralized procurement system with a clear
  division of responsibilities at the central and local levels.
  No safeguard policies applied to the project. As reported by the ICR (page 29), the World Bank’s FM and
  procurement specialists provided extensive support and closely monitored the fiduciary compliance of the
  project activities with World Bank policies.

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)



  Overall, the supervision team managed to address certain shortcomings at design, in particular the
  implementation arrangements that included one ministry and streamlining the procurement processes at
  local level. At the same time, the project’s efficiency remained low, with two additional years of
  implementation and significantly reduced scope, the project could not utilize half of its already
  reduced commitment. The ICR reports that a cancellation was discussed in June 2017 but not implemented
  as the Ministry expected to use the funds and savings resulting from devaluation of the rupee for additional
  activities.
  In addition, the M&E design indicators were changed in all three restructurings; however the outputs
  and targets were not aligned with the increase of funding under component 1 and the overall funds available
  under the project. Also, as noted by the ICR (page 26), while extensive with several review committees and
  reports, the M&E arrangement did not adequately address the needs of a project which required dynamic
  monitoring of contracts and quality assessment.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The original results framework had two PDO outcome indicators that were not clearly defined, i.e., ULBs will be
  implementing (i) at least two urban management reforms covering FM, urban planning, service delivery and
  governance, and (ii) urban poverty reduction strategies. Four intermediate level indicators were linked to
  components 1 and 2 each; while some were precise (e.g., number of ULBs able to finalize their accounts under
  accrual accounting within a period of one year of close of FY after initial installation of new accounting system),
  others were less so just referring to the ability of demonstrating improved property tax management or 100
  percent degree of operationalization of diagnostic and reduction strategy (PAD, Annex 3).
  The PMU was responsible for the results monitoring framework on behalf of MOUD and MOHUPA.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project established a three tier monitoring structure: (i) Project Management Unit (PMU) provided day to
  day monitoring and oversight; (ii) a Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the Project director from the
  Ministry met regularly at an interval of 3 to 6 months to review implementation; and (iii) the Project
  Management Board (PMB) provided macro level guidance on the project, meeting once a year. Activities
  financed under the project kept changing from inception until project closure. The results framework was also
  revised each time at both outcome and intermediate level during project restructurings, without significant
  improvements. The two new outcome indicators linked to the revised PDO were output-oriented, i.e., (i)


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)



  number of ULBs with City Strategic Plans financed under the Smart Cities Mission, and (ii) Number of policy
  level studies completed and disseminated (Project Restructuring Paper, 2015, Annex I).

  The ICR reports (page 26) that, while the results indicators measured the outputs that were achieved, there
  was no critical analysis on (i) the quality of each output and utilization/impact, (ii) the reasons for outputs were
  not being produced, and (iii) measures to be taken for delivery of outputs and the effective utilization of these
  outputs. In summary, the monitoring structure and evaluation arrangements were ineffective.



c. M&E Utilization
  As the ICR (page 26) reports, based on feedback received through the M&E reports on training and financial
  management reports, support for the roll out of the new national urban missions was included in the revised
  PDO. However, given the weaknesses in M&E Design, the M&E reports could not be utilized to assess
  progress toward the achievement of the PDO.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
  This TA project was assigned Category C at appraisal and did not trigger any safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The ICR reports (page 28) that the project complied with the designed financial
  management systems and the fund flow mechanism in a satisfactory manner, albeit with delays. The project
  largely submitted accurate and timely Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) for Component 1 as per due dates,
  whereas those of Component 2 were delayed. The annual external audits were largely prepared on time and
  the submissions of external audit reports were mostly satisfactory. There were a few delays on account of
  MoHUPA, when the project had two implementing agencies. The Bank followed up with the Ministry as well as
  the Department of Economic Affairs to resolve these. Audit observations in the external audit did not raise
  serious concerns.
  Procurement. The project followed the procedures of e-Procurement from July 2014 using the Central
  Procurement Portal of National Informatics Centre. Procurement remained a critical issue at preparation and
  throughout the implementation stage. The two central ministries were responsible for the entire procurement.
  They had poor capacity and procurement remained a key bottleneck throughout the project. The ICR (page 27)
  reports that procurement was largely rated unsatisfactory throughout the project. This was mostly on account of


                                                                                                      Page 15 of 18
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)



  the low levels of procurement during majority of the project period. After the third project restructuring in 2016,
  the decentralized procurement helped speed up the implementation, however, as noted by the ICR (page 27), it
  was difficult to decentralize procurement end-to-end at an advanced stage of project implementation. Thus, the
  final verification of outputs and payment remained with the Center. The Center had to coordinate with ULBs
  and verify outputs to pay 312 contracts. The PMU manpower remained the same and processing of outputs
  and payments took significant time. Thus, many ULBs that initially procured services under the World Bank
  project eventually opted out and made final payments out of other funding sources.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
      ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory            ---
Bank Performance                Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory            ---
                                                                                  IEG agrees with the rating of
Quality of M&E                  Modest                  Negligible                the ICR that is negligible (ICR,
                                                                                  p.27).
Quality of ICR                                          Substantial               ---

12. Lessons

IEG selected three lessons from the ICR, with some adaptation of the language:

  • Provision of technical assistance is not a guarantee of interest on the part of local bodies to
  undertake capacity-building exercise. Under this capacity building project in India, given the large deficit in
  basic service delivery, urban local bodies (ULBs) are predominantly concerned with building infrastructure
  and the day to day service delivery. While officials may appreciate the long term positive impact from
  technical assistance, they might not prioritize it. Knowledge exchange workshops could help to
  create incentives of undertaking technical assistance. Outputs should enable ULBs to leverage other
  funds/programs, planning for service delivery which is critical to the city and for which investments have been
  identified, increase in own source revenues and trainings linked to current work programs. Being able to
  clearly identify such incentives has two benefits: (a) increase in the likelihood that TA activities will be in


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)



  areas which are prioritized for on-ground implementation and (b) World Bank-funded activities becoming
  upstream works which leverage further funding or enable ULBs to do so.




  • Funding of ‘wholesale’ TA may bring larger benefits versus ‘retail’ TA. In India, most state-level urban
  projects have TA components and these have been formulated as comprehensive studies, which are
  implemented across all ULBs in the states. The impact is considered deep and sustained. Many of them have
  similar scope to what the project intended to fund, e.g., double entry accounting, geographic information
  system (GIS) mapping, e-governance systems, property tax enhancement, city level service planning, and
  training. Consequently, the contracts are large, implemented across a range of ULBs to enable cross-
  learning and coordination, and anchored in a department that has the mandate and capacity to implement
  those. If working directly with ULBs, TA assistance could provide a ‘package’ of assistance to few ULBs
  versus several dispersed studies to a large number of ULBs.




  • There is a trade-off between complexity of fiduciary requirements and efforts and ownership of
  outputs produced. This TA project attempted to fund a large number of consultancies/studies. The decision
  was made to have centralized procurement as it simplifies fiduciary assessments during preparation and
  monitoring during implementation. Consequently, the centralized implementation structure became a critical
  bottleneck, and the project introduced the decentralized procurement. The ownership of outputs was higher
  when the ULBs (beneficiaries) were made a party to the procurement and also led to an increase in demand
  for TA as ULBs were able to customize contracts based on their needs. The downside of decentralized
  procurement was the increased need for monitoring the contracts. Thus, this trade-off between fiduciary
  requirements and demand and ownership for TA should be carefully assessed and implementation
  arrangements should be designed accordingly. This approach should be combined with increased PMU staff
  for fiduciary monitoring.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is outcome-oriented and written in line with the OPCS/IEG harmonized guidelines. It provides a
thorough and diligent account of the completed TA activities and studies, complemented by an analysis of the
results and outcomes achieved from the project TA outputs (beyond the results framework). The ICR provides
a candid analysis of issues that affected the project implementation and achievement of the objectives.


                                                                                                Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: CBldg for Urban Development (P099979)



Lessons are based on the project experience. At the same time, the report seems to be overcritical in the
efficacy section basing its judgement largely on the expected long-term impacts of the studies rather than
targets that could be possible to achieve within the project timeframe. In addition, a brief description of the
results and outcomes would be better suited in the main text rather than referencing them in Appendices (e.g.,
assessment of training, NRW studies, tax increase). Annex 3 Table on Project Cost by Component erroneously
indicates that the actual total project cost was US$45 million at closure.




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 18
