     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FY17 -Chad Emergency DPO(P163968)



                                                                              Report Number : ICRR0021498

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P163968                                  FY17 -Chad Emergency DPO

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Chad                                     Social Protection & Labor


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D2270                               31-Dec-2017                                       66,311,829.71

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Jun-2017                             31-Dec-2017

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                         65,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                          65,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                      66,311,829.71                                              0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof     Judyth L. Twigg             Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                       Maldonado



2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives

   The program development objective (PDO) of the Emergency Fiscal Stabilization Development Policy
   Operation (EFSDPO) as set out in the Program Document (PD) was to achieve fiscal consolidation and lay the
   foundation for a functioning social safety net and transfer system.




                                                                                               Page 1 of 10
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        FY17 -Chad Emergency DPO(P163968)



   This ICRR will assess efficacy based on two objectives: (i) achievement of fiscal consolidation; and (ii) laying
   the foundation for a functioning social safety net. The “transfer system” constitutes an integral part of the
   safety net and is not assessed separately.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation
   of the series?
  ---


c. Pillars/Policy Areas

   The EFSDPO included two pillars and five policy areas:

   Pillar 1: Fiscal management involving fiscal consolidation through expenditure rationalization included
   measures to: (i) reduce and streamline the central government wage bill; (ii) improve oversight over state-
   owned enterprises (SOEs); (iii) rationalize tax expenditures; and (iv) strengthen public procurement.

   Pillar 2: Social protection, involving moving from a system of short-term crisis management towards
   building a longer-term, more permanent safety net.


d. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates

   Program cost and financing. An Emergency Grant of SDR 47 million (US$65 million equivalent) was
   provided and fully disbursed on becoming effective.

   Borrower contribution. None.

   Dates. The grant was approved on June 29, 2017, and disbursed on becoming effective on July 27,
   2017. It closed on December 31, 2017.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives


  The EFSDPO’s objectives and pillars are consistent with the Country Partnership Framework for FY16-20
  that includes the management of public resources, as well as reducing vulnerability and building human
  capital, as two of its three major themes of engagement in Chad. The former, primary, objective of fiscal
  consolidation supported the government’s emergency fiscal plan and aligned with donor efforts to reverse

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 10
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            FY17 -Chad Emergency DPO(P163968)



       fiscal deterioration. It also followed on earlier fiscal consolidation support grants provided in 2015 and 2016
       (P155480 and P162548).



       Rating
       High

   b. Relevance of Design


       The choice of instrument for the operation was appropriate. It responded to the need for quick-disbursing
       budget support to address pressing financial needs in the aftermath of external shocks, including falling oil
       prices, security threats, and an ensuing humanitarian crisis, as well as the need to lay the foundations for a
       functioning safety net. The operation built on previous interventions focused on maintaining fiscal and
       macroeconomic stability, and functioned as a bridge to an upcoming medium-term structural DPO program,
       currently under preparation. It also aligned with other donor-generated programs (International Monetary
       Fund (IMF), European Union) that supported fiscal consolidation, especially the IMF’s three-year Extended
       Credit Facility (ECF) introduced in 2017. The ECF helps ensure a broadly adequate macroeconomic
       framework for the operation and provides the necessary stability for effective decision-making at the political
       level.

       The results framework was set out in the policy and results matrix, and it reflected the emergency nature of
       the operation. The PDO were primarily focused on short-term remedies to reduce pressures on fiscal
       balance. Four of five prior actions addressed fiscal management issues; the fifth one dealt with the safety
       net, but primarily as a means of laying the institutional foundations for its longer-term development. Even the
       fiscal remedies were modest; while all prior actions were met, only one of the targeted results was expected
       to have an immediate effect on fiscal consolidation, while the others set the stage for longer-term
       improvements.



       Rating
       Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To achieve fiscal consolidation


                                                                                                          Page 3 of 10
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    FY17 -Chad Emergency DPO(P163968)




Rationale

The objective was to be achieved by supporting reforms aimed at rationalizing the public wage bill and tax
expenditures; improving SOE oversight; and enabling effective public procurement.

Rationalizing the public wage bill

Based on an audit to strengthen the effectiveness of the public payroll system, the government set a target
to reduce allowances for civil servants by 50 percent effective November 2016 (both prior actions for
EFSDPO). These efforts were expected to reduce the public wage bill by 3 percent by mid-2017 as
compared with the level in mid-2016. Instead, the wage bill rose by one percent, as the government
abandoned the plan due to pressures from affected stakeholders.

Improving SOE oversight

To identify weaknesses and improve efficiency in SOE management, the government commissioned an
audit of the financial performance of SOEs to reduce transfers and subsidies to SOEs (prior action for
EFSDPO). To facilitate the audit, the government was to complete an initial inventory of 20 SOEs, and
issued a decree to ensure the availability of SOE financial statements for the years 2014-2016 (prior actions
for EFSDPO).

The process is still under way. Under the operation, only 15 SOEs submitted financial statements and a
sub-set of 10 were audited, all of them benefiting from government subsidies. Significant constraints on
oversight at the government level – limited human, financial, and physical resources – contributed to
delays. Still, by late 2018, almost a year after the operation closed, 29 SOEs had been inventoried.

Tax expenditures: the provision of new tax exemptions to SOEs was temporarily frozen as the process to
identify means to improve the tax expenditure and subsidy system for SOEs was going on (prior action for
EFSDPO).

Strengthening public procurement

The government established a procurement regulatory agency by appointing the president and members of
a national council of regulation, as well as assigning it a regular budget line in the 2017 budget law (prior
actions for EFSDPO). Previously, the government had already revised the procurement code, including
provisions for contract implementation. With a new code and a new regulatory agency in place, the value of
single source procurement contracts as a share of the value of total contracts was expected to decline from
37 percent to 30 percent. Instead, their share rose to 42 percent, influenced by an overall decline in
procurement through public tenders (ICR, page 20) that included a slower decline in single-source contracts.

In summary, measures to reduce the public wage bill were not successful, as the government yielded to
political pressures opposing wage adjustments. The process of improving SOE oversight is still underway,


                                                                                                  Page 4 of 10
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               FY17 -Chad Emergency DPO(P163968)



    and neither tax expenditures nor subsidies have so far been addressed. Without further analysis of the
    procurement portfolio, it is difficult to assess achievements in public procurement.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     To lay the foundation for a functioning social safety net

    Rationale

    The objective was to be achieved by moving from the existing emergency approach to addressing the needs
    of poor and vulnerable households, towards the establishment of a permanent safety net supporting
    resilience and strengthening livelihoods among the poor.

    Building on a safety nets unit established in 2016, the government set up a steering committee for its safety
    net program; recruited key staff; and introduced a system combining geographic and household targeting to
    select beneficiaries. By end project, a geographical area had been selected and a standard questionnaire
    applied to area households, drawing up an initial registry of 17,000 households (with 4,500 households
    identified as beneficiary households) (prior actions for EFSDPO).

    As a result, the 4,500 eligible households are now receiving cash benefits on a regular basis. The
    government has asked all donors supporting safety net programs to use the government’s questionnaire for
    targeting, and to include their findings into building up the registry.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




   5. Outcome


   Relevance of objectives is related high: objectives were in line with the CPF, and reflected the country situation
   and government policy. Relevance of design is rated modest: it addressed relevant issues, but with only partial

                                                                                                        Page 5 of 10
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        FY17 -Chad Emergency DPO(P163968)



focus on the primary objective of finding remedies to short-term financing needs. Efficacy for the first objective
is rated modest, as efforts at fiscal consolidation were only partly successful. Efficacy for the second objective
is rated substantial, as the project significantly advanced in key areas for building the safety net. The PD (pp.
17-18) made an effective case for the primacy of the first objective, referring to it as the "main objective" and to
the safety net objective as a "secondary objective." Giving more weight to the first objective, overall efficacy is
rated moderately unsatisfactory.


a.     Outcome Rating
       Moderately Unsatisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating


The operation was introduced into a volatile economic and political environment. While the government
managed to move the policy agenda forward, pressing financial needs, security risks, and a threatening
humanitarian crisis continue to pose risks that were rated high already at appraisal.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
       High

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

     The operation was timely; an emergency response in the form of external budget support was appropriate
     in a situation of economic and social crisis. To address pressing fiscal needs, the operation focused on
     fiscal stabilization as its primary objective, albeit with only one of four prior actions expected to have an
     immediate effect on fiscal consolidation; the others set the stage for longer-term
     improvements. Introducing the safety net objective as a secondary aim directly recognized the longer-term
     nature of building an adequate transfer system, and in the short term focused on two fundamental building
     blocks: targeting and registry. At the same time, the urgency of the operation – it was put into place over a
     period of some four months – may not have sufficiently recognized political constraints to some of the
     policy changes pursued in trying to control fiscal spending.



     Quality-at-Entry Rating
     Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                       Page 6 of 10
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FY17 -Chad Emergency DPO(P163968)



  While there was no formal supervision of the operation – one is not required for a single-tranche operation
  of this type – some monitoring did occur to the extent that actions under the operation coincided with
  activities during preparation of the new DPO series, and in supervision of other ongoing projects with a
  similar focus. According to the ICR (page 25), this was sufficient to allow the Bank team to react to
  concerns when they arose, even in the absence of sufficient information flows from the
  government.. However, given the modest results in meeting the operation's primary
  objective, "engagement" was not sufficient.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance

  While the government appears to have been committed to the objectives being pursued under the
  operation, progress was nevertheless modest. In part this reflected a challenging political and economic
  environment (national security, civil service strikes, fluctuating export prices) and a lingering
  humanitarian crisis, all of which diverted government attention from the task at hand. It was also to an
  important extent influenced by institutional and capacity limitations; while prior actions were met,
  achievement of intended results faltered.



  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  Not assessed.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 10
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FY17 -Chad Emergency DPO(P163968)



a. M&E Design

  A policy and results matrix included short-term indicators of performance and targets to measure change,
  reflecting the short-term nature of the operation. Information flows were coordinated by a Negotiations
  Committee in the Ministry of Finance and Budget (MFB) which had participated in preparing the operation
  and monitored progress against program objectives. The Committee had a solid track record in collaborating
  with the Bank in monitoring similar operations. Participating agencies provided information and
  documentation of progress on their respective programs to the Committee. The safety net component was
  overseen by a national safety net unit, which already had experience in piloting cash transfers



b. M&E Implementation

  In the absence of formal implementation arrangements by the Bank, monitoring was performed by Bank
  teams when EFSPDO activities coincided with other Bank operations, and in collaboration with other
  donors. Rigorous monitoring was hampered by the modest performance of the MFB team and the
  uncertain flow of information between participating agencies and the MFB (ICR, page 25).



c. M&E Utilization

  The information collected on the operation was used to design the new, upcoming programmatic series. In
  particular, experience with the failed reduction in the wage bill and slow progress on acquiring SOE financial
  statements led to adjustments in the targets being set for the new series.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects

  Not raised in the ICR.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
Not raised in the ICR.


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 10
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       FY17 -Chad Emergency DPO(P163968)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
    ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                              Moderately              Moderately
Outcome                                                                            ---
                              Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
Risk to Development
                              High                    High                         ---
Outcome
                                                                                   With a MU rating for Outcome,
                                                                                   and MS for quality at entry
                              Moderately              Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                   and MU for quality of
                              Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   supervision, Bank
                                                                                   performance is rated MU
                              Moderately              Moderately
Borrower Performance                                                               ---
                              Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                  ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons


An emergency DPO may be the most appropriate instrument to respond to a government’s request for
immediate relief to a massive fiscal crisis. Teams need to determine the urgency of addressing a fiscal crisis
when determining the nature of the intervention. EFSDPO was implemented when the government had to
address an economic crisis, a large financing gap, growing security concerns, and with limited institutional
capacity to carry out substantial reforms. An emergency DPO was the appropriate choice.




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 10
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       FY17 -Chad Emergency DPO(P163968)



It is useful to have ongoing longer-term operations that complement an emergency response. When
deciding on the nature of the intervention, it should be seen in the broader context of ongoing support. A stand-
alone, single-tranche operation such as the EFSPDO, by itself, would be at risk of failing (i.e., not meeting the
PDOs) if its PDOs were not aligned with other Bank operations that have longer implementation periods.

Supplementary and dedicated technical assistance can help governments stay focused on achieving an
emergency DPO. Teams should assess the utility of flexible technical assistance and prepare for it in
designing an emergency operation. A stand-alone single tranche DPO does not include budgeted supervision.
Moreover, government capacity is often weak, especially during a crisis. In this situation, technical assistance
to an implementing agency can be critical to achieving the PDOs. In EFSPDO, there was no supervision
required as it was stand-alone, but technical assistance to the government to help rationalize expenditure could
have helped in achieving targets.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR provided an adequate evaluation of the operation, including a sufficient description of its background
and rationale to permit results to be assessed and ratings to be assigned. The ICR was consistent with the
guidelines, although the main text of 28 pages by far exceeded the prescribed length of 15 pages.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 10
