     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Social Inclusion TAL (P131029)



                                                                               Report Number : ICRR0021494

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P131029                                   PE Social Inclusion TAL

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Peru                                      Social Protection & Labor


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82220                               31-Jan-2017                                          9,193,938.94

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Dec-2012                              31-Mar-2018

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           10,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                             9,193,938.94                                             0.00

 Actual                                         9,193,938.94                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl              Judyth L. Twigg            Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                        Maldonado



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. vii) and the Financing Agreement of January 15, 2013
   (p. 5), the objective of the project was “to strengthen the Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion’s
   (MIDIS) systems and capacity to improve the performance of MIDIS’s programs and to monitor social
   inclusion policy.” The main MIDIS programs impacted by the project included the Juntos conditional cash
   transfer program, the Qali Warma school feeding program, the Pension 65 social pension program, the Cuna



                                                                                                Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Social Inclusion TAL (P131029)



   Más early childhood development program, and FONCODES, a small-scale public investment program
   aimed at increasing employment and improving access to social services.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                          PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   The project included five components:

   Component 1: Quality improvement of MIDIS’s programs (appraisal estimate US$3.53 million,
   actual US$3.53 million): This component was to finance the design and piloting of activities aimed at
   improving the quality control of MIDIS social assistance programs, by: (i) developing user participation and
   accountability mechanisms for MIDIS programs; ii) designing and piloting local coordination methodologies
   and tools for MIDIS programs; (iii) improving the Household Targeting System’s (SISFOH) internal and
   external communication and coordination mechanisms; and (iv) strengthening administrative processes of
   MIDIS programs.

   Component 2: Improving knowledge management, information, and communication (appraisal
   estimate US$3.73 million, actual US$3.73 million): This component was to finance the provision of
   support to strengthen MIDIS information systems to collect, process, and produce data to enhance
   decision-making processes, by: (i) designing an integrated multi-sectoral information platform for social
   policy decision making, including the development of data models; (ii) strengthening the management
   information systems of the Qali Warma (school feeding) and Pension 65 (social pension) programs; and
   (iii) improving MIDIS administrative and communication systems.

   Component 3: Strengthening of MIDIS’s capacity on results orientation, monitoring, and evaluation
   (appraisal estimate US$3.49 million, actual US$3.49 million): This component was to finance the
   development and implementation of a social policy monitoring and evaluation system by developing tools
   to collect data and analyze indicators of social policies, including MIDIS programs, through: (a) the
   development of a monitoring dashboard for chronic infant malnutrition and the mechanisms to analyze and
   use the information produced by said dashboard; (b) the creation of an elderly observatory to support the
   development of an integrated strategy for the elderly; (c) the systematization of pilot experiences of
   application of social policy; and (d) the carrying out of evaluations of national social policy and programs.

   Component 4: Strengthening of human resource management and capacity (appraisal estimate
   US$2.29 million, actual US$2.29 million): This component was to finance the provision of support to
   design and implement a continuous capacity building and training program for public officials implementing


                                                                                                              Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Social Inclusion TAL (P131029)



   social policy, by: (i) designing and carrying out capacity-building activities for public officials involved in
   policy planning, budgeting, and implementation of social inclusion programs; (ii) creating a guidance and
   counseling program for local Juntos promoters; and (iii) developing a capacity-building and certification
   program for qualified local and regional coaching professionals to create a network of MIDIS-certified local
   professionals.

   Component 5: Support to project administration (appraisal estimate US$1.24 million, actual
   US$1.24 million): This component was to finance activities related to management and implementation of
   the project, including the strengthening of the Sectoral Loans Cooperation Unit (UCPS, the project
   implementation unit) team to be able to facilitate, coordinate, and monitor implementation.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

   Project Cost: The project's estimated and actual cost was US$14.3 million.

   Financing: The project was to be financed by a US$10 million loan, of which US$9.19 million was
   disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$4.29 million, which did not materialize.
   However, according to the Bank team (February 9, 2019), since the project partially funded the
   implementation of key systems and programs for the entire operation of MIDIS, the amount of resources
   allocated by the government to the Ministry could be considered as counterpart funding.

   Dates: The project was restructured twice:
   • On December 13, 2016 the project was restructured to extend the closing date from January 31, 2017
   to June 30, 2017 to ensure the sustainability of implementation of activities with the remaining loan
   amount resources, and to confirm that those activities in process were aligned with the priorities
   established by a new government administration following general elections earlier in 2016.
   • On June 15, 2017 the project was restructured to extend the closing date from June 30, 2017 to March
   31, 2018 to allow for the use of remaining resources for activities that would support MIDIS in responding
   to the flooding emergency caused by El Niño Costero, and to ensure the completion of some pending
   project activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale




                                                                                                      Page 3 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            PE Social Inclusion TAL (P131029)



       According to the PAD (p. 2), despite Peru’s strong recent economic performance and significant decline in
       poverty rates, disparities persisted across the country. In 2011, 56 percent of the population in rural areas
       lived below the poverty line. The poverty rate was 32 percent among indigenous people and 20 percent
       among the non-indigenous population. In order to address these inequalities, the government
       implemented numerous social assistance policies and programs under the 2007/2008 "Include for Growth"
       strategy, including the conditional cash transfer program Juntos and the Social Fund of Cooperation for
       Social Development (FONCEDES). However, these activities were implemented in a fragmented
       manner, producing mixed impact on the target population. In order to address these challenges, the
       government established a new Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion (MIDIS) in 2011. The aim of
       the new ministry was to implement and consolidate programs dispersed in different sectors and ensure a
       unitary institutional framework to improve coordination and align program objectives with social policy
       priorities.

       The project's objectives were fundamentally to support this new Ministry and its aim of reducing
       fragmentation. The objectives were in line with the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (2012-2016) at
       appraisal, which contained two strategic goals: to increase access and quality of social services for the
       poor, and to connect the poor to services and markets. The objectives of the project were also in line with
       the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework (2017-2021), which focuses under pillar two on
       “services for citizens across the territory."



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To improve the performance of MIDIS’s programs

    Rationale

    The project’s theory of change connected improving SISFOH’s performance, strengthening transparency
    and accountability practices as part of program management, strengthening MIDIS communication
    management, improving results-oriented human resource management practices, strengthening MIDIS
    evaluation policies and practices, and integrating the MIDIS information platform to monitor policy outcomes,
    with improving MIDIS capacity and systems to administer programs and to coordinate, monitor, and
    evaluate social inclusion policies.

    Outputs


                                                                                                         Page 4 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            PE Social Inclusion TAL (P131029)



    • Technical assistance was provided on development of organizational regulations and standards for MIDIS,
    including consolidation of budgets for each of the programs MIDIS manages and associated organizational
    strengthening and streamlining. Capacity development was supported at MIDIS liaison offices operating
    in all 26 regions.
    • MIDIS norms to ensure appropriate human resource management processes were developed. MIDIS
    introduced three results-oriented human resource management practices, achieving the target. These
    three practices included: 1) approving a methodology to be used for standardization; 2) analysis of times and
    frequencies to determine staffing by unit; 3) elaboration of key documents, including a manual of job profiles,
    and assessment and tables of positions of the ministry. A Performance Incentive Fund was established, and
    a budgetary agreement with the Ministry of Finance was put in place.
    • A national communications strategy for MIDIS was put in place that included different approaches for
    different population groups, achieving the target.
    • Three operation rules were designed to coordinate interventions to reduce chronic malnutrition, surpassing
    the target of two operation rules. A national strategy to prevent anemia was developed.

    Outcomes
    • MIDIS has certified the quality of its processes through the International Organization of Standardization
    (ISO) 9001:2008 international standard on quality management. This certification was awarded to several
    programs, including Pension 65, Qali Warma, Juntos, Cuna Más, and FONCODES. The information
    systems that support MIDIS business processes were certified with the ISO 27001:2014 award.
    • Between March 2013 and May 2018, the coverage of Cuna Más increased from 61,430 to 165,449
    children. The coverage of Juntos increased from 650,252 to 706,646 households. The coverage of
    FONCODES increased from 123,921 to 512,328 users. The coverage of Pension 65 increased from
    253,661 to 541,240 elders. The coverage of Qali Warma increased from 2,657,485 to 3,720,090 children. In
    addition, two new interventions were added: Contigo (targeted disability allowance) reaching
    14,623 beneficiaries, and the Action Plans for Social Inclusion providing services to 268,924 beneficiaries in
    remote and hard-to-reach areas. While these increases in coverage cannot be solely attributed to project
    implementation, the project supported critical aspects to ensure more efficient management of MIDIS and its
    systems, which plausibly contributed to these increases.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     To monitor social inclusion policy

    Rationale

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 13
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE Social Inclusion TAL (P131029)




Outputs
• In 2016, the National Registry of Social Programs was launched with the aim to establish a centralized
repository of information on public interventions. The registry includes information such as objectives of each
program, the sectors responsible for implementation, targeting criteria, territorial scope, and coverage. A
National Social Registry was also set up to compile information on the beneficiary populations of programs
systematized under the Registry of Social Programs.
• SISFOH, the national household targeting system, was moved to MIDIS. SISFOH improved its data
collection systems by adapting processes for the rapid verification of basic household data through database
cross-checks and household visits conducted by Local Registration Units (ULEs). The project provided
ULEs with training and technical assistance to improve rapid verification processes. 100% of ULEs were
interconnected and their staff were trained on standardized practices, achieving the target. In addition, the
project supported the development of the Law of the National Focalization System (SINAFO), a national
targeting system designed to apply SISFOH to other sectors, allowing for cross-check with databases
managed by different sectors in addition to establishing beneficiary entry and exit criteria for each targeted
program.
• The project contributed to the launch of InfoMIDIS, a digital platform that includes data on geographic
coverage of programs and the main outcome indicators of MIDIS policy, supporting more efficient
implementation of social programs.
• The project provided technical assistance to the development of REDinforma, a dashboard-based
repository where multi-sectoral databases are centralized, stored, and updated to provide real-time reports
on beneficiaries of government programs.
• The project supported the development of My Region and MIDIStrito, information platforms for monitoring
regional and district-level social program indicators.
• Support was provided for establishing grievance redress mechanisms for MIDIS programs, through which
program beneficiaries can raise concerns or complaints about the implementation of programs, and/or issues
with the socio-economic categorization they had received by the targeting system.
• Seven MIDI’s programs and policies were evaluated, surpassing the target of six programs or policies. The
ICR neither reports on the programs evaluated nor on the actions taken in response to these evaluations.
• MIDIS monitored infant malnutrition and development plan indicators at the regional level for 26 regions,
surpassing the target of 10 regions.
• MIDIS implemented an integrated information system for four programs, achieving the target of four
programs.
• Three key monitoring and evaluation, and coordination mechanisms were established, achieving the
target.

Outcomes
• MIDIS started to operate in a de-concentrated way across the country’s territory, achieving the target.
This outcome indicator measured the number of functional liaison offices that MIDIS established at the
regional level to improve coordination between different stakeholders. Successive steps were achieved in
consecutive years. In year one, MIDIS premises (or decentralized ministerial offices) were operating in each
territory and were using planning tools designed to facilitate territorial coordination. In year two, MIDIS


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 13
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  PE Social Inclusion TAL (P131029)



             premises were using a common information system. In years three and four, MIDIS premises were using
             evaluation and monitoring tools designed to facilitate territorial coordination.



             Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

The achievement of both objectives was Substantial. With project support, formerly separate social programs
were integrated under the MIDIS umbrella, and there is substantial evidence of improved coverage, and
monitoring.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

     5. Efficiency


            Economic Efficiency

            Neither the PAD nor the ICR included a traditional economic analysis but instead focused on the efficiency
            gains the project was trying to achieve. The PAD (p. 17) noted the principles of cost-effectiveness on which
            the project’s design was based: (i) the emphasis on activities that maximize benefits for users, as measured
            by the development of accountability mechanisms in social programs; (ii) the focus on implementation of cost-
            effective social inclusion reforms (such as support for the implementation of a decentralized school feeding
            program and alternative modalities for payment of social pension transfers); (iii) support for reforms that allow
            for integration along several dimensions including activities in the field, information systems, communications,
            and monitoring and evaluation, thereby gaining from economies of scale; (iv) support for improvements in
            targeting systems that allow for reduced errors of inclusion; (v) strengthening of monitoring and evaluation
            systems to provide practical recommendations to programs on how to become more cost-effective; and (vi)
            support for local capacity development at low cost and focus on results to ensure that training leads to
            effective interventions.

            The ICR (p. 14) stated that a traditional efficiency calculation was not applicable, as this was a technical
            assistance project. Instead, the ICR mainly focused on operational/administrative efficiency.

            Operational Efficiency

                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE Social Inclusion TAL (P131029)




According to the ICR (p. 15), the project was based on the previous DPL, resulting in a short preparation
phase of only ten months between concept state and effectiveness. The ICR (p. 18) stressed that, even
though the project’s financial contribution was marginal, the project was able to leverage this relatively small
investment into significant outcomes. While the project was initially planned as technical assistance to
support the DPL, it eventually "had a very independent implementation track" (ICR, p. 6), outliving the DPL by
more than four years. Financial management and procurement were efficient (Section 10b).

There were minor shortcomings in implementation efficiency. There were minor start-up delays due to the
project's novelty and some organizational rearrangements for the implementation unit, resulting in the first
extension of the closing date. In addition, MIDIS experienced five ministerial changes (including two changes
in the executive branch) over the project's lifetime, realigning priorities that required shifts in technical teams.

Overall, efficiency is rated Substantial.



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                    Rate
                                                           Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                    Available?
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


Relevance of the project's objectives is rated High, given alignment with sector conditions and the Bank’s most
recent Country Partnership Framework. Efficacy and Efficiency were rated Substantial. The overall outcome
rating is therefore Satisfactory, indicative of only minor shortcomings in the project's preparation and
implementation.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Satisfactory

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Social Inclusion TAL (P131029)




7. Risk to Development Outcome


The project built institutional capacity by fostering cooperation between the Ministry of Economy and
Finance and MIDIS. It included activities that strengthened the sector’s institutional processes linked with
improvements in service delivery to citizens. Technical assistance provided under the project supported
management improvements that are likely to be sustained, strengthening overall MIDIS stewardship of the
sector. In addition, MIDIS has developed a network of social workers who can liaise between the different
programs to allow for more coherent and coordinated implementation.

However, according to the ICR (p. 26), the sustainability of the project’s outcomes faces several risks. First,
MIDIS is a relatively new and "volatile" institution. It has recently undergone several administrative changes
resulting in new policy priorities and changes in previously approved policies. Along these lines, the ICR
specifically cited the 2017 Include to Growth Strategy, whose proposed revision to serve specific vulnerable
populations was ultimately not approved. Second, MIDIS might face challenges in implementing its policies on
the district and regional levels; the MIDIS liaison offices will be particularly important in this regard.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  According to the ICR (p. 20), the project benefited from the Bank’s extensive experience in cooperating
  with the government to reduce poverty and inequality in Peru. The ICR (p. 21) stated that the project’s
  flexible design was beneficial in allowing the Bank to respond to changes in sector priorities. For example,
  when the Incentive Performance Fund was established during implementation, the project was able to use
  it as the main instrument to monitor the early childhood development program. The project’s Results
  Framework was adequate (see Section 9a). The ICR (p. 25) also stated that the Bank team had sound
  technical expertise and identified relevant risks at the political, institutional, and operational levels during
  project preparation. The risk of weak capacity posed by the establishment of a new ministry and the
  governance risk of governance due to a changing political environment were both rated as
  Substantial. The Bank conducted assessments to identify potential implementation bottlenecks related to
  these risks and identify appropriate mitigation measures. The capacity of UCPS was strengthened to
  oversee project implementation and prepare procurement and financial reports. According to the ICR (p.
  25), the signing of an initial agreement between MIDIS and UCPS was a key step in defining
  responsibilities and improving coordination between the two entities.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Social Inclusion TAL (P131029)



b. Quality of supervision

  According to the ICR (p. 25), the Bank conducted regular supervision missions that allowed the
  identification of implementation bottlenecks in advance and strengthened collaboration with the
  government's technical and fiduciary teams. The Bank provided timely technical assistance to units within
  MIDIS and provided appropriate and timely feedback and support to the UCPS in regards to fiduciary and
  administrative management. The Bank was able to mobilize additional financing through a Trust Fund to
  support an emergency response to the natural disaster in January 2017. Coordination with other Bank-
  financed projects was strong, particularly with the Results for Nutrition SWAP (P117310), which was
  managed by the same implementation unit and included support for the Juntos conditional cash transfer
  program. Safeguards compliance was satisfactory.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The M&E design and arrangements were well embedded institutionally. MIDIS was to collect, analyze, and
  present data and reports as part of annual reviews throughout the implementation period. The objectives of the
  project were clearly specified, and the theory of change linking key activities to intended outcomes was
  reflected in the Results Framework. However, the selected indicators were rather generic and did not measure
  all aspects of the PDO statement well. In addition, none of the outcome or intermediate outcome indicators
  included in the Results Framework had a baseline. According to the ICR (p. 22), more specific definitions of
  indicators had to be added during project implementation in order to connect the project’s indicators more
  clearly with data collected by MIDIS systems. Some data, such as the indicator on monitoring infant malnutrition
  in each region, ended up being collected by the Incentive Performance Fund.



b. M&E Implementation

  According to the ICR (p. 22), the General Directorate of Monitoring and Evaluation (DGSE) conducted several
  impact evaluations of MIDIS programs, including Juntos and Pension 65. According to the Bank team
  (February 9, 2019), DGSE monitored all indicators included in the Results Framework on a regular basis. In
  addition, a process evaluation for Qali Warma and a methodological note for its impact evaluation were
  formalized. MIDIS has published an online repository including all the evaluations conducted over the project


                                                                                                 Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Social Inclusion TAL (P131029)



  period. MIDIS has also developed a virtual platform that brings all the different programs' monitoring tools
  together and publishes on a monthly basis updates on coverage indicators down to the district level, as well
  as yearly data on financing of investment projects implemented by the Economic Inclusion Fund for the Rural
  Areas (FONIE). According to the Bank team (February 9, 2019), these data sets are of good quality and
  reliable.



c. M&E Utilization

  According to the ICR (p. 23), the project's M&E systems were used to inform progress toward achievement
  of the objectives. The MIDIS data repository aims to support the exchange of knowledge and information
  among all public institutions in a planned, timely, and precise manner.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was classified as environmental assessment category C and triggered the Bank’s safeguard
  policy OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous People), as the project supported activities by MIDIS that were to be
  implemented in areas with a significant presence of indigenous people. According to the ICR (p. 24), during
  project preparation MIDIS and the Bank conducted a social assessment to ensure that implementation of
  project activities was adapted to indigenous needs. MIDIS also developed an indigenous people’s
  strategy that was discussed with indigenous people’s organizations and technical experts. The strategy
  identified 12 issues through the conducting of a social diagnostic and 18 recommendations, including
  capacity building for social workers and facilitators at the local level on sensitivity issues for the indigenous
  population. The ICR (p. 24) stated that MIDIS implemented these actions in a timely manner.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial Management

  The ICR (p. 24) stated that the project’s financial management performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory
  throughout project implementation. During project preparation, the project’s financial management risk was
  rated Moderate. Financial management responsibilities were split between MIDIS and the Ministry of Economy

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Social Inclusion TAL (P131029)



  and Finance's Technical and Financial Coordination and Cooperation Unit (UCCTF). According to the ICR (p.
  24), the auditor’s opinion was unqualified for all the reports issued during implementation, and all audit reports
  were submitted on time. Budget preparation was clearly defined, financial reports were used to monitor
  progress, and approval and authorization controls were well documented. The project faced some minor
  financial management challenges, such as discrepancies in unaudited interim financial reports, delays in
  documentation of expenditures during 2016 and the first half of 2017, and a low level of budget execution
  through part of 2016 because of weak coordination between MIDIS and UCCTF; these issues were promptly
  addressed.

  Procurement

  UCCTF was responsible for procurement. According to the ICR (p. 24), procurement was rated Satisfactory in
  the Bank’s latest Implementation Status and Results Report. UCCTF conducted three ex-post procurement
  reviews (June 2015, March 2016, and July 2017). The recommendations of these reviews, in addition to
  findings from supervision missions, were shared with the project to improve procurement processes and
  were included in the action plans of ex-post reports.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                        IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                       Satisfactory              Satisfactory               ---
Bank Performance              Satisfactory              Satisfactory               ---
Quality of M&E                Substantial               Substantial                ---
Quality of ICR                                          Substantial                ---

12. Lessons


The ICR (p. 27-29) provided useful lessons learned, adapted here by IEG:




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 13
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        PE Social Inclusion TAL (P131029)



  • When designing a technical assistance operation, it is useful when the objective is well defined but
  the instrument can be used in a flexible manner. In this project, the objectives of the project were quite
  broad and well aligned with the needs of the sector and the new ministry, leaving room for the project to
  be flexible in adding, testing, and revising innovative activities throughout implementation when needed. This
  approach appreciated by the government, which was faced with less flexibility in use of its own resources.
  • Combining different innovative financing methods allows for a long-term engagement to achieve
  the desired development outcomes. This project was part of a long-term partnership between the
  government and the Bank and was to provide the financial resources to initiate and sustain policy reforms
  that were triggered by the Social Inclusion Development Policy Loan. These two different instruments in
  combination facilitated addressing the technical and policy needs of the sector over two decades.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR provided a solid overview of project preparation and implementation. It was internally consistent. It
highlighted effectively the synergies between this project and the development policy operation the project was
initially intended to support. However, the ICR's efficacy section lacked clear structure in regards to the results
chain, without a clear sense of the linkages between outputs and outcomes specific to each of the project's
objectives.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 13
