     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhancing Education Development Project (P131331)



                                                                               Report Number : ICRR0021523

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P131331                                   Enhancing Education Development Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Maldives                                  Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H8410                                 30-Jun-2018                                          9,159,128.58

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Apr-2013                               30-Jun-2018

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          10,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             9,569,403.03                                              0.00

 Actual                                         9,159,128.58                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Katharina Ferl             Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p.ii) and the Financing Agreement of June 17, 2013 (p.
   4), the objective of the project was “to enhance and strengthen strategic dimensions of education access and
   quality.”




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhancing Education Development Project (P131331)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                         PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   The project included three components:

   Component one: National Level Education Development (appraisal estimate US$8.55 million, actual
   US$7.81 million): This component was to promote strategic initiatives at the country level to strengthen
   and develop the education system, including building technical capacity within the Ministry of Education
   (MoE), especially the Education Supervision and Quality Improvement Division (ESQID), to undertake
   rigorous, state-of-the-art national assessments and to deliver short courses. Also, this component was to
   support the National Institute of Education (NIE) to conduct advanced certificate or diploma level courses
   in national assessments of learning outcomes. The component was also to build the capacity of selected
   policy makers and education specialists within the MoE, especially in the ESQID, the Policy Planning and
   Research Section (PPRS), and the NIE, to use the results and findings from national assessments for
   strategic policy and management decisions. Furthermore, this component was to finance the management
   and leadership development of staff in the education sector as well as enrich the learning environment of
   45 strategically selected schools through the provision of information technology (IT) and science
   equipment and the expansion of classroom facilities in overcrowded large schools.

   Component two: School Level Education Development (appraisal estimate US$1.15 million, actual
   US$0.83 million): This component was to promote strategic initiatives to improve the performance of
   schools through supporting the MoE to train and strengthen the capacity of Senior Management Teams of
   schools and School Boards to take school-based management forward efficiently, modernizing quality
   assurance for school improvement, and strengthening school-based professional development (SBPD) for
   teachers and other school staff. Furthermore, this component was to support a system of School Quality
   Assurance and Teacher Development Awards (QATDA). Under this component, all schools were to
   receive an annual award of between MVR 6,000-7,500 (about US$ 400-500), depending on school size, to
   implement the findings and recommendation of quality assurance (QA) self-evaluations to improve student
   learning and soft skills, and to implement SBPD programs to enhance teacher performance.

   Component three: Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Program Development
   (appraisal estimate US$1.30 million, actual US$1.58 million): This component was to support the
   coordination of project components, undertake monitoring and evaluation of results and outcomes, and
   support the MoE to undertake program development in key areas for the future of the education system.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

                                                                                                             Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhancing Education Development Project (P131331)



   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$11 million. Actual cost was US$10.22 million.

   Financing: The project was financed by a US$10 million grant, of which US$9.57 million was
   disbursed. US$ 0.3 million was cancelled, and the remaining difference between planned and actual
   financing was due to exchange rate losses.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$1 million, of which US$650,000 was used
   (according to the Bank team, February 11, 2019). This amount was not included in the ICR's reporting of
   total project costs.

   Dates: The project closed on its original closing date. There were no restructurings or extensions.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  At the time of project appraisal, despite Maldives’ achievement in the education sector (net primary
  enrollment rate at 94 percent, net lower secondary enrollment rate at 81 percent), the country was
  experiencing several challenges. First, there was a sharp drop in enrollment at the higher secondary
  education level due to the limited number of schools offering education in grades 11 to 12. Out of 220
  schools in the Maldives, only five schools offered higher secondary education. The Maldives also lagged in
  higher education compared to other small island nations. The quality of education was another challenge
  that the education system faced at all levels. The MoE prepared an education sector development program,
  which was still relevant at the time of the ICR, to address these challenges. The education development
  program also aimed to address the low quality of education through several strategic initiatives such as the
  development of a system of regular National Assessments of Learning Outcomes (NOLA), a QA system,
  and pre-service teacher education and continuing teacher development programs.

  The objective of the project was in line with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework (2016-
  2019), which identified three priority areas: to promote growth, reduce poverty, and increase shared
  prosperity in a sustainable manner. Priority area one aims to provide employability and economic
  opportunities for Maldivians. The Bank’s systematic country diagnostic, conducted under the Country
  Partnership Framework, found that shortcomings in the education system have limited participation of the
  local population in the existing job market and entrepreneurial activity, hindering growth and poverty
  reduction.



  Rating
  High


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Enhancing Education Development Project (P131331)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To enhance and strengthen strategic dimensions of education access

    Rationale

    The project’s theory of change linked improving teaching-learning facilities with enhancing and strengthening
    strategic dimensions of education access.

    Outputs

    • The learning environment was enriched in 53 secondary schools, surpassing the target of 45
    schools. Coverage included all 38 secondary schools in the country, plus some larger secondary feeder
    schools. For the expansion of Advanced-Level education (that is, higher secondary education) at atoll
    education centers, the following improvements were made: construction of 42 new classrooms and 36
    toilets, and purchase of new classroom furniture, computer systems, equipment for science laboratories, and
    state-of-the-art video conference facilities.

    Outcomes

    • The survival rate in higher secondary education (grades 1 to 12) increased from 17 percent in 2013 to 32
    percent (29 percent for boys and 35 percent for girls) in 2018, surpassing the target of 27 percent.
    • The ICR (p. 12) stated that with the expansion of physical facilities in the outer islands, the Gross
    Enrollment Rate (GER) in higher secondary education increased from 26.8 percent in 2013 to 36.8 percent
    in 2017. The Bank team stated (February 11, 2019) that the increase in the GER can be attributed to the
    project, as the main reason for the relatively low initial GER at the higher secondary level was the limited
    number of schools that offered grades 11-12. The expansion of physical facilities in the outer islands had a
    positive impact on the GER.
    • Approximately 66,000 students benefitted from the project, surpassing the target of 50,000 students. 49
    percent of beneficiaries were female, surpassing the target of 48 percent.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 13
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Enhancing Education Development Project (P131331)




Objective

To enhance and strengthen strategic dimensions of education quality

Rationale

The project’s theory of change linked providing research equipment, conducting curriculum reforms,
providing training/research opportunities for faculty and students, supporting scholarships for staff,
developing leadership training and opportunities, and supporting the creation of institutional strategic plans
with enhanced quality of education.

Outputs

• A system of NALO was developed and operationalized in grades four and seven for English, Mathematics,
and Dhivelhi, with the goal of informing education policy and program development. Two NALOs were
implemented, in 2015 and 2017. According to the ICR, because there was a curriculum change between
these two rounds of the NALO, their results could not be compared. According to the Bank team (February
11, 2019), however, these results were "fully utilized," defined as: i) data is being analyzed and results are
being reported to education policymakers and/or the public; ii) results are being reported for at least one of
the following student subgroups: gender, urban/rural, geographic region; and iii) the assessment exercise is
being repeated at least once every 5 years for the same subject area(s) and grade(s). It is noteworthy that
the ICR did not report information on the findings of these learning assessments; those findings would have
been useful in discussing the extent to which education quality was enhanced and strengthened.
• All atolls established a system of QA, and self-evaluations were conducted and their findings incorporated
in the implementation of school improvement plans, surpassing the target of 80 percent. A Master of
Education degree in educational assessment was developed, and 16 persons completed the course in
2018. These graduates were assigned to the National Network on School Assessment to assist schools in
conducting quality assessments in classroom and nationwide NALOs.
• 132 staff were trained in short-term and long-term courses in education management and administration,
exceeding the target of 100 staff. The percentage of principals and members of Senior Management Teams
(SMT) formally trained in their respective fields increased from 40 percent prior to the project to 85 percent at
completion.
• In order to improve the quality of teaching and raise school standards, training was provided on School-
Based Management (SBM), covering school leadership and management skills, training for school boards,
and training of trainers for teacher resource center coordinators. A total of 586 participants (175 principals,
207 SMT members, and 204 school board members) completed this training. The ICR (p. 14) stated that the
training resulted in the development of school-specific plans to strengthen SBM.
• A system for SBPD was initiated in all schools to improve the capacity of professional development
coordinators and teacher resource center coordinators, surpassing the target of 80 percent. A total of 3,658
teachers benefited from this training program. QADTAs were introduced to strengthen the link between QA,
school self-evaluations, and school improvement plans. 193 schools received QATDAs.
• Technical advice was provided for the development of a framework for multi-grade teaching (MGT). This
framework included policy guidelines, a curriculum framework, and a communications strategy to educate

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 13
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Enhancing Education Development Project (P131331)



             stakeholders on the advantages of MGT. Plans were developed for the training of teachers and preparation
             of teaching and learning materials, as well as monitoring and feedback mechanisms to be used for
             MGT. MGT was established in 44 schools, of which 10 were financed by the project. Under the project, by
             the end of 2016, 85 MGT teachers out of a total of 139 were trained. The rest were trained by the
             government.
             • A vocational education strategic implementation model was developed and implemented in 2016, resulting
             in the introduction of the first vocational stream in all schools across the country.
             • The NIE was provided with technical assistance to establish a delivery mechanism for inclusive education.
             571 teachers were trained in inclusive education.
             • A master plan for higher education (2017-2022) was developed and launched to guide institutional and
             sectoral development of higher education. This plan focused on five main areas: desired size and structure,
             governance, quality, economic and social relevance, and budget and financing of higher education. A
             Strategic Action Plan, including costing for the master plan, was completed and implemented in 2017. The
             Maldives Qualification Authority (MQA) was supported in developing international benchmarks, standards,
             and review procedures for external quality reviews and guidelines for internal quality assurance in higher
             education institutions. Also, training was provided for higher education institutions on how to conduct internal
             reviews. Seven higher education institutions in 2017 and five in 2018 were audited, and reports were shared
             with stakeholders. Furthermore, a management information system for MQA was developed and integrated
             with a similar system developed for the Department for Higher Education.

             Outcomes

             • All atolls are conducting self-evaluations, and findings are incorporated in the implementation of School
             Improvement Plans, surpassing the target of 80 percent. In addition, 91 percent of schools in all atolls are
             engaged in self-evaluation activities. In 2017, a School Improvement and Quality Assurance and
             Accountability Framework (SIQAAF) was prepared and implemented, and analytic reports were prepared for
             168 schools that completed external reviews in 2016 and 2017.
             • According to the ICR (p. 13), the NALO results showed that girls outperformed boys in Dhivehi, English,
             and mathematics in grades four and seven across the country. Also, the results of NALO and school-self
             evaluations were reported to have been used to make improvements, including through individual school
             improvement plans. However, the ICR did not provide detailed data on learning outcomes.



             Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

The achievement of both objectives was Substantial. Project-supported expansion and improvement in
secondary education facilities clearly improved access to secondary education. The ICR (pp.13-14) provided


                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Enhancing Education Development Project (P131331)



significant information on a wide range of trainings that were provided to teachers and education administrators,
and on the use of data and analysis for quality improvements in the sector, that plausibly led to strengthening of
education quality. However, those data and analysis themselves were not provided in the ICR. Given that NALO
results are available, for example, even though they are not comparable across the two administered rounds, it
would have been useful for the ICR to have reported this information to augment assessment of improvements in
education quality.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

5. Efficiency


 Economic Efficiency

 The PAD (p. 17) conducted a cost-benefit analysis that assumed 4,534 additional secondary education
 graduates over the project’s implementation period. The benefit stream was calculated over a 20-year time
 frame. The annual growth rate of wages was close to the annual growth rate of the Gross Domestic
 Product. A discount rate of 12 percent was applied. A 55 percent labor force participation rate for secondary
 education graduates was used as the base case scenario. Furthermore, it was assumed that secondary
 education graduates would experience an eight percent quality premium over the existing wage rate due to
 project activities that were to improve the quality of education. The Net Present Value (NPV) of the project
 was estimated at US$22 million, and an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) was estimated at 30 percent.

 The ICR (p. 17) made the same assumptions as the PAD. Benefits were assumed to result from an increased
 number of higher secondary school completers and graduates, and from improved quality of the education
 system, which would translate into higher labor productivity and lifetime earnings. A sensitivity analysis found
 that the NPV ranged between US$17.6 million and US$21.3 million, depending on different scenarios. The
 IRR ranged from 27.3 percent in a low-case scenario to 30.7 percent in a high-case scenario.

 Operational Efficiency

 The project did not experience any major delays and closed at its original closing date. Administrative
 efficiency was demonstrated by strong coordination across atolls (ICR, p. 20). Minor procurement issues
 were resolved quickly (see Section 10b), indicating that the project’s financial resources were used efficiently.

 Taking everything together, the project’s overall efficiency is rated Substantial.




Efficiency Rating

                                                                                                      Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Enhancing Education Development Project (P131331)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                     Rate
                                                           Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                     Available?
                                                                                      100.00
Appraisal                                                 30.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
ICR Estimate                                              27.30
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


The relevance of the objective is High given its alignment with country context and with the Bank’s most recent
Country Partnership Framework. Efficacy and Efficiency are rated Substantial. The overall outcome rating is
therefore Satisfactory, consistent with only minor shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


The ICR (p. 23) stated that the government continues to be committed to implementing its education reform
program, which will support the sustainability of the outcomes achieved under this project. The Bank is
preparing a follow-on “Enhancing Employability through Human Capital and Entrepreneurship Development”
project that focuses on the building of tertiary skills for youth in preparation for private sector employment in key
areas such as tourism and IT services. The achievements made under his project will support the
implementation of the new project. However, the ICR (p. 23) stated that the education sector faces the
challenge of high per capita costs of education service delivery due to the widely spread islands with small
populations. Even with the development of video conferencing that can connect the atolls, one program
participant stated that “without proper/additional training and resources, the program is never going to be
sustainable" (ICR, p. 23).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhancing Education Development Project (P131331)




a. Quality-at-Entry

  According to the ICR (p. 19), the Bank collaborated with relevant stakeholders from the education sector to
  define the objective of the project and respective activities. The ICR (p. 22) stated that the project design
  took lessons learned from a previous education project in Sri Lanka into account and remained highly
  relevant throughout implementation. According to the Bank team (February 11, 2019), these lessons
  included: the importance of a project focusing on a single sector and having one counterpart ministry; the
  benefit of adopting a layered approach, focusing on both national-level initiatives and school-level
  initiatives, to have a greater impact on the entire education system; and the importance of having a strong
  coordination unit that works with different agencies in the MoE.

  The Bank identified relevant risk factors, including weak capacity within school communities to implement
  new initiatives and the MoE's unfamiliarity with the Bank’s financial management and procurement
  policies. Risks related to delivery monitoring and sustainability were also identified as Substantial. It was
  thought that monitoring activities in the scattered islands of the Maldives could stretch the capacity of the
  MoE, and results of monitoring and evaluation activities might not be adequately linked to improved
  management and teaching practices at the school level. In order to mitigate these risks, the Bank provided
  financial management and procurement trainings and built capacity within school communities for the
  implementation of these new initiatives. These mitigation measures were adequate.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  According to the ICR (p. 22), the Bank team consisted of team members with an adequate skill mix and
  benefited from the continuity of the same task team leader over the project's lifetime. The Bank conducted
  regular supervision missions at least twice a year and was proactive and responsive to government
  requests, including the government deciding to use its own funds for the construction of some school
  buildings. The ICR (p. 23) stated that the Bank provided timely financial management, procurement, and
  environmental safeguard support and conducted relevant and timely trainings to strengthen capacity.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhancing Education Development Project (P131331)



a. M&E Design

  The objective of the project was clearly specified. The project’s theory of change was sound and reflected in
  the Results Framework (RF). The number of selected indicators (four PDO indicators and three intermediate
  outcome indicators) was small, but they captured achievement of project activities and were logically linked to
  the intended outcomes; it would have been useful, however, for the RF to have included more direct measures
  of improvement in education quality. The indicators included in the RF were specific, measurable, and relevant.

  The PPRS of the MoE was responsible for the monitoring of project activities. Other central level MoE agencies
  were to monitor the implementation of activities under their mandates and responsibilities at the atoll and school
  level. The PPRS was to be supported by the Coordination Support Unit (CSU).



b. M&E Implementation

  According to the ICR (p. 20), M&E activities were conducted throughout project implementation on three
  different levels: national, atoll, and school. Research and evaluation activities were contracted out to
  independent private higher education institutions and individual consultants. The M&E officer within the CSU
  was responsible for collecting data and preparing M&E progress reports. The Bank team stated (February 11,
  2019) that the data was found to be reliable and of good quality.

  Evaluations included beneficiary feedback surveys, in particular for school-level development activities.
  According to the ICR (p. 21), monitoring activities followed a cascade model, with atoll education officials and
  teacher resource center coordinators assisting the national MoE agencies in monitoring the activities in the
  atolls and islands. The CSU shared with the Bank its M&E results on a monthly basis. Furthermore, the ICR
  (p. 21) stated that the CSU worked with the National Institute of Education to prepare reports by teacher
  resource center coordinators to receive feedback by beneficiaries and assess the impact of school self-
  evaluation and school-based professional development activities on improving school
  performance. According to the Bank team (February 11, 2019), the indicator targets could have been revised
  to be more ambitious, since all of them were achieved or surpassed. The Bank team stated that sustainability
  of M&E functions and processes after project closing is not an ongoing concern.



c. M&E Utilization

  M&E data were used to inform decision making. For example, the ICR (p. 21) stated that the outcomes of
  the NALO were used in education sector analysis and sector plans to define literacy and numeracy
  standards. However, without reporting on the specific NALO results, it is difficult to assess the ways in which
  these results were used.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhancing Education Development Project (P131331)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was classified as environmental assessment category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard
  policy OP/BP 4.10 (Environmental Assessment). According to the ICR (p. 21), an environmental and social
  management framework was developed to support the safeguard process during project implementation
  and to mitigate potential impacts from project activities, especially in regards to physical facilities. The ICR
  (p. 22) stated that the project’s compliance with the Bank’s safeguard policy was rated moderately
  Unsatisfactory at the time of the mid-term review due to lack of staffing and changes in project
  implementation structure. An environmental officer was not assigned to the project, and construction
  activities were managed by engineering consultants. The rating was upgraded to Satisfactory once
  mitigation measures were implemented. These mitigation measures included conducting a rapid
  environmental screening and field verification of construction project sites.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Procurement

  According to the ICR (p. 22), the project’s overall procurement rating was Satisfactory throughout
  implementation. The project experienced some delays and cancellation of contracts due to contract variations
  requested by the MoE. However, these delays were addressed, and the ten construction activities were
  completed on time. The Bank introduced a new online procurement system during project
  implementation that produced some delays, as staff had to be trained on the new system. However, all goods
  and consultancy contracts were completed on time.

  Financial Management

  The ICR (p. 22) stated that the project’s financial management performance was Satisfactory throughout
  project implementation. Quarterly interim unaudited financial reports were submitted in a timely manner, the
  external auditor’s opinions were unqualified, and no major systems and control issues were identified by the
  auditors during the 2017 and 2018 audits.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Enhancing Education Development Project (P131331)



  None reported.



d. Other
     ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                      Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                         IEG
                                                                                      Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory                Satisfactory               ---
Bank Performance               Satisfactory                Satisfactory               ---
Quality of M&E                 Substantial                 Substantial                ---
Quality of ICR                                             Substantial                ---

12. Lessons


The ICR (p. 23-24) provided valuable lessons, adapted here by IEG:

• In order to ensure positive project outcomes and sustainability of knowledge built among education
officials for future activities, it is critical to provide continuous capacity building activities during
project implementation. In this project, atoll- and island-level education officials were trained on an ongoing
basis to achieve technical and management support for schools to implement education development activities.
• When a project introduces a new system midway through implementation, it is important to find a
way to avoid disruption of project implementation. In this project, a new procurement system was
introduced in the middle of project implementation, resulting in several challenges due to lack of capacity to
implement the new system, inflexibility of the system, and slow internet speed. These challenges were
mitigated through training and capacity development.
• Activities to strengthen school-based management contribute to ownership and sustainability
of improvements. This project provided training for senior management teams in school leadership and
management skills, training for school boards, and training of trainers for teacher resource center coordinators,
all aimed at strengthening school-based management. The ICR (p. 14) quoted a participant as saying,
“understanding on how to make our school improvement plans was a huge step for us to make plans, and
to implement and monitor them for the betterment of our schools.”




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

                                                                                                       Page 12 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhancing Education Development Project (P131331)




14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR provided a strong overview of project preparation and implementation and included an adequate
economic analysis. The ICR was concise and internally consistent. However, it did not provide results from
the two NALO assessments; even though the two rounds of the NALO may not have been comparable, their
results would have provided an additional, useful dimension to the assessment of the quality objective. The
lessons learned included in the ICR could also have provided additional detail. The Borrower’s note was of
notably high quality and provided important augmentation and clarification to many of the points made in the
ICR. .



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 13 of 13
