     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water Sector Improvement Project (P100954)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0021583

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P100954                                   Water Sector Improvement Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                     Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-78970                                31-Jul-2016                                        399,203,614.34

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 03-Jun-2010                               28-Jul-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          450,600,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           450,600,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       395,079,989.85                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Fernando Manibog             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   The Project Development Objectives as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 5) were:
   (a) To improve irrigation service delivery on a sustainable basis so as to increase productivity of
   irrigated agriculture in the Nagarjuna Sagar Scheme: and
   (b) To strengthen Andhra Pradesh's institutional capacity for multi-sectoral planning, development
   and management of its water resources.


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water Sector Improvement Project (P100954)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                           PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   There were four components (PAD, pages 5 to 8).

   One. Improving Irrigation Service Delivery in Nagarjuna Sagar Scheme (NSS). Appraisal
   estimate US$752.15 million. Actual cost at closure US$806.67 million. The Nagarjuna Sagar is a
   multipurpose irrigation and hydropower dam and the NSS, the target project area, represented about 13
   percent of the State of Andhra Pradesh's (AP's) irrigated scheme. Activities in this component included: (i)
   rehabilitation of the entire canal system of NSS; (ii) dam safety works; (iii) capacity building of 750 Water
   User Organizations (WUOs);(iv) implementation of improved water management practices, (such as,
   volumetric supply of water to the WUOs, water auditing, benchmarking and asset management); and (v)
   support for implementing the social and environmental management plans. A WUO, which is headed by a
   Water Users Committee, refers to a grouping of farmers in a selected area, responsible for operating and
   maintaining the tertiary irrigated structure.

   Two. Irrigated Agriculture Intensification and Diversification. Appraisal estimate US$21.27
   million. Actual cost at closure US$10.35 million. This component supported capacity building activities,
   such as: (i) organizing demonstrations of improved agricultural production technologies and efficient on-
   farm use of irrigated water, training farmers and the district Agricultural Technology Management
   Agencies; (ii) capacity building activities for promoting diversification to high-value horticultural crops
   and increasing dairy and fish production; (iii) training farmers on efficient use of irrigation water; and (iv)
   capacity building activities to the Agricultural Technology Management Agencies and WUOs for
   improving agricultural marketing. The actual cost of this component was only about half of the originally
   allocated financial resources as the sub-component activities of increasing production of fisheries, dairy
   production and agricultural marketing were dropped and the funding for these activities were reallocated to
   other components.

   Three. Water Sector Institutional Restructuring and Capacity Building. Appraisal estimate US$23.04
   million. Actual cost at closure US$2.85 million. This component aimed at institutional reform of the water
   sector institutions for multi-sectoral planning and management of water resources. Activities included:
   (i) support for establishing the Andhra Pradesh Water Resources Regulatory Commission (APWRRC), an
   autonomous regulatory institution, to be established under the APWRRC Act of 2009; (ii) capacity building


                                                                                                               Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Water Sector Improvement Project (P100954)



  of the Irrigation and Command Area Development Department (I&CADD) and the Water and Land
  Management Training Institute in Hyderabad for training the Water User Associations (WUAs) and I&CADD
  staff; (iii) use of Information Technology in the project activities for improved water management; (v) a pilot
  for implementing the users-centered aquifer level ground water management in the Telangana region of
  AP; and (vi) promoting conjunctive use of surface and ground water in two pilot areas. The actual cost of
  this component was only about 10% of the originally allocated amount. This was due to the changes in the
  activity to establish the Andhra Pradesh Regulatory Commission, following the bifurcation of the state
  (discussed in Sections 2e and 4).

  Four. Project Management. Appraisal estimate US$14.24 million. Actual cost at closure US$8.87
  million. Activities in this component included: (i) support for establishing a project preparation and
  management unit; (ii) support for Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E); and (iii) communication and
  dissemination of the state government's irrigation and water initiatives.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Project cost. The appraisal estimate (including baseline cost and costs of contingencies) was
  US$988.97 million. The actual cost at closure was US$828.73 million. The cost of Component One was
  seven percent higher than estimated and the costs of Components Two, Three and Four were 51 percent,
  88 percent and 37 percent lower than estimated, respectively. The actual project cost was lower than
  estimated due to a combination of factors including, reducing the scope of some project activities,
  changes caused by the bifurcation of the state and 37 percent depreciation of the Indian Rupee relative to
  the US$ during implementation. This resulted in "windfall" savings as the project expenditures were
  mainly in Indian Rupees. The savings were made available to the two states for funding additional
  activities (ICR, para 53).

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$450.60 million. The amount
  disbursed at closure was US$395.07 million. The actual amount disbursed was lower than estimated due
  to a combination of factors, including reduced scope of some activities and significant depreciation of the
  Indian Rupees relative to the US$ during implementation.

  Borrower contribution. The appraisal estimate was US$529.06 million. The contribution at closure was
  less than planned at US$433.65 million. The expected contribution from local farmer's organizations was
  estimated at US$9.30 million at appraisal. The ICR (page 9) notes that there was no contribution
  from local farmer organizations at closure.

  Dates. The project, approved on June 3, 2010, became effective on September 10, 2010 and was
  originally scheduled to close on July 31, 2016. The project was restructured through a Level 2
  restructuring on January 2015. In March 2014, AP was bifurcated into two states covering the same
  geographic space: a smaller AP and a new Telangana state (TS). The restructuring was approved to
  address the changes occasioned by the bifurcation. The PDO was revised and all references to "AP" were

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Water Sector Improvement Project (P100954)



         revised to the AP and TS states. There was no change in the PDOs for the states and the undisbursed
         loan was divided between them. The restructuring also resulted in changes in implementing agencies and
         the Project Management Unit was separated into two units for AP and TS. Corporate indicators were
         added and the project closing date was extended by two years, in view of the delays to activities caused
         by disruptions in the project area in the wake of the state bifurcation. The project closed on July 28, 2018.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

       Rationale


       The agricultural and allied sectors accounted for 29 percent of the Gross Domestic Product of the AP state
       and 73 percent of the state population were dependent on income from the agricultural sector for their
       livelihood. The availability of water in the state was uneven spatially and temporally, with most of the rainfall
       in the state occurring in just about 40 to 100 days a year. The PDOs were substantially relevant to the state
       government’s strategy articulated in the AP Water Policy (2009). The strategy articulated policy directions
       for multi-sector and environmentally-sustainable water resources planning, allocation and management.
       This policy was still in effect when the project closed. In 2009, the government enacted enabling
       legislation through the Andhra Pradesh Water Resources and Regulatory Commission (APWRRC) act of
       2009 aimed at forming a state-level independent APWRRC.

       At appraisal, the project objectives were well-aligned with the Bank's Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for
       the 2009-2013 period. The strategy underscored the need for strengthening the enabling environment for
       development and growth and pro-poor rural development through irrigation sector projects. The PDOs
       remain currently relevant. The Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2013-2017 underscored the
       need for increasing agricultural productivity. The Bank's India Systematic Country Diagnostic in
       2018 specifically identified inefficient agricultural water practices, low irrigation water productivity and
       inadequate agricultural diversification as major constraints to India's economic development. The first focus
       area of the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the 2018- 2022 period highlighted the need for
       promoting resource efficient growth through among other things, inclusive and diversified growth in the rural
       sector.




       Rating
       Substantial

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL




                                                                                                            Page 4 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Water Sector Improvement Project (P100954)




Objective 1
Objective

To improve irrigation service delivery on a sustainable basis so as to increase productivity of irrigated
agriculture in the Nagarjuna Sagar Scheme

Rationale

Theory of Change. The project framework, which included investments in irrigation infrastructure assets
with capacity-building activities for WUOs was comprehensive and the causal links among project activities,
the outputs, and outcomes were logical. The outputs of activities associated with infrastructure investments
(repair and rehabilitation of the canal system, dam safety works and off-take delivery of irrigation services),
can be expected to improve delivery of irrigation services. Capacity-building activities such as training
farmers and WUOs, could also result directly in promoting diversification to high-value horticultural crops in
the project-intervened areas. The combination of these activities could credibly be expected to contribute to
the PDO of increasing productivity of irrigated agriculture in the NSS scheme.

Outputs (ICR, page 11, page 38-39 and paragraphs 22 to 26).

The following outputs met or exceeded their original targets:

  • The entire length of canals (10,030 kilometers) were rehabilitated to their original design flow sections as
  targeted. Concrete lining of 995 kilometers was provided to the most deteriorated sections as compared to
  the target of 1,000 kilometers.
  • According to the Dam Safety Review Panel, the quality of the completed dam safety work was
  satisfactory.
  • 88 percent of the total WUA managed command areas were provided with adequate irrigation services
  at project closure. This exceeded the revised target of 80 percent. The total included 92 percent in AP as
  compared to the target of 80 percent, and 80 percent in TS as targeted.
  • The water use efficiency improved by over nine percent to 169.1 hectares compared to the baseline of
  154.7 hectares. There were no targets for this indicator. The ICR (para 23) notes that at normal reservoir
  storage capacity, the project canal rehabilitation interventions ensured that water now reaches the middle
  and tail end farmers, who had been previously been deprived access to irrigation water and that evidence
  of this was provided in 2016 when water reached the farther extents of the NSS despite low water release
  from the dam.
  • A total of 212,996 female water users were provided with improved irrigation and drainage services at
  project closure, exceeding the target of 85,000. The total included 147,048 female water users in AP as
  compared to the target of 58,650, and 65,918 female water users in TS as compared to the target of
  26,350 water users.
  • 94,610 farmers benefitted from improved agricultural practices. This exceeded the target of 60,000
  farmers.



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Water Sector Improvement Project (P100954)



  • 116,853 on-farm demonstrations of improved agricultural practices in the project-intervened areas were
  conducted at project closure. This exceeded the target of 40,000 on-farm demonstrations.
  • Demonstrations of improved agricultural practices covered over 255,574 hectares of the NSS command
  area at project closure. This exceeded the target of 223,912 hectares.

The following outputs were partially achieved.

  • 495 WUA off-takes to sub-branch canals were rehabilitated. This was short of the target of 672 off-takes.
  • System readiness to supply the required volumes of water at WUO off-takes (measured in number of
  WUOs) increased to 661 WUOs at project closure. This was short of the target of 672.
  • Improved irrigation and drainage services were provided in 788,459 hectares in total. This was short of
  the target of 895,455 hectares. The total included 574,639 hectares in AP (as compared to the target of
  627,150 hectares) and 213,820 hectares in TS (as compared to the target of 268,305 hectares).
  • 425,992 water users were provided with improved irrigation and drainage services at project closure.
  This was short of the target of 500,000 water users. The total included 294,156 water users in AP as
  compared to the target of 350,186, and 131,836 water users in TS as compared to the target of 149,814
  water users in TS.


 Outcomes.

  • 425,992 people in the NSS benefitted from the rehabilitated activities. This was short of the target of
  500,000 people. The ICR (paragraphs 24 and 25 notes that this shortfall was due to low water levels in the
  NSS reservoir compared to historical levels, due to prolonged drought, climate variability and increased
  upstream development on the Krishna river.
  • The ICR (page 30) notes that since the project commenced the State governments have been releasing
  Operation and Maintenance (O&M) funds to WUOs as necessary to meet the assessed demand,
  accounting for the ongoing canal rehabilitation works.

The outcomes were to be reflected through increases of 15 to 25 percent in crop yields of five major crops
(rice, maize, chilies, cotton and groundnut) after completion of the rehabilitation of the irrigation system and
the implementation of the agricultural development program. According to the information on yield data
provided by the Department of Economics and Statistics (the agency in charge of estimating the yields) at
project closure:
• The yield on paddy in project- intervened areas showed a 24 percent increase at project closure relative to
the baseline (from 3.149 tons per hectare at the baseline to 3,901 tons per hectare at project closure).
• The yield on maize showed a 50 percent increase at project closure relative to the baseline (from 5.014
tons per hectare to 7.545 tons per hectare).
• The yield on chilies showed a 16 percent increase at project closure relative to the baseline (from 3.824 at
the baseline to 4.444 tons per hectare).



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Water Sector Improvement Project (P100954)



    • The yield on cotton showed a 48 percent increase at project closure relative to the baseline (from 1.446 at
    the baseline to 2.145 tons per hectare).
    • The yield on groundnut showed a 36 percent increase at project closure relative to the baseline (from
    1.535 tons per hectare at the baseline to 2.085 tons per hectare).

    Given that the water levels released from the reservoir were not sufficient, the ICR (page 16) notes
    that “despite the limited water availability from the NSS reservoir, the higher than yield gains in the project
    areas as compared to in the non-project areas” were attributable to the improved agricultural practices,
    provided under the auspices of this project.


    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     To strengthen Andhra Pradesh's institutional capacity for multi-sectoral planning, development and
     management of its water resources.

    Rationale

    Theory of Change: The causal links between the capacity building activities supported by the project, their
    outputs and outcomes were logical. Establishing the Andhra Pradesh Water Resources Regulatory
    Commission - an autonomous institution, training the staff of the Irrigation and Command Area Development
    Department and WUOs in water management practices, using Information Technology in the project
    activities and pilot activities aimed at promoting conjunctive use of surface and ground area, can be
    expected to contribute to the institutional reform of the water sector institutions. These activities in turn can
    be expected to strengthen Andhra Pradesh’s institutional capacity for multi-sectoral planning, development
    and management of water resources.

    Outputs.
    The following outputs were achieved:

        • Pilot activities of user-centered aquifer-level groundwater management and conjunctive groundwater use
        of selected for selected WUA's in NSS were completed as targeted.
        • The Water and Land Management Training and Research Institute, Hyderabad delivered three training
        modules and conducted over 84 workshops for WUA's and the government staff as targeted.
        • Using their own resources, farmers constructed 361 wells/bore wells in the Khammam pilot area and
        124 wells in the Guntur Pilot area, serving an area of 995 hectares.




                                                                                                          Page 7 of 15
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Water Sector Improvement Project (P100954)



             The following outputs were not achieved or were partially achieved:

                  • This activity was not achieved: to operationalize the Andhra Pradesh Water Resources Regulatory
                  Commission, which was changed after the bifurcation of the state to the Krishna River Management Board
                  and the State Level Committees for Integrated Water Planning and Management. These agencies were to
                  be responsible for inter-state and intra-state level water resources regulation.
                  • Computerized database for recording entitlements were not yet completed when the project closed.




             Outcomes.

                  •  672 water entitlements in NSS were approved by the Krishna River Management Board (established by
                  the Government in place of the Andhra Pradesh Water Resources Regulatory Commission at project
                  closure) for the overall NSS and its two main canals. These entitlements were to be shared by all the
                  WUOs under the canals, as decided by the respective state authorities, depending upon the availability of
                  water. This was slightly short of the target of 680.
                  • As of December 2018, the Krishna River Management Board and the State Level Committee for
                  Integrated Water Planning and Management, approved and issued water entitlements for eight other
                  irrigation projects. This was 60 percent above the target.



             Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale
Outcomes were for the most part, substantially achieved.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

     5. Efficiency


            Economic analysis. An economic analysis was conducted both at appraisal and at closure for the first three
            project components. These components accounted for 97 percent and 99 percent of the total project cost at
            appraisal and at closure (excluding the costs associated with contingencies). The direct benefits of the project
            were assumed to come from: (i) expected gains from expansion in irrigated area; (ii) improved technological
            impacts due to adoption of resource-efficient technologies in major irrigated crops; (iii) benefits

                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water Sector Improvement Project (P100954)



from diversification to high-value items in the irrigated area; (iv) development of fisheries; (v) improvement in
livestock; (vi) increased power generation; (vii) reduction in water-logged area; and (viii) power savings due to
the reduced need for many of the lift irrigation currently in use to supplement the canal flow in tail reaches.
The Net Present Value at closure was Indian Rupees (INR) 14.7 billion as compared to the NPV of INR 11.90
billion at appraisal. The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 22.40 percent as compared to
the ex ante EIRR of 19.1 percent (ICR, page 20). The ICR notes that the higher NPV and EIPP at closure was
mainly due to greater adoption of improved production technologies and higher diversification away from
paddy than envisaged at appraisal.

Administrative and Operational inefficiencies. The scope of the project was reduced, with some activities
such as capacity-building (aimed at increasing production of fisheries, dairy production and agricultural
marketing) being dropped during implementation. Given that the Telangana movement has had a long history
and was known at appraisal, the uncertainties that preceded the state bifurcation had a negative impact on all
aspects of government functioning. The agitations in connection with the secessionist movement impeded
implementation, including progress on the activity associated with the formation of the Andhra Pradesh Water
Resources Regulatory Commission. This activity was eventually not completed and following the bifurcation,
the Government of India constituted a Krishna River Management Board to supervise Krishna river water-
sharing between the states of AP and TS. The state bifurcation also raised challenges relating to the
uncertainty of the legal framework, the election of WUO members and the sharing of implementation
arrangements between the two states.



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate
                                                         Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                   Available?
                                                                                   97.00
Appraisal                                               19.10
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                   99.00
ICR Estimate                                            22.40
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDOs to the strategies of the government and the Bank is rated Substantial. Efficacy is
rated Substantial, based on the substantial achievement of the two PDOs. Efficiency is rated Modest. The
number of beneficiaries were lower than targeted due to the low water levels in the NSS reservoir, climate


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 15
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Water Sector Improvement Project (P100954)



variability and increased upstream developments on the Krishna river. Further, funds required for funding O&M
comes from inadequate State budgets. WUA's complete dependence on state budgets presents sustainability
risk. Taking these ratings into account, overall outcome is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.


a.     Outcome Rating
       Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


Technical risk. There is risk to ongoing benefits from the project activities given the recent persistent low levels
in the NSS reservoir and prolonged droughts linked to climate change. This risk is exacerbated by the
increasing water demand from competing water uses including urban households, and industrial water demand
from the rapidly growing urban centers of Hyderabad and Vijayawada. Combined with unpredictable weather
patterns, these pressures could impact water availability and water quality, rendering the existing water
resources insufficient to meet irrigation requirements in the NSS.

Institutional risk. There is risk to ongoing benefits given that the uncertainty over the legal framework of the
WUAs following the bifurcation of the state have not been fully resolved in TS. In TS, the terms of the WUA
committee representatives expired in 2014 and elections have hot been held since then.

Financial risk. Financial sustainability of irrigation systems depends on recovering O&M costs and the
arrangements for recovering the costs from WUOs. Funding for O&M in the NSS is currently dependent on
State government resources. Only 48 percent of WUOs in AP collect the targeted water tax amount, which the
ICR notes (para 79) is not sufficient for full cost recovery. In TS, state WUA water tax collection was
discontinued and O&M funding for the irrigation system is currently fully funded using state resources. This
exposes the NSS to O&M risks arising from competing State Budgetary priorities and difficulties of accessing
allocated state resources.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

     This project was prepared based on the lessons from two prior bank projects: the Third Andhra Pradesh
     Irrigation Project and the Andhra Pradesh Economic Restructuring Project, which had an irrigation
     component. (PAD, para 42). Lessons incorporated at design included: (i) combining irrigation activities with
     agricultural support activities and institutional reforms for ensuring sustainability; (ii) tailoring activities to the
     country context such as focusing on water resources management through separating water resource
     management from irrigation and drainage service to prevent conflict of interest; (iii) adopting participatory


                                                                                                              Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water Sector Improvement Project (P100954)



  and key community-level implementation entities through involvement of WUOs in line with internationally
  accepted good practice; and, (iv) support for enabling legislation and regulatory framework. Several risks
  were identified at appraisal including moderate risks associated with lack of capacity of the government to
  meet counterpart funding requirements. The mitigation measures included securing commitment on the
  part of the government to provide counterpart funding requirements and the overall project risk was rated
  moderate at appraisal. The implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the Project Preparation
  and Management Unit housed in the Irrigation and Command Area Development of the State (the agency
  in overall charge of implementing the project). The agency had implemented several Bank-financed
  projects and was familiar with the Bank's fiduciary requirements (PAD, para 67). The arrangements made
  at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  There were moderate shortcomings at Quality at Entry. The project underestimated the risk associated with
  the formation and operationalization of the Andhra Pradesh Water Resources Regulatory Commission.
  This risk was rated low at appraisal. A higher risk rating for this activity would have been appropriate given
  the political situation in the state and in particular, the disruption caused by the Telangana movement. The
  ICR (page 22) notes that the Telangana movement has had a history of several decades and the issue was
  known at appraisal. The design also underestimated the risk associated with drought and climate
  variability.
  There were modest shortcomings in M&E (discussed in section 9a).


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  Supervision missions were held twice a year, with 18 missions over a nine-year project implementation
  period (ICR, para 71). The continuity of leadership was more or less maintained, with three task team
  leaders over nine years. The team was proactive and provided timely and effective advice to the
  counterparts to ensure that issues were addressed as they arose. This was particularly so in responding to
  the challenges in the wake of the bifurcation of the state. The Borrower’s ICR (page 55) notes that the Bank
  took the right step of permitting the project to go ahead with activities associated with WUOs despite the
  absence of the elected bodies of the WUOs (as originally planned), which recognizes the ground realities in
  the wake of the bifurcation of the state. This aided in implementation of the WUO activities. The Borrowers
  ICR (page 55) notes that the Bank team provided effective support throughout the implementation
  period. However, there were issues associated with M&E implementation (discussed in section 9b).


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water Sector Improvement Project (P100954)




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  In addition to the Project Preparation and Management Unit, which was responsible for Monitoring and
  Evaluation(M&E), an independent M&E agency external to the government was to be hired by the government
  for monitoring project performance (PAD, para 52). However, despite the critical role that WUOs were
  expected to play, there was no indicator specifically aimed at monitoring their performance (ICR, para 56).



b. M&E Implementation

  Core sector indicators were incorporated during implementation. however, there were shortcomings in M&E
  implementation. Although data was collected regularly by field staff, it was not consistently entered into the
  electronic database. Hence the data was not readily available for detailed methodical analysis. There
  was confusion on the Bank's part during much of the project period on what indicators to report on. The ICR
  (para 23) notes that while the project's M&E framework at design included seven outcome indicators and
  eight intermediate indicators, the Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISR) were reporting on only
  four PDO indicators. This issue was eventually resolved in March 2017.
  The M&E indicators were not adjusted to reflect realities on the ground during implementation. For instance,
  indicators could have been adjusted for: (i) reflecting lowered irrigation coverage due to the construction of
  upstream farms that resulted in much lower than expected flows into the NSS; and (ii) delays on the
  rehabilitation works that reduced the need to undertake and fund regular Operation and Maintenance. Timely
  adjustments of the M&E framework would have helped in calibrating the expected results to be achieved.



c. M&E Utilization

  The ICR does not provide information on whether the indicators were used for purposes other than
  monitoring the performance of project activities.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water Sector Improvement Project (P100954)



  The project was classified as a Category A project for environmental purposes: The project triggered the
  following safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Pest Management (OP 4.09),
  Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10); involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): and Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37).
  (PAD. page 23).

  Environmental Assessment, Pest Management and Indigenous Peoples. The PAD (para 75) noted that
  adverse environmental impacts were not anticipated, as the project activities were confined to rehabilitation
  of the existing irrigation works on the NSS scheme. There was however the possibility of agriculture-related
  environmental impact, due to the increased use of pesticides and chemical fertilizers. Indigenous peoples
  (tribal people referred to as Scheduled Tribes) constituted around 6.6 percent of the State's population. An
  Integrated Social and Environmental Assessment (ISEA) was conducted at appraisal to address potential
  environmental issues during implementation. A sustainable agriculture strategy was developed as part of
  the ISEA to encourage environmentally sustainable agriculture through promotion of Integrated Nutrient
  Management, Integrated Pest Management and organic farming in the project areas (PAD, para 76). As
  part of the ISEA, a separate tribal study was conducted, and a tribal strategy was prepared to mitigate any
  adverse impacts to the tribal population (PAD, para 73-74). An Environmental and Social Management Plan
  was prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal. The ICR (para 64) notes that the Environment and Social
  Management Plan was updated during implementation as part of the canal rehabilitation works.

  The ICR (para 60) notes that there was compliance with the safeguards mentioned above and there were
  no environmental and pest management issues. The ICR (page 63) notes that there was no adverse impact
  on the tribal population due to the project.

  Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (para 72) reports that Resettlement Action Plans were prepared at
  appraisal to ensure that those affected by the project were compensated for the loss of their livelihood. The
  ICR (para 63) reports that there was no land acquisition and there was no resettlement during
  implementation.

  Safety of Dams. The PAD (page 90) noted that no new dams were to be constructed under the project and
  that only existing dams were to be rehabilitated under the project. To ensure the safety of existing dams and
  appurtenant structures, a dam safety plan was prepared at appraisal. The ICR (para 67) notes that at
  project closure, inspection of the dams that were rehabilitated under the project showed that the dams were
  safe and of good quality.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial management. An assessment of the financial management capacity of the implementing agency
  was conducted at appraisal (PAD, page 56). The financial management risk was rated as High on account of
  factors such as, risks due to the large volume of transactions and inadequate counterpart funding (given that
  over 50 percent of the total project cost was through counterpart funding). Several mitigation measures were
  incorporated at design, including firm commitment from the government for appropriate budget allocations. The

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water Sector Improvement Project (P100954)



  ICR (page 24) notes that there were no financial management issues during implementation and at project
  closing, all audit reports were submitted with unqualified audit opinions.

  Procurement. An assessment of the implementing agency's ability to address procurement issues was
  conducted at appraisal (PAD, page 70). The assessment concluded that the procurement arrangements were
  satisfactory. The ICR (para 62) notes that there were no procurement issues during implementation and that
  procurement management of the project was in compliance with Bank procedures (ICR, para 62).



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

  The ICR (para 46) notes that over 1,066 kilometers access roads were constructed on canal side bunds
  during canal rehabilitation, using the excavated earth to allow tractors to move. The roads constructed
  for canal rehabilitation, is used by the local people in many ways, such as accessing nearby markets,
  hospitals, schools, offices and other purposes. Further, the construction of new bridges across the canals
  helps in reducing people's travel times.



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                              Moderately               Moderately
Outcome                                                                           ---
                              Satisfactory             Satisfactory
                              Moderately               Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                  ---
                              Satisfactory             Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                Modest                   Modest                     ---
Quality of ICR                                         Substantial                ---

12. Lessons


The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with some
adaptation of language (ICR, pages 28-29).

(1) Climate change risk screening may be required for large infrastructure projects during preparations.
The performance of this project was adversely affected by persistent low water levels in the Nagarjuna Sagar



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Water Sector Improvement Project (P100954)



dam in part due to prolonged drought. The project could have benefitted from climate change screening to
better understand the potential impacts of climate variability.

2) Integrated River Basin Planning and 'Transboundary' Water Resources Management approaches may
be useful for major inter-state irrigation systems, irrespective of whether or not they cross international
boundaries. This may be particularly important in countries with decentralized/federal governance systems
where water resources management may be within the purview of the national government.

(3) Demonstrations of pilots can help in fast-tracking innovative concepts for better project
performance. Successful demonstrations and pilots on improved agricultural practices and conjunctive surface
and groundwater use for selected WUOs helped this project in achieving significant development outcomes of
improving aggregate crop yields.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR is reasonably clear and candidly discusses the issues that arose following the bifurcation of the state.
It also provides a clear description of how the bank assisted in resolving the issues. The ICR is consistent with
the guidelines.
The ICR could have provided more details on the Krishna River Management Board and how it is intended to
resolve transboundary issues. The ICR is unduly long (almost twice the recommended length of 15 pages).



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 15
