     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK: Skills Development Project (P118177)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0021493

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P118177                                    PK: Skills Development Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                   Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-49470                                  31-Dec-2014                                           18,648,991.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 31-May-2011                                31-May-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            21,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             21,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         18,648,991.00                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Katharina Ferl              Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. ii), the objective of the project was “to support the
   Government of Sindh in strengthening its training programs to improve the skills set and employability of
   trainees.” The objective as stated in the Financing Agreement of October 21, 2011 (p. 5) differed only in
   terms of stating “project implementing entity” rather than “government of Sindh." This validation will use the
   objective as stated in the Financing Agreement.



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK: Skills Development Project (P118177)



   Outcome targets were revised upward twice. A split rating is therefore not warranted.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  23-Dec-2014
                                                           PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   The project included three components:

   Component 1: Improving and Expanding Short-Term Training (appraisal estimate US$18.75 million,
   actual US$13.50 million): This component was to finance the expansion of the existing Benazir Bhutto
   Shaheed Youth Development Project (BBSYDP) that had already been in place for two years and had
   trained 79,000 unemployed youth. Specifically, this component was to finance the contracts for delivering
   training to approximately 45,000 additional trainees over a two- to three-year period. Competitively
   selected Training Service Providers (TSPs) were to be funded through performance-based contracts to
   deliver trainings in industry-demanded skills in the public and private sector. Target beneficiaries included
   semiliterate youth between the ages of 18 and 35 years with 10 years of schooling or less, with a specific
   emphasis on youth from rural Sindh. According to the PAD (p. 22), trainees were to be selected using a
   transparent public process that was to be announced via print and internet media as specified in set
   guidelines. Specific efforts were to be planned to target information campaigns to youth in low-income
   households to raise their awareness of this opportunity. Prospective trainees were to fill out a simple
   registration form including information on the course(s) of interest, personal details, and family details.

   The applicants were to be invited to appear for an entry test (conducted by an independent testing service,
   the National Testing Service (NTS)). The names of all selected trainees were to be made public on the
   program’s webpage. Trainees who had benefitted from earlier training rounds were ineligible for a second
   training opportunity. This criterion for eligibility was to be checked at two levels, before the testing and a
   second time before placement, to ensure that only fresh applicants were to benefit from the training. The
   component was to finance stipends, conditional on 85% attendance, for a monthly amount of PKR 2,500
   (US$29), and a mobility allowance of PKR 4,000 (US$47) if the trainee's home was more than 75
   kilometers away from the training location.




                                                                                                               Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PK: Skills Development Project (P118177)



  Component 2: Establish Market-Driven Institutional Training Programs (appraisal estimate US$5.0
  million, actual US$5.0 million): This component was to finance the piloting of a sector program to
  establish market-driven institutional training programs in Sindh Technical Education and Vocational
  Training Authority (STEVTA)-administered institutions to better meet the skill demands of employers. The
  program aimed to establish 70 programs responsive to labor markets. This target was based on estimated
  average costs for upgrading or establishing a new program and was to vary with the cost requirements
  submitted by training institutions. The 70 programs were expected to be implemented in at least 35
  institutions and at most 70 institutions, out of the 454 STEVTA institutions in Sindh. The pilot was thus to
  benefit 8-15 percent of institutions in the province. The main selection criteria were to be: (i) the potential to
  cater to local market demand, including explicit buy-in from local employers; (ii) quality of upgrade
  proposal; and (iii) the poverty level of the district. This program was to disburse based upon progress as
  measured by four Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs: implementation of reforms, approved curricula
  and standards, renovated and equipped facilities, and enrolled students), all verified on a sample basis by
  an independent third party.

  Component 3: Capacity Building of Sindh Technical Education and Vocational Training Authority
  (appraisal estimate US$1.25 million, actual US$1.60 million): This component was to finance the
  provision of technical assistance to strengthen STEVTA to implement Component 2, establish better
  information systems and policies, improve the capacity to manage its institutions, and enhance monitoring
  and evaluation (M&E) and dissemination of results of the programs. The M&E activities were to include
  tracer studies, a net impact study of training programs, and employer surveys. The component was also to
  finance capacity development of staff as well as strategic policy improvements in the technical and
  vocational education and training (TVET) system in the province, such as developing standards and
  assessments and undertaking strategic studies. This component was also to provide technical assistance,
  training, operational costs for project implementation, and limited equipment and supplies.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$26 million. Actual cost was US$18.64 million. The
  project experienced cost savings due to delivery of training in small rural towns as opposed to the larger
  cities of Sindh (during the first three years of implementation), lower than estimated costs of service
  delivery due to use of a competitive funding mechanism and involvement of the private sector, and the
  implementation of a placement algorithm to ensure that the distance between the trainee’s home and
  training location was reduced, all resulting in a 30 percent reduction in funds required.

  Financing: This International Development Agency Credit was approved in the amount of US$21
  million. US$18.64 million was disbursed, and $0.77 million remained undisbursed.

  Borrower Contribution: The government was originally to contribute US$5.0 million. The project team
  later added that, according to the Interim Unaudited Financial Report of September 30, 2018, the



                                                                                                       Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK: Skills Development Project (P118177)



   government’s contribution for Component 1 was US$2.5 million (using the May 31, 2018 exchange rate
   as in the ICR) and for Component 2 was US$1.25 million.

   Dates: The project was restructured four times: i) on December 15, 2014; ii) on December 29, 2015; iii)
   on December 16, 2016; and iv) on December 22, 2017. The first project restructuring was to increase the
   target value for the number of youth who receive short term training under the project in the extension
   period, and to reallocate funds from the "unallocated" category to support enhanced technical assistance
   for training programs upgraded under Component 2. Both the 2014 and 2015 restructurings increased the
   outcome targets for number of youth completing short-term training, as the previous targets had been met
   in each case. All the restructurings extended the closing date to allow for the completion of project
   activities, which experienced delays due to slow transfer of funds from the Government of Sindh to the
   two implementing agencies.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  The government of Pakistan implemented an ambitious reform program in the mid-2000s resulting in a
  reduction of the fiscal and the external current account deficit and an increase of gross domestic product
  with reduced inflation. In 2008-2009, however, the country experienced a dramatic fallback during the most
  serious economic crisis in the country’s history, followed by a modest economic recovery. The country’s
  macroeconomic stability continued to be fragile. One of the key constraints to economic growth and
  competitiveness was a lack of skilled labor and human capital. According to the PAD (p. 1), at the time of
  appraisal only a quarter of the youth cohort graduated from secondary education, and only four percent
  entered the higher education system. Also, less than one percent of the population in the age range 10
  years and above ever received technical education and vocational training. In addition, the quality of
  education was weak at all levels, dropout rates were high, and learning achievements were low and varied.
  The TVET sector in Sindh, one of the four provinces in Pakistan, faced a number of challenges including
  poor relevance of training, few training opportunities, and low public investment. Also, the infrastructure of
  public institutions was outdated, and the administration of public institutions was generally poor and had few
  quality assurance mechanisms, occupational standards, or certifications in place.

  The project supported the government’s BBSYDP that had been initiated to skill unemployed youth for
  employment. The program financed training through contracts with private and public training
  providers. According to the ICR (p. 17), the project also supported the National Vocational and Technical
  Training Commission’s National Skill Strategy (2009-1013), which aimed to improve trainings through the
  delivery of competency-based trainings. At the time of appraisal, the project’s objective was in line with the
  Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (FY10-13), which included a pillar to improve human development and
  social protection. The project supported several pillars of the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (FY15-
  20) at closing, including pillar 2 on “private sector development," in particular its outcome area “improving

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            PK: Skills Development Project (P118177)



       youth skills for business,” and pillar 3 on “inclusion” by including female and poor beneficiaries in skills
       training programs.



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To support the implementing entity in strengthening its training programs to improve the skills set of trainees
     and employability of trainees

    Rationale

    The project’s theory of changed linked the provision of market-driven short-term training, equitable access to
    such training, and upgrading competitively selected trades and capacity building for teachers and institutes
    with improved skills and employability, which ultimately would result in increased competitiveness of local
    companies and economic growth for the country.

    Outputs

    Outputs under Component 1:

    • TSPs were selected competitively and funded through performance-based contracts to deliver trainings in
    industry-demanded skills in the public and private sector. 1,437 private sector TSPs participated in the
    project, offering skills training on 354 types of trades. To promote participation of youth who otherwise would
    not have had access to training, the project supported stipends conditional on 85 percent attendance for a
    monthly amount of PKR 2,500 (US$29). If a participant lived further away than 75 kilometers, they
    were eligible for a rural mobility allowance of PKR 4,000 (US$47). In order to include women, the program
    offered trades at locations close to the beneficiaries’ homes (also in rural areas) and trades that were likely
    to attract more females, including agro‐horticultural trades, arts and crafts, health and medical services,
    office management, beautician, textile, garment, and embroidery and tailoring.

    Outputs under Component 2:

    • 70 programs (from 47 STEVTA institutes) offered labor market‐driven training programs monitored by
    four DLIs: (a) refurbished faculties, (b) updated curricula with curriculum‐compliant equipment, (c) placement
    of teachers and faculty trainings according to the updated curricula, and (d) enrollment with at least 80


                                                                                                            Page 5 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PK: Skills Development Project (P118177)



percent of the seating capacity. The curriculum and training facilities were updated in each of these
programs, achieving the target. For 66, curriculum-compliant equipment was procured and installed, not
quite reaching the target of 70. Through the support of Institutional Management Committees (IMCs) in all 70
programs, 58 enrolled their first classes at 80% of capacity, not achieving the target of 70. 378 girls were
enrolled in these programs, representing 27% of all participants.
• The number of training programs in institutions having an active IMC with at least a third of the members
from the private sector increased from 10 in 2011 to 70 in 2018, achieving the target of 70 training programs.
• 17 STEVTA board meetings were held publicly, surpassing the target of four meetings.
• In 2018, the project carried out a tracer study of STEVTA institutes delivering market-driven training
programs.

Outcomes

• 106,209 unemployed youth participated in project-sponsored training programs under five rounds of
BBSYDP, and 83,639 of those graduated with support from stipends under the project, surpassing the
original target of 45,000 youth and the revised target of 82;000 youth.
• The share of female participants in youth development programs increased from 20% in 2011 to 53% in
2018, surpassing the target of 28%. The share of rural participants in youth development programs
decreased from 70% in 2011 to 69% in 2018, almost achieving the target of staying constant at 70%.
• The BBSYDP had trained 79,000 unemployed youth using government resources before the project
started, and a government-funded training program continued during the project period in parallel with
project activities.
 • The percentage of trainees of the BBSYDP who were externally certified increased from 20% in 2011 to
75.1% in 2018, surpassing the target of 30%.
• Information provided by the project team in response to the draft of this ICR Review indicates that he
employment rate of BBYSDP trainees increased from 28% percent in 2010 to 40.8% in 2018. The project
established a baseline through a tracer study of BBYSPD’s trainees in 2010 whereas the end line was
collected through third party validation exercises. In comments, the project team stated that the end line
reported represents the average employment rate for trainees of the five BBSYDP training rounds sponsored
by the project. The employment rate associated with the BBYSDP sponsored by the project is higher than
the employment rate for similar short-term training programs in Bangladesh, India, and Pakistan (also
provided in the team’s response).
• The third-party validation for the fifth round also showed that the BBSYPD supported by the project
performed better than similar Government of Sindh programs. Comparison showed The ICR reported that
96% of the BBSYPD training service providers (TSPs) delivered the curriculum as agreed in program
guidelines, compared with 31% of TSPs in similar Government of Sindh programs; 76% of BBSYPD trainees
achieved certification by external bodies, compared with 3% for Government of Sindh program trainees; and
92% of BBSYPD trainees received employment facilitation compared with 17% for Government of Sindh
program trainees. (Information on achievements of Government of Sindh programs was provided in the GP’s
response to the draft ICR Review.)
• 57% of all graduates of the 70 new labor market-driven programs at STEVTA institutes interviewed in a
2018 tracer study had found some form of employment (full‐time household work, full‐time formal


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 14
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  PK: Skills Development Project (P118177)



             employment, part‐time employment, or self-employment). According to the ICR (p. 40), this is a higher than
             the average placement rate in the context of government‐run training institutes.
             • A 2018 third-party validation report covered visits to 35 STEVTA institutes and 51 STEVTA programs in
             five regions of Sindh. It found that 30 of the 35 institutes visited achieved all four DLIs. It also found that
             86% of graduates felt that the STEVTA curriculum was up to date, and 65% felt that the courses had a high
             level of relevance in today’s job market. Most employed graduates said they had to resort to using informal
             modes of placement support, with only 3% finding a job using their school/institute. Only 5% of all the
             employed graduates were self‐employed, indicating a possible lack of support for entrepreneurs (evident
             from the fact that only 4% borrowed initial funding from banks or microcredit institutes). 47% of all
             respondents felt that STEVTA offered little to no soft skills training.



             Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

Overall, the project met its target with respect to the number of unemployed youths who graduated from the
BBYSDP program. The information provided (in the ICR and later) indicates that the BDYSP program increased
graduates’ employment rates over time and that it performed better than other similar short-term training
programs in South Asia. Though with minor shortcomings, the project also met its targets with respect to
developing longer term market-driven programs in STEVTA institutes. Given these achievements, overall efficacy
is rated substantial.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

     5. Efficiency


            Economic Efficiency

            The PAD (p. 12) and the ICR (p. 14) conducted a benefit-cost analysis based on the two main components of
            the project. The PAD identified the project’s benefits as an increase in the probability of trainees finding
            employment and an increase in their salaries after they have received training. For Component 1, the net
            present value (NPV) of investing in short-term training of 45,000 youth at an average cost of $410/trainee was
            estimated at US$27.34 million, with an internal rate of return (IRR) of 21% for the base case if the probability
            of finding employment three months after completing training remained at 28% (BBSYDP Tracer Study


                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK: Skills Development Project (P118177)



Finding for FY2010). If the probability of employment were to increase to 40% as targeted by the project, the
NPV was as high as US$73.9 million, with an IRR of 36.7%. For Component 2, a sensitivity analysis was
conducted for cost-benefit calculations, where the probability of employment within six months was varied
under low and high scenarios. Based on the analysis, re-designed one-year programs had an IRR of 26.9%
and a per-trainee NPV of US$1,703 under the low case scenario, with an increase in the IRR to 34.4% and
the per-trainee NPV to US$2,560 under the high case, indicating a strong economic rationale for project
implementation.

The ICR used the same assumptions as the PAD, with a discount rate of 12% and a wage premium of 6.4%
for skilled and 5.6% for unskilled labor. Life time earnings of an individual were assumed to be over a 40-year
time span. For Component, 1 the ICR found an IRR of 91% and a NPV of US$537 million. Both estimates
were higher than at appraisal due to a higher number of project beneficiaries and higher probability of
employment. For Component 2, the ICR found an IRR of 27-34% and a per-trainee NPV of US$ 5,866 -
8,088 under the low and high scenarios.

Operational Efficiency

The BBSYDP implemented a placement algorithm to ensure that the distance between the trainee’s home
and training location was reduced. This resulted in a 30% reduction in funds required for
training. However, there were moderate implementation shortcomings. Due to intermittent and inadequate
release of funds to the implementing agency from the Government of Sindh, the project’s closing date had to
be extended four times resulting in a total extension of 41 months. Also, according to the ICR (p. 20), the
agreed 80–20 counterpart financing ratio was not fully maintained during implementation because counterpart
financing was not available on time. During the last month of project implementation, the project lacked
counterpart funding and the project could not disburse. In addition, ineligible expenditure was declared in
September 2017 based on a government audit and an additional detailed financial management audit that
identified failure to follow operational procedures for distributing stipends to beneficiaries. Due to these
financing and fiduciary issues, the project could not be scaled up further. These shortcomings are indicative
of inefficient use of project resources. The project’s overall efficiency rating is therefore Modest.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate
                                                        Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                   Available?
                                                                                  72.00
Appraisal                                              21.00
                                                                                  Not Applicable



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 14
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        PK: Skills Development Project (P118177)



                                                                                      67.00
ICR Estimate                                               91.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives was High given the project’s alignment with country context, government strategy, and
the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Strategy. Efficacy is rated Substantial. Efficiency is rated Modest
due to several shortcomings in implementation efficiency. The overall outcome rating is therefore Moderately
Satisfactory.


a.    Outcome Rating
      Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


Some of the capacity development that took place under the project is likely to be sustained. STEVTA was able
to (re)design and operationalize existing or new training programs in selected reformed training institutions,
strengthen its governance structure, and improve its institutional capacity by establishing better information
systems and policies. In addition, active IMCs were enhanced by at least a third of their members from the
private sector, ensuring a more dynamic market-driven training program. According to the ICR (p. 22),
however, Pakistan’s weak economic outlook and decreasing competitiveness may undermine the relevance,
quality, and effectiveness of trainings due to weak labor market absorption and tight budget constraints for
spending on human development. The IMCs have been allocating funds for teachers to be placed in the 70
new training programs, but these funds are tenuous as they are based on grants from STEVTA, the private
sector, and revenue-sharing with the programs themselves. In the longer term, teachers will have to be formally
hired by the government, challenging in an already fiscally constrained environment.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

     According to the ICR (p. 21), project design reflected experience from the implementation of earlier TVET
     projects and took lessons learned from completed trainings by the BBSYDP into account. These earlier
     programs were reviewed in terms of participation, gender, trade specialization, job placement rate, quality
     of training facilities, training quality, training mechanisms, management information system, etc., through a


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK: Skills Development Project (P118177)



  tracer study (PAD, p. 68). Public-private competitive selection, preference for quality-focused training,
  emphasis on job placement, and emphasis on in-demand specializations were among the areas where
  earlier lessons were considered.

  The project was in line with the government’s federal and provincial agenda. Furthermore, the project used
  existing institutional structures of the BBSYDP and STEVTA for project implementation. The Bank team
  identified relevant risk factors. The following risks were rated as medium: i) reduction in government
  ownership due to change in political leadership; ii) insufficient staffing and lack of long-term education
  goals in the implementing agency; iii) unfamiliarity with competitive selection processes and results-based
  contracts for public sector institutions and the competitive fund mechanism proposed under Component 2;
  and iv) reduced demand for skilled labor as a consequence of low economic growth. The Bank’s mitigation
  measures for these identified risks were adequate. The ICR (p. 17) stated that the implementing agency
  was set up with adequate staff and monitoring and reporting systems to allow for timely start of project
  implementation.

  However, the ICR (p. 22) stated that the project’s allocation of only 20% of project fund to the RBF-
  financed Component 2 was insufficient given unfamiliarity with the financing mechanism, resulting in
  continuous delays.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  According to the ICR (p. 21), the Bank conducted regular supervision missions and site visits. Findings and
  challenges were reported to the government and to Bank management. The ICR further stated that
  Implementation Status Reports were generally of good quality. The Bank team also raised shortcomings in
  fiduciary procedures for electronic payment of stipends, and ineligible expenditures were returned by the
  government. Even though the frequency of supervision missions was increased to address implementation
  bottlenecks due to delayed counterpart financing during the last two years of project implementation, the
  Bank was not able to solve these issues, and the project’s closing date had to be extended four
  times. Furthermore, the project experienced shortcomings with respect to M&E implementation (See
  Section 9a).


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK: Skills Development Project (P118177)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The objective of the project was clearly specified. The theory of change was sound and reflected appropriately
  in the results framework. The intermediate results indicators were adequate to measure the contribution of
  project activities towards achieving the project’s objective.

  Baselines and targets were specified where appropriate. The M&E design included a set of four DLIs
  measuring “implementation of governance reform," “development of market driven curriculum," “adequately
  equipping reformed programs," and “commencement of training."

  The project focused on strengthening and supplementing the existing M&E systems used by SVEVTA and
  BBSYDP. The ICR (p. 18) stated that several key staff were hired to manage data collection and monitor and
  report results.



b. M&E Implementation

  According to the ICR (p. 18), data on key indicators were produced on a regular and timely basis. Target
  values for the number of persons trained were increased at both the 2014 and 2015 restructurings to take into
  account achievement of previous targets. Third-party validations were conducted for STEVTA and the
  BBSYDP. The BBSYDP developed a web-based management information system to collect data from these
  validations. Selected training institutions were required to submit detailed inception reports including
  information on their trainees, course content, and activity plans. All training institutions submitted reports on
  progress of activities on a weekly basis and consolidated reports on a monthly basis to the BBSYDP. All
  private sector training institutions were visited at least once a month by a BBSYDP program officer or district
  program coordinators. A course completion report was submitted by the training institutions to report on the
  completion rate of trainees. The ICR (p. 19) stated that BBSYDP did not conduct an independent tracer study
  to better understand the successes and challenges in increasing employability but instead relied on third-party
  validation reports on employment outcomes. Also, the PAD (p. 47), in the M&E section, noted that the project
  would carry out a net impact study within the duration of the project, which would have compared BBSYDP
  participants with non-participants. The ICR did not report results of this study, and did not state whether this
  study was conducted. The project team’s comments on the ICR Review draft indicated that, in lieu of the
  impact study, the project measured employment outcomes through third party validations exercises. These
  third-party validations, however, did not include information that would enable comparison of experiences of
  project participants with experiences of other similar people who did not participate in the project. The project
  team later provided additional information comparing the performance of the BBSYDP program with similar
  South Asia programs and Government of Sindh programs. The ICR (p. 19) mentioned that the intermediate
  results indicator “stakeholder ratings of STEVTA” was not tracked; this would have been a critical indicator for
  measuring TVET outcomes on the labor market, including employer satisfaction with STEVTA sponsored
  training programs. Overall, however, these are considered moderate shortcomings.

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK: Skills Development Project (P118177)




c. M&E Utilization

  The ICR (p. 19) stated that M&E and third-party validation data were used to track progress and identify
  implementation bottlenecks, allowing for highlighting of issues in a timely manner and using M&E data to
  inform decision making. Tracer and monitoring studies were conducted on an annual basis. Furthermore,
  M&E data informed the performance evaluation and ranking of TSPs under Component 1. Weak performing
  TSPs were informed and given the opportunity to improve. In addition, the Bank team stated (March 21,
  2019) that the Bank's fiduciary audit helped addressing the ineligible expenditure issue.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was classified as category C and did not trigger any of the Bank’s safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Procurement:

  According to the Bank team, procurement was carried out in accordance with Bank guidelines. The project did
  not encounter any specific procurement-related delays.

  Financial Management:

  The project’s closing date had to be extended four times due to intermittent and inadequate release of funds to
  the implementing agency from the Government of Sindh. As mentioned in Section 8a, the project’s allocation
  of only 20% of project fund to the DLI-financed Component 2 was insufficient given unfamiliarity with the
  financing mechanism, resulting in continuous delays.

  According to the ICR (p. 20), in 2017 a government audit and an additional detailed financial management audit
  found ineligible expenditure due to failure to follow operational procedures for distributing stipends to
  beneficiaries. The amount was refunded with a value date of May 2018. Furthermore, the agreed 80-20

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK: Skills Development Project (P118177)



  counterpart financing ratio was not fulfilled as counterpart financing was not available on time, an issue that
  persisted until project closing and resulted in inability of the project to disburse. Due to these challenges, the
  financial management rating for the BBSYDP was Moderately Unsatisfactory when the project closed.

  According to the Bank team, all audit reports entered in the Bank system appear unmodified. Two audit
  reports (for FY 2013 and FY 2014) were received after the due date.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

  According to the ICR (p. 16), the competency-based testing and assessment programs developed by
  STEVTA were accredited by the National Vocational and Technical Training Commission as the national
  standard, benefiting other provinces in the country.



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                        IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately                Moderately
Outcome                                                                             ---
                               Satisfactory              Satisfactory
                                                                                    The project experienced
                                                                                    several financial management
                                                         Moderately
Bank Performance               Satisfactory                                         issues resulting in the need to
                                                         Satisfactory
                                                                                    extend the project's closing
                                                                                    date multiple times.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial               Substantial                ---
Quality of ICR                                           Modest                     ---

12. Lessons


The ICR (p. 22-23) provided several lessons learned, adapted here by IEG:
• When implementing a new mechanism such as Results-Based Financing, it is critical to allocate
sufficient resources for its implementation. In this project, only 20 percent of the project funds were
allocated to Results-Based Financing despite a lack of experience in working with such a mechanism, resulting
in implementation delays due to administrative delays in the allocation of funds and release of funds from the
line department to the implementing agencies.

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PK: Skills Development Project (P118177)



• Supporting a training scheme that has already been established in the country is beneficial for
ensuring country ownership, taking lessons learned into account and building on already existing
experience. In Pakistan, the BBSYDP had already been implemented for two years, allowing the project
design to consider lessons learned and to build on an already existing training structure.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR was concise and internally consistent, generally following guidelines. It provided an adequate
economic analysis. It presented evidence and provided a candid account of implementation challenges and
attempts to resolve them. However, some gaps are noted: First, although relevant information that compared
the performance of the project-sponsored short-term training (BBSYDP) with other programs existed (it was
provided to IEG in response to the draft ICR Review), the ICR omitted to mention it, even though this
information would have greatly strengthened the results narrative by providing comparison information that
would have helped to make a case for plausible relationships between the project activities and results
observed (by comparing results observed among project participants with results observed among other
populations for example). Second, the ICR did not include comprehensive information in critical areas such as
procurement and financial management. Third, the ICR did not discuss whether the Bank team identified
relevant risks and implemented adequate mitigation measures. Finally, the ICR did not include information on
the achievement of DLIs.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Modest




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 14
