     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)



                                                                              Report Number : ICRR0021517

1. Project Data



 Project ID                         Project Name
                                    GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage
 P074595
                                    Treatment

 Country                            Practice Area(Lead)                        Additional Financing
 West Bank and Gaza                 Water                                      P091314,P117446,P146065


 L/C/TF Number(s)                   Closing Date (Original)                    Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16501,TF-16844,TF-54208,TF- 31-Dec-2017                                                  42,284,648.47
 56186,TF-57109,TF-57595,TF-
 92196,TF-97081

 Bank Approval Date                 Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Sep-2004                        30-Jun-2018

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         40,053,776.15                                   40,053,776.15

 Revised Commitment                          41,846,749.74                                   40,043,050.15

 Actual                                      42,284,648.47                                   42,284,648.47



 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Kavita Mathur             J. W. van Holst             Christopher David Nelson      IEGSD (Unit 4)
                           Pellekaan



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   Original Objectives

   The project development objective (PDO) as per the Trust Fund Grant Agreement (TF054208-GZ page 12)
   dated October 27, 2004 was to:


                                                                                               Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)




   (i) mitigate the health and environmental safety threats to the communities surrounding the effluent lake at
   Beit Lahia;
   (ii) implement a scheme to transfer the effluent in the said lake to the newly constructed infiltration basins
   east of Jabalia and thereby prevent backflows in the sewerage system; and
   (iii) provide a satisfactory long-term solution to the treatment of wastewater for the Northern Government in
   Gaza.

   The Memorandum of the President (MOP) and the Technical Annex dated August 12, 2004 defined a two
   part PDO by omitting the second element of the three-part Grant Agreement PDO namely “(i) to mitigate the
   immediate and gathering health and environmental safety threats to the communities surrounding the poorly
   treated sewage lake at the Beit Lahia Waste Water Treatment Plant (BLWTP) site; and (ii) to provide a
   satisfactory long-term solution to the treatment of waste water for the Northern Governorate in Gaza” (page
   5).

   There was no resolution of the difference between these PDOs in the documentation for this
   project. However, this review notes the following:


     1.  The second element in the PDO defined in the original Trust Fund Agreement in October 27, 2004 was
     an input for the first element of the PDO and was therefore not a separate objective but a necessary
     condition for the first element of the PDO.
     2 . The Memorandum of the President in August 2004 defined a two-part PDO that made no mention of the
     second element of the PDO in the Trust Fund Agreement.
     3 . The formally approved Project Papers for all Additional Financing Proposals and for all Restructuring
     Proposals used the two-part PDO defined in the Memorandum of the President.

   This review concluded that there was no material difference between the three-part PDO used in the original
   Grant Agreement and the two-part PDO used in the Memorandum of the President and used in all the
   Project Papers approved by the Bank Board. This review has therefore used the two-part PDO defined in the
   Memorandum of the President as the PDO against which to assess this project’s achievements.


b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  14-Apr-2014
                                                          PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

                                                                                                              Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)




d. Components

  The project included two parts (Technical Annex paras 38 to 49). Appraisal costs includes contingencies.

  Part A. Effluent Transfer (appraisal cost US$13.15 million, actual cost US$15.87 million).

  Component 1. Beit Lahia-Jabalya Effluent Transfer (appraisal cost US$12.15 million including
  provisional items of US$1.85 million, actual cost US$14.12 million). The project was expected to finance
  the construction of: (a) a terminal pumping station with five pumps at Beit Lahia Waste Water Treatment
  Plant (BLWWTP), (b) a ductile iron sewage pipe to transfer the effluent from the Beit Lahia effluent lake to
  the infiltration basins, and (c) nine infiltration basins at the planned site of the North Gaza Waste Water
  Treatment Plant (NGWWTP). In addition, the component would cover the operations and maintenance of
  the infiltration basins for 24 months including the monitoring of effluent and ground water quality during the
  construction period of the new plant, and a coordinator for the maintenance of the basins, equipment and
  materials

  Component 2: Technical Assistance for the Implementation of Component 1 Activities (appraisal
  cost US$0.9 million, actual cost US$1.75 million). This component would finance the operation costs of the
  Project Management Unit (PMU) as well as the costs related to the supervision of the construction works.
  In addition, this component would also update the Environmental Assessment carried out in 1999, to
  ensure compliance with Bank’s Operational Policy on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and a detailed
  remedial works study, as well as the costs related to the implementation of the environmental monitoring
  plan.

  Part B: Treatment (appraisal cost US$29.9 million, actual cost US$65.68 million).

  Component 3. Construction of the North Gaza Wastewater Treatment Plant (appraisal cost US$28.3
  million, actual cost US$60.68 million). This component would finance: (a) the construction of the phase one
  of the North Gaza Waste Water Treatment Plant with a capacity of 35,600 cubic meters/day and
  comprising three treatment modules for secondary biological treatment with nitrogen removal, as well as
  sludge treatment, digestion, electricity generation, dewatering, drying and storage, including: (a)
  implementation of remedial works; (b) acquisition of equipment and materials; (c) operation and
  maintenance of the NGWWTP for two years after the commissioning of this plant, and (d) implementation
  of the remedial works.

  Component 4. Technical Assistance for the Implementation of Component 3 Activities (appraisal
  cost US$1.6 million, actual cost US$5 million). This component would also finance the operating costs of
  the Project Management Unit (PMU), the supervision of construction works, as well as the implementation
  of the environmental monitoring plan during construction.

  Revised Scope of Components

  The first Additional Financing (April 2008) expanded the scope of the project as follows:

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)




    • inclusion of additional risk management measures such as: recovery wells, new pumping station, new
    storage reservoir of about 5000 cubic meters, installation of collection and distribution pipelines; and
    carrying out water quality monitoring and operational program. This was added in in response to the
    2007 rupture of the temporary infiltration basin.


  The Restructuring in April 2017, revised the project scope as follows:


    •The irrigation reuse scheme was dropped. It was expected to be covered under the Bank’s broader
    water security strategy for Gaza.

    • Technical assistance to support the development of operations and maintenance (O&M) arrangements
    was added. Earlier, the Bank was fully financing O&M costs. The technical assistance to build the
    capacity for sustainable management and O&M of infrastructure.

    • Instead of full remediation of the BLWWTP site, the project would finance only partial remediation i.e.,
    priority works, including cleaning and partial leveling of the effluent lakes. This change was made
    because full site remediation was possible only after the new wastewater treatment is commissioned and
    the effluent evacuated.

    •Finance the rehabilitation and activation of a power line which had been damaged during the 2014
    war, in order to provide a 24-hour source of power to the NGWWTP infrastructure.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Project Cost: The actual project cost was US$81.54 million substantially higher than the appraisal
  estimate of US$43.05 million. This was due to: (i) three major outbreaks of severe hostilities; (ii) direct
  damage to some project investments due to 2014 war was estimated around US$1 million; (iii) import
  restrictions; (iv) exchange rate fluctuations; (v) global increases in energy prices; and (vi) need to redesign
  some parts of the North Gaza Waste Water Treatment Plant.

  Financing: The project was financed through a number of tranches from the West Bank & Gaza Multi-
  donor Trust Fund established at the Bank to finance projects in West Bank and Gaza. In addition, the
  Bank acted as administrator for trust funds financed by other donors that entered into joint co-financing
  agreement with the Bank (namely the Belgian, European Commission and Swedish International
  Development Cooperation Agency Trust Funds) and contributed to the financing of this project.



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)



West Bank & Gaza Multi-donor Trust Fund (MDTF)

The original trust fund (TF-54208) for US$7.8 million financed by the MDTF was approved in 2004 to fund
this project. Three more Additional Financing operations were subsequently used to cover financing gaps,
cost overruns, environmental risk mitigation measures and financing for three years of the Operations and
Maintenance of the North Gaza Waste Water Treatment Plant:


  •The first additional financing (TF-92196) for US$12.0 million was approved on April 22, 2008 to
  address cost overruns and finance new activities like the construction of risk management facilities.

  •The second additional financing (TF-97081) for US$7.0 million was approved on August 26, 2010 to
  address cost overruns and financing gaps.

  • The third additional financing TF-16844) for US$3.0 million was approved on April 14, 2014 to
  address cost over-runs and financing gaps, PDO and PDO indicator changes, reallocation between
  disbursement categories and change in legal covenants.


The total financing was US$29.8 million.

World Bank administered Trust Funds


  •Directorate General for International Cooperation of Belgium TF-057109 [appraisal amount US$5.87
  million, actual amount US$7.48 million];

  •European Commission TF-057595 [appraisal amount US$7.94 million, actual amount US$7.68
  million]; and

  •Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency TF-056186 [appraisal amount US$5.77
  million, actual amount US$6.42 million].


Parallel Financing

The project was also parallel financed by the following international institutions:


  • European Investment Bank (EIB) [appraisal amount US$4.73 million, actual amount US$4.71 million];
  and



                                                                                                 Page 5 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)



     •French Agency for Development (AFD) [appraisal amount US$20.66 million, actual amount US$20.48
     million].


   Client/Receipient Contribution: The PLO contribution was US$0.5 million, same as the appraisal
   amount.

   Dates: The project was approved on April 22, 2008. The original closing date was December 31, 2009.
   The closing date was cumulatively extended to June 30, 2018 by additional financings and restructurings.


     •The first additional financing extended the closing date by two years from June 30, 2010 to June 30,
     2012.

     •The second additional financing extended the closing date by one year from June 30, 2012 to June
     30, 2013.

     •The first restructuring (December 24, 2013) extended the closing date of selected trust funds – TF-
     057109 and TF-057595 - until April 7, 2014 and December 31, 2014, respectively.

     •   The third restructuring (December 2017) extended the closing date to June 30, 2018.


   The main reasons for the extended implementation periods related to: (i) a number of conflicts and wars in
   Gaza (ICR para 73 estimates they added close to 2 years of implementation) and associated needs to
   repair damages which added additional time; (ii) insolvency of the contractors which led to significant
   delays; and (iii) significant delays in the import of material (ICR para 74).


3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  Alignment with the country’s priorities. At appraisal, the three wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) in
  Gaza were in very poor condition. The plant in Rafah city was essentially a collection pond with only minor
  treatment capability, and the poorly treated wastewater was discharged into the Mediterranean Sea. The
  plant serving Gaza City was 50 percent overloaded. The Beit Lahia plant in North Gaza. was heavily
  overloaded, functioning poorly, and not equipped with any sludge disposal facilities. Because of poorly
  functioning wastewater treatment plants in Gaza and Israeli restrictions prohibiting the untreated wastewater
  from being discharged into the sea, the untreated wastewater was seeping into the Coastal Aquifer and
  contaminating the groundwater, which was the major source of drinking water and exposing the population to
  waterborne diseases and threat of sewage floods. In response to this challenge, the Palestinian Water


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 20
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)



       Authority (PWA) had prepared a sewage master plan for Gaza, but the implementation was delayed because
       of a lack of financing and a deteriorating security situation (ICR, para 4). The project addressed both the
       urgent needs of the people of Gaza and also the long-term public health needs and environmental threats
       posed by improper wastewater management.

       During implementation, the project objectives remained aligned with the Gaza Regional Waste Water
       Strategy and the Rolling Schedule of Interventions (2011), which included accelerated completion of the
       major WWTPs in Gaza, including the North Gaza Waste Water Treatment Plant, currently the only treatment
       plant in Gaza that provides the potential to generate 13 million cubic meters of reused water annually (ICR,
       para 37).

       At closure, the project objectives were aligned with the PWAs medium-term Water Sector Strategic
       Development Plan (SDP, 2017–2022). The SDP focuses on improving water security by enhancing the
       delivery and structure (collection, treatment, and reuse) of water and wastewater services. The project
       objectives were also aligned with the National Water and Wastewater Strategy and Policy for Palestine
       2012-2032, which aims to protect the natural water resources from pollution by wastewater (ICR, para 38).

       Alignment with the Bank’s strategy. The project objectives were aligned with the third pillar of the Bank’s
       current Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for West Bank and Gaza (FY18–21) which aimed at “addressing
       the needs of the vulnerable and strengthening institutions for improved citizen-centered service delivery”,
       including water and sanitation (CAS page 21). The strategy notes that “with major water supply and
       sanitation infrastructure deficits and inefficiencies, water scarcity is a major concern” (CAS, para 68).
       Moreover, 96% of water resources are unfit for use by Gaza’s 2 million inhabitants due to low levels of
       treatment of wastewater and sewage, that result in salinity and nitrate concentrations in aquifers that are six
       times higher than WHO standards for drinking water (ICR, para 39). This poses a severe threat to
       environmental and public health (CAS, para 71).



       Rating
       High
   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     As noted in Section 2a of this review the objectives against which this project’s achievements will be
     assessed are (i) to mitigate the immediate gathering health and environmental safety threats to the
     communities surrounding the effluent lake at BLWWTP; and (ii) to provide a satisfactory long-term solution
     to the treatment of wastewater for the Northern Government in Gaza. The assessment of achievements
     below will refer to these objectives as Objective 1 and Objective 2.



                                                                                                          Page 7 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)




Objective 1: Mitigate the health and environmental safety threats to the communities surrounding the
effluent lake at Beit Lahia.

Rationale

Theory of Change. According to the theory of change presented in the ICR (Figure 1), the project objective
to, mitigate the health and environmental safety threats to the communities surrounding the effluent lake at
Beit Lahia was expected to be achieved through the drainage of Beit Lahia lake via effluent transfer to new
infiltration basins built near the planned North Gaza Waste Water Treatment Plant (NGWWTP) site, as well
as additional risk management measures (recovery wells, new storage reservoir, etc.) that were added to the
project scope following the rupture of the temporary emergency infiltration basin at the Beit Lahia Waste
Water Treatment Plant (BLWWTP) in 2007.

Outputs

(i) The construction of the Terminal Pumping Station (TPS) at Beit Lahia which was equipped with five
pumps (4 in operation and one in standby);

(ii) The construction of 9 infiltration basins;

(iii) The installation of a seven km ductile iron 800 mm diameter pressure pipeline; and

(iv) The construction of nine new infiltration basins to support the transfer of effluent from Beit Lahia to the
NGWWTP site.

These four activities were sufficient to transfer the effluent in the Beit Lahai lake to the newly constructed
infiltration basins east of Jabalia and thereby prevent backflows in the sewerage system. The scheme was
successfully completed in April 2009 to enable successful drainage of the effluent lake.

Plans for decommissioning of the BLWWTP as well as the rehabilitation of the effluent lake, including
removing the human made embankments, as well as refilling and leveling of the site, effectively ensuring
that the effluent lake cannot pose health and safety threats in the future, were completed. However, the
proposed works could not be financed under the project for lack of available resources and late completion
of the lake drainage (ICR, para 46).

Following the clogging of the infiltration basins in 2016 (discussed below under "outcome"), two of these
were rehabilitated as pilots following a technical feasibility study in December 2017, while the remaining
seven are expected to be financed by a project currently under preparation with financing from the French
Development Agency (AFD). The two rehabilitated infiltration basins are functioning well and managing the
current sewage inflow.




                                                                                                       Page 8 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)



 At project closure, 14 out of 28 proposed recovery wells were operational and 5 out of 10 proposed
 monitoring wells were operational. The remaining recovery and monitoring wells are expected to be installed
 under parallel AFD financing by 2023.

 Outcomes

 The project investment assisted in mitigating the health and environmental safety threats to the communities
 surrounding the effluent lake at Beit Lahia. The effluent lake at Beit Lahia was drained. An assessment of 60
 households (totaling 400 beneficiaries), showed that the incidence of the water-borne diseases such as
 diarrhea, skin diseases and typhoid (especially among children) was reduced. On average, 64%
 respondents reported a reduction in the incidence of these diseases (Beit Lahia - 70 percent, Jabalia - 70
 percent, Jabalia Camp - 70 percent, Beit Hanoun - 60 percent and Omm Al Nasser - 50 percent) (ICR para
 50).

 For the communities living in Um Al Nassir village (which is adjacent and the closest to the effluent lake), the
 health data from the local clinic show positive trends in the incidence of most intestinal and skin diseases,
 especially the most often associated with poor sanitation and environmental conditions – typhoid, diarrhea,
 and skin rashes (ICR para 51 and 52). The incidence of typhoid and paratyphoid fevers decreased from 44
 reported cases in 2017 (when the Beit Lahia lake was full) to 25 reported cases in 2018 (when the lake was
 drained). During the same period, the incidence of “diarrhea and gastroenteritis of presumed infectious
 origin” decreased from 266 to 187, and dermatitis from 219 to 109.

 The evacuation and drainage of the effluent lake at Beit Lahia was done twice, first in December 2010 and
 second in March 2016. In addition to the drainage of the effluent lake, which was pumped from Beit Lahia to
 the infiltration basins, the project additionally pumped extra volumes (25 million cubic meters) of sewage
 from the old Beit Lahia WWTP to the infiltration basins directly, bypassing the effluent lake. However, due to
 construction delays of NGWWTP and the poor treatment performance of the BLWWTP, partially treated
 wastewater eventually clogged the infiltration basins, forcing the Palestinian Water Authority (PWA) to resort
 back to using part of the effluent lake as a temporary measure in March 2016. The effluent lake was finally
 drained for a second time in October 2018, with an estimated 2.5 million cubic meters removed after the
 NGWWTP had become operational (well above the intermediate indicator target of 1.5 million cubic meters
 removed).

 The drainage of Beit Lahia lake via effluent transfer to new infiltration basins built near the planned North
 Gaza Waste Water Treatment Plant as well as additional risk management measures (recovery wells, new
 storage reservoir, etc.) substantially reduced the incidence of water borne diseases and helped helped
 mitigate the health and environmental safety threats to the communities surrounding the effluent lake at Beit
 Lahia.



 Rating
 Substantial
PHREVDELTBL

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 20
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)




PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     Provide a satisfactory long-term solution to the treatment of waste water for the Northern Government in
     Gaza.

    Rationale

    Theory of Change. According to the Theory of Change, the construction of the wastewater treatment plant
    and complementary sustainable practices for its operation and maintenance would provide a long-term
    solution to the treatment of wastewater for the Northern Government in Gaza.

    Outputs

    The construction of wastewater treatment plant in North Gaza.

    For sustainable operations and maintenance (O&M) of the North Gaza Wastewater Treatment Plant, limited
    progress was made. A draft Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) defining the roles and responsibilities of
    key stakeholders was prepared. However, by project closure, the MOU had not been signed. Regarding tariff
    collection arrangements, the ICR reports that the discussion is still ongoing (ICR para 60).

    To build the capacity of the Coastal Municipalities Water Utility (CMWU), a ten-month training program was
    carried out by the international joint venture contractor (see section 7).

    Outcomes

    With the completion and operation of the North Gaza Wastewater Treatment Plant, the project investments
    provided a long-term solution for the treatment of wastewater in in Gaza. The target of “quantities of waste
    water treated and appropriately disposed of” was substantially achieved. By 2018, 33,000 cubic meters/day
    of waste water was being treated compared to the original target of 35,000 cubic meters/day and revised
    target of 25,000 cubic meters/day (ICR, page 37).

    The waste water is being collected and treated in compliance with the Palestinian Environmental Standards
    for biological parameters of treated wastewater and is fit for aquifer recharge and unrestricted reuse (ICR,
    para 56). The target for the indicator “less than 5% increase in salinity and nitrate levels at monitoring wells
    within project site compared to before commissioning the plant” was achieved (ICR, Annex 1, A1). As per
    September 2018 groundwater quality sampling results, the levels of nitrates were between 33 and 60 mg/L
    for the 13 regularly monitored wells. However, elevated nitrates levels (> 200 mg/l) were witnessed in two
    wells.




                                                                                                         Page 10 of 20
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)



              Regarding the sustained funding of O&M for the North Gaza Waste Water Treatment Plant, the Ministry of
              Finance has committed to finance the O&M for the full two-year period (up to end of February 2020). In the
              meantime, it will continue the dialogue with the Coastal Municipalities Water Utility (CMWU) and the
              municipalities to determine the post-2020 O&M financing arrangements (see section 7 for details).



              Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL

 PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




 Rationale

 The project has fully constructed and implemented a scheme which included the Terminal Pumping Station
 (TPS), infiltration basins, and a seven km ductile iron pressure pipeline to support the transfer of effluent from
 Beit Lahia to the NGWWTP site to prevent backflows in the sewerage system. The NGWWTP is fully operational.
 Project activities ensured that the surrounding communities were at no further risk of sewage flooding (and its
 associated casualties, detrimental health impacts and economic damage) and environmental safety threats.




 Overall Efficacy Rating
 Substantial
PHREVISEDTBL



      5. Efficiency


      Economic Analysis. The project was prepared under the Bank's emergency recovery assistance procedures
      (OP 8.50) and detailed financial and economic analysis were not required or carried out at appraisal due to
      limited time and non-availability of economic data (PAD, para 64). The PAD refers to an analysis carried out by
      SIDA using the Mekorot (Israeli Water Utility) water price and seawater desalination costs. That investment
      yielded an estimated economic rate of return of 8.7%. No additional information is provided in PAD on how this
      was calculated. The Bank project team sought additional information from SIDA but none was provided.

      During additional financing, economic analysis was also not carried out because, in line with Bank guidelines, it
      was not required because this operation was aimed at emergency recovery.

      At completion, a cost benefit analysis was carried out. Estimated benefits included: (i) the North Gaza
      Wastewater Treatment Plant O&M cost savings; (ii) the environmental benefits of reducing Biochemical
      Oxygen Demand (used as an indicator of the degree of organic pollution), and; (iii) the annual expected
      damage (AED) of further sewage flood events. Regarding the first assumption, the Bank project team
      explained to IEG that “the alternative scenario in the case the North Gaza Emergency Sewage Treatment

                                                                                                              Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)



(NGEST) Project does not happen is to outsource the treatment of waste water of 30,000 cubic meters/day to a
plant in Israel, which is more costly (US$ 0.46 per cubic meters) than treating in the NGEST plant (US$ 0.21
per cubic meters). This gap is counted as O&M cost savings of the project”. Moreover, “even when the waste
water is treated in the Israeli plant, there were some areas that had not been covered with existing sewerage
network before NGEST Project, which results in discharge of polluted waste water to the Mediterranean Sea.
The non-market environmental benefit derived from avoided discharge of waste water was calculated using
shadow price estimation method”. The sensitivity analysis included a 1 in 10-year flood event. According to the
ICR (footnote 34), the ‘Low scenario’ assumes the number of partially destroyed houses as 387 (cited in
Jerusalem Post) while the ‘High scenario’ Sc. 2 assumes affected people as 50,000 and assuming an average
of 5.6 people per household indicates a partial destruction as 8,929 houses (the number cited from NY Times).
The ERR ranged from 3.3% to 10.6%. The point value was estimated at 7.8% and the net present values
(NPV) was US$9.5 million.

A cost savings analysis with and without the project was also carried out. As noted above, the "with" project
scenario included processing the waste water through the North Gaza Waste Water Treatment Plant which
generated the benefits enumerated above. The "without" project scenario included the waste water treatment
by Israel using the latest Israeli waste water treatment tariff of 1.71 ILS/cubic meter. Both scenarios include the
capital expenditures (CAPEX) related to the effluent transfer infrastructure. This resulted a net ERR of 1.3%
compared with the counterfactual and a negative NPV of US$6.6 million using a discount rate of 6%. The "net
ERR" of 1.3% obviously indicates a very low impact of the project compared with the cost of waste water
treatment by a plant in Israel. A negative "net NPV" is probably caused by the 6% discount rate
chosen although this rate is not justified in the ICR.

Cost overruns. The project experienced a cost overrun in 2017 prices of US$23 million. This was because of:
(i) three major outbreaks of severe hostilities; (ii) direct damage to the project due to 2014 war was estimated
around US$1 million; (iii) import restrictions; (iv) exchange rate fluctuations; (v) global increases in energy
prices; and (vi) need to redesign some parts of the North Gaza Waste Water Treatment Plant (ICR, paras 73,
90, and 108)

Procurement delays. As discussed in section 10 b, there were procurement delays due to conflict in Gaza
and restrictions imposed by Israel on the import of cement and other raw materials.The delays slowed down
the completion of the project quite severely.

Time overruns. Throughout project implementation, the conflict situation in Gaza persisted with periods of war
(a month- long war in 2008-09; one-week war in 2012; and two-month war in 2014), instances of shootings and
security threats to the project. There were several instances when contractors and staff had to be evacuated
and therefore stopped work. The ICR estimates that the conflict added around 22 months to the project
implementation period (including the time to remobilize contractors and to repair damage due to conflict and
wars) (ICR, para 73).

Though delays caused by conflicts, war and import restrictions were not project inefficiencies, they did
contribute to the significant cost overrun of US$23 million and resulted in time overruns.



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)



Financial Viability of NGWWTP. The ICR reports (Annex 4, para 16) that during the first five years of the
operation of the plant, is estimated to incur a deficit of US$9.5 million. This was because CMWU did not have
the capacity to efficiently operate and maintain the plant and no financial resources to sustain the O&M costs
had been identified.

Overall, project's efficiency is rated modest due to a low estimated rate of return and significant time and cost
overruns. In addition, for the first five years, the newly constructed North Gaza Waste Water Treatment Plant is
not expected to be financially viable.



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                    Rate Available?        Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                 8.70
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                     80.00
ICR Estimate                                              7.80
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


The project's development objectives were highly relevant to country priorities and Bank’s strategy for West
Bank and Gaza. The achievement of the project's objectives was substantial. First, by draining the effluent lake,
the project assisted in mitigating the health and environmental safety threats to the communities surrounding the
effluent lake at Beit Lahia. Second, through the construction of the North Gaza Waste Water Treatment Plant,
the project the project investments provided a long-term solution for the treatment of waste water in North
Gaza. Project efficiency, however, is rated modest due to a relatively low economic rate of return as well as
significant time and cost overruns, and for the first five years the newly constructed NGWWTP is not expected
to be financially viable with a likely total deficit of US$9.5 million.

Overall the project had moderate shortcomings and its outcome is therefore rated moderately satisfactory.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)




7. Risk to Development Outcome


Political Risk: The conflict situation in Gaza and Israeli restrictions pose substantial risks to the sustainability of
development outcomes. The conflicts hinder progress in institutional and capacity building and may reverse the
progress made under the project.

Financial Risk: The Ministry of Finance (MoF) has committed to finance the operation of the waste water
treatment plant for the next two years (until 2020). However, the continued operation of the plant would require
sustained commitment from the MoF, Palestinian Water Authority as well as the Palestinian Authority. Moreover,
financial resources to cover the O&M costs through a full cost recovery are insufficient. Therefore, the financial
risk is substantial.

Operations and Maintenance (O&M) Capacity Risk: Since 2009, the Coastal Municipalities Water Utility
(CMWU) has been adequately supervising the O&M of the infiltration basins along with other components of Part
A of the project, i.e. the Terminal Pumping Station and the pressure pipeline, with financial contributions from
relevant municipalities and support from the Palestinian Water Authority (ICR para 45). CMWU is expected to
take over the O&M from the international joint venture contractor at the end of February 2020. The O&M
agreement signed between the Palestinian Water Authority and the contractor provides for the training of the
CMWU staff for a period of six months. By comparison, the ICR mentions 10 months of training but
the information provided to IEG by the Bank task team is that the training period will be for six months without any
negative repercussions. The O&M capacity risk is modest.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  The project preparation was based on the lessons learned from previous emergency operations in the
  West Bank and Gaza. The lessons related to decentralization of project preparation and implementation,
  when central systems are unable to function effectively because of the security situation. Another
  lesson was to include realistic contingency plans to deal with various crises (Technical, Annex para 58).
  However, despite a realistic contingency plan, two additional financings were needed to cover financial
  gaps due to conflict.

  The implementation arrangements envisaged at appraisal were satisfactory. The PMU, with the core
  team of a Project Director, two engineers, two supervisors, one administrative assistant and one financial
  accountant, were responsible for the day to day implementation of the Project. The core team would be
  supplemented with consultants (Technical Annex para 60).

  There were some weaknesses in M&E design (see section 9).


                                                                                                        Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)




  At appraisal, the risks identification was satisfactory. The main risk was security due to the conflict
  situation in Gaza. The associated implementation risks were access of materials and contractors to the
  project sites, and movement of PMU staff into and out of Gaza. The other risks identified were: (i) sudden
  and catastrophic failure of the lake embankment, and (ii) delays in implementation due to financing
  issues. However, two risks were not anticipated. These were the length of the project's implementation
  period (including several additional financing and restructurings) was not anticipated, and the insolvency
  of the international joint venture contractor.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  The Bank team implemented the project in very difficult circumstances – wars and conflict situation. The
  ICR records that the Bank team administered a number of trust funds and spearheaded donor
  coordination over the long implementation period which spanned 14 years. The Bank team was flexible
  and arranged for crucial additional financing when needed. The Bank team also liaised with the
  Government of Israel to permit the material and equipment for the construction of the North Gaza Waste
  Water Plant to enter Gaza (ICR, para 110).

  Nevertheless, while IEG recognizes the challenges involved in the supervision of the project over 14
  years, there were some shortcomings in supervision. In IEG’s view the Bank’s project task team was lax
  in not formally resolving the discrepancy between the PDO statements in the Trust Fund Grant
  Agreement and in the Memorandum of the President and then using the two-part PDO in the
  Memorandum of the President in all the Project Papers to the Board for the AFs and project
  restructurings as though it was the formally agreed PDO. In addition, performance indicators could also
  have been revised earlier to better align with planned outcomes that could realistically be attributed to
  and measured under the project.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)



a. M&E Design

  M&E design had major weaknesses. The project’s results framework included mostly output indicators
  such as "effluent lake is drained" and "increase in quantity of wastewater treated and appropriately
  disposed of". The outcome indicator “positive incidence on local population observed at local clinics” to
  measure the first PDO was not fully attributable to the project and was difficult to measure. On the other
  hand the outcome indicator “improvement of the ground water quality in terms of salinity and nitrates
  contamination” was appropriate to assess the achievement of the second PDO, but no baseline and
  targets for this indicator were set at appraisal.



b. M&E Implementation

  During implementation the results framework was revised. The indicator “positive incidence on local
  population observed at local clinics” was dropped as it was not practical to measure the incidence of diarrhea
  at local clinics and then attribute any change directly to project outputs” (ICR page 12). The target for the
  increase in quantities of wastewater treated and properly disposed of was decreased from 35,000 cubic
  meters to 25,000 cubic meters. The measurement of the indicator “improvement of ground water quality in
  terms of salinity and nitrates contamination” was clarified to mean that the project was not expected to
  improve groundwater quality, but to prevent further deterioration .

  To measure the long term sustainability of the project, two indicators were added: (i) Maintenance and
  operational costs of the NGWWTP fully financed by the Costal Municipality Water Utility (CMWU), Ministry of
  Local Government and Municipalities (target: Yes); (ii) CMWU manages plant so that effluent standards are
  met at all times (target: Yes).

  The ICR reports (para 99) that M&E implementation was the responsibility of the PMU. The PMU hired
  consultants to consolidate the M& E data received from the PWA. As mentioned above, the data for the
  “positive incidence on local population observed at local clinics” were difficult to collect. An assessment of
  project benefits through a survey of 60 households (covering 400 beneficiaries) was conducted through group
  discussion. This was complemented by observations and secondary data collection from previously
  completed assessments by Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) stakeholders and monitoring groups
  (ICR, para 50). Data on the incidence of typhoid, diarrhea, and skin rashes were also collected from a local
  clinic of the Um Al Nassir village before and after the effluent lake was drained.

  Quarterly monitoring reports were prepared by the PMU and, according to the ICR. their quality was
  satisfactory. The methodology used for analyzing the data was sound (para 99).



c. M&E Utilization



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)



  The ICR advised that data collected from the groundwater quality monitoring was used to modify the location
  of recovery wells in order to control the pollution movement towards the water supply wells. Moreover, the
  data on the effluent lake level and the infiltration basins were used for designing temporary disposal ponds,
  as a flood prevention measure (para 100) .On the other hand, the M&E system was not helpful in providing
  comprehensive information on the health and environmental benefits from the project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was classified as Environmental Assessment Category "A" because of the potential negative
  environmental impacts associated with the construction of the North Gaza Waste Water Treatment Plant
  (NGWWTP), the effluent recharge, and the re-use of sludge. In the short-term, the main negative impact of
  the project was the potential degradation of ground water quality from the drainage of the effluent lake before
  the completion of the NGWWTP. However, in the long-term, the project was expected to have a strong
  positive effect on the environment by protecting the groundwater from contamination of poorly treated
  wastewater. The other anticipated impacts were the elimination of potential flooding from the effluent lake at
  Beit Lahia on adjacent lands and the reuse of the sludge generated by NGWWTP.

  At the time of approval, the Environmental Assessment (EA) study was being carried out on a fast-track
  basis. This was in accordance with the OP 8.0 as the project was an emergency operation. The Middle East
  and North Africa Regional Vice-president had requested for an exemption to allow the disclosure of the draft
  EA report shortly after the Board presentation (MOP paras 27). The ICR reports that Environmental Impact
  Assessment (EIA) was disclosed by the Palestinian Water Authority (PWA). The first EIA study
  “Improvements to Beit Lahia and Associated Developments”, was financed from SIDA funds in 1999. The
  second EIA study “Proposed New Wastewater Treatment Works” covered (i) the NGWWTP (ii) the sewage
  transfer from the existing BLWWTP to the new NGWWTP site (iii) the activities associated with the
  decommissioning of BLWWTP, financed from SIDA funds, 1999. The full EA (safeguards category A)
  including EMP for the NGEST Project, was financed by the Bank in 2006. The Bank's project team informed
  IEG that the first EIA was disclosed in Feb 2006 and the updated EIA in April 2013.

  No other safeguards were triggered.

  The ICR reports (para 31) that not all measures of the environmental management plan were fully achieved.
  For example, as noted already, only 14 out of the 28 recovery wells were constructed, thus some residual
  safety and environmental risks remain in place until those measures are fully completed. They are being
  financed by AFD and scheduled to be finalized in 2023. The rating of safeguards performance in the ISRs
  ranged from “moderately satisfactory” to “Moderately unsatisfactory” during the implementation period. The
  Bank project team explained to IEG that “what remains to be completed is the decommissioning of the old

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)



  BLWWTP and the remedial works on the effluent lake site, which were not completed due to time and
  funding limitations. A detailed study was carried out in consultation with key stakeholders that included social
  and environmental measures, preparation of the design and tender documents. Carrying out of these works
  is pending the availability of funding”




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  The Financial Management: The ICR reports (para 106) that the financial performance rating was
  satisfactory. The project complied with the Bank’s financial management guidelines including budgeting,
  internal controls, financial reporting, staffing, and auditing. Audit reports and Interim Financial Reports (IFRs)
  were submitted to the Bank on time and with only minor issues. The Bank project team informed IEG that
  external audits of project accounts were conducted and were unqualified.

  PWA had had a budget and disbursement plan which was broken down by donor and funding sources, and
  this plan was updated regularly. However, because of currency exchange variations, the last audit report had
  over US$200,000 in exchange rate losses. The project team informed IEG that “these are reporting
  variances as the reporting currency was in USD, but some trust funds were in GBP or Euro. Any receipts in
  GBP or Euro were exchanged as of the date of receipt into USD and payments were made in USD. This was
  a reporting loss to the project”.

  Procurement: The ICR reports (para 105) that the project procurement was in accordance with the Bank’s
  Procurement Guidelines, January 2011, revised July 2014. The procurement contracts for the large civil
  works as well as their subsequent amendments were subjected to the Bank’s Prior reviews. In addition, the
  Bank carried out five ex-post procurement reviews over the lifetime of the project. There was no major
  noncompliance.

  There were, however, some procurement challenges:

    • The Project Director was responsible not only for the project contract management decision-making but
    also other projects in the water sector in Gaza. This overload led to procurement delays.

    •Finalizing the contract with a qualified international joint venture took almost two years. This was partly
    because the context of Gaza make it less attractive for qualified bidders (ICR para 96).

    •   There were procurement delays due to conflicts in Gaza that led to prolonged period of inaction.

    •Sometimes, contract dates had to go through multiple amendments to extend completion dates. This
    was due to the lengthy clearances required for imported items.




                                                                                                      Page 18 of 20
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
      ---


d. Other
      ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                     IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory   ---
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory   ---
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                  Modest                    ---
Quality of ICR                                         Substantial               ---

12. Lessons


Several lessons have been selected from the ICR as relevant to other similar operations in the World Bank with
some adaptation of the language (ICR paras 117 to 123):

  • Designated financial resources for the operation and maintenance of crucial social infrastructure
  in poor fragile, conflict and violence (FCV) affected countries can ensure the sustainability of crucial
  infrastructure. Operation, maintenance, and replacement costs of critical social infrastructure facilities such
  as sewage systems in poor FCV affected countries are typically not affordable by the public sector because
  payments for services by beneficiaries, even if made, are generally inadequate to sustain the costs of
  running such infrastructure. In this project the North Gaza Waste Water Treatment Plant (NGWWTP),
  constructed as part of the project, is expected to accumulate a deficit of US$9.5 million during the first five
  years of its operation. Unless funds are available to cover these costs the inevitable outcome will be
  deterioration of the NGWWTP and ultimately complete costly reconstruction or rehabilitation.

  • In situations where electricity supplies based on fossil fuels to operate infrastructure are unreliable,
  alternate renewable energy sources are usually available. This project's experience shows that in Gaza,
  where energy is a particular challenge, the NGWTTP will be operated in future using alternate renewable
  energy sources such as on-site solar panels.




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment (P074595)



  • When strong donor coordination is established at the start of a project it provides mutual
  reinforcement of effort. For a project with a multitude of donors, an effective division of labor between
  donors at various stages can benefit the project. Co-financing and parallel financing arrangements with the
  various technical and financial partners in this project provided a level of flexibility in the preparation, initiation
  and prioritization of critical activities. This project provided a specific example in the reuse of the treated
  waste water for irrigation available from the operation of the NGWWTP which will be financed by the Agence
  de Developpement (AFD).




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR is comprehensive and provides a good overview of the implementation challenges. It follows OPCS
guidelines and is results oriented and provides some useful lessons. The efficiency analysis was
comprehensive, but the ICR provided no justification for the 6% discount rate used in the economic analysis.

The ICR also did not discuss why an interim ICR was not prepared for this project, as per Bank guidelines,
for projects undergoing implementation for more than 10 years. This review notes that the rationale for
not preparing an interim ICR (stipulated in World Bank BP10.00, para 5) was mentioned in the Project Paper
(paragraph 55) for the third Additional Financing namely that, if closing date extensions and additional
financing are solely for cost overruns, Management can decide to have a single ICR prepared at project
completion. The Country Director decided that this project met the requirements for a single ICR.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is substantial.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                          Page 20 of 20
