     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0021513

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P117157                                    SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 El Salvador                                Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80760                                 30-Jun-2016                                         79,853,295.14

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Jul-2011                                30-May-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            80,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             79,853,295.14                                              0.00

 Actual                                         79,853,295.14                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   According to the Loan Agreement (p. 4), the project's objectives were "to: (i) expand the coverage, quality
   and equity in utilization of primary health services provided under the Integral and Integrated Health Care
   Service Networks (RIISS); and (ii) strengthen the Ministry of Health's (MINSAL's) stewardship capacity to
   manage essential public health functions." RIISS is MINSAL's network of organizations aimed at providing
   integrated health services to the population, established through the National Development Plan 2010-2014.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)



   At a March 2016 restructuring, the target for one outcome indicator was revised upward. Per IEG/OPCS
   guidelines, a split rating is not performed.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

                                                          PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   The project contained three components, targeted at 2.1 million people in 92 municipalities who were
   identified as having the greatest health needs, largest requirement for financial protection, and lowest
   access to disease prevention and health promotion services at the primary care level. These municipalities
   were chosen to avoid duplication with another project being financed by the Inter-American Development
   Bank (IADB; Project Appraisal Document, PAD, p. 24).

   1. Expansion of Priority Health Services and Programs (appraisal, US$ 45 million; actual US$ 60.6
   million). This component was to strengthen the quality and delivery capacity of priority health services
   under the RIISS through the gradual implementation of a Comprehensive Primary Health Care Strategy,
   including the acquisition of medical equipment and maintenance/minor rehabilitation of facilities; and the
   improved delivery of selected priority public health programs, including those addressing maternal health,
   reproductive and sexual health, teenage pregnancy, child health, nutrition, dengue control, and chronic
   kidney disease. RIISS included all levels of the health system: Family Health Community Teams (ECOS),
   Community Health Units, and hospitals. The component was also to support the implementation of a
   National Medical Emergencies system in about 16 eligible hospitals through coordination of the national
   hospital system with MINSAL, the Salvadoran Social Security Institute, the Ministry of Defense, the
   National Civil Police, the Solidary Fund for Health, and the Red Cross; the installation of a national call
   system for emergencies; improvements in resuscitation room equipment and the ambulance fleet;
   training of medical and paramedic staff in the management of medical emergencies; and strengthening of
   medical emergency response at the community level.

   2. Institutional Strengthening (appraisal, US$ 31.4 million; actual US$ 16.9 million). This component was
   to strengthen MINSAL through: (i) enhancing MINSAL's stewardship and management capacity to perform
   essential public health functions, including improvement of the Single Unified Health Information System
   (SUIS); implementation of a national pharmaceutical policy aimed at increasing the quality, efficiency, and
   security of rational use of medicines as well as transparency in procurement; and support for activities of
   the National Health Institute (including training of clinicians and lab technicians, surveillance, knowledge


                                                                                                              Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)



  generation, and research) and the Central Laboratory; and (ii) developing an emergency preparedness
  plan for public health emergencies, and implementing this plan through the financing of Eligible Public
  Health Expenditures. The component included a contingency fund to support immediate emergency
  response for natural disasters officially declared by the government within the project's first three years; as
  there was no declared emergency during this time frame, these funds were allocated to other project
  activities.

  3. Project Management and Monitoring (appraisal, US$ 3.4 million; actual US$ 2.2 million). This
  component was to support the monitoring of project activities through semi-annual external technical
  reviews, annual health facility surveys, and an impact evaluation. It was also to assist the Project
  Coordination Unit in carrying out the management, monitoring, and supervision activities of the project, and
  strengthen the Institutional Procurement and Contracting Unit and the Institutional Financing Unit in
  performing project-related fiduciary activities.

  As the project proceeded, challenges related to non-communicable disease, especially cancer, became
  more important to the implementation of the government's 2015-2019 Health Strategic Plan. As a result,
  US$ 9 million was reallocated across components for the design of a National Strategy for Chronic
  Diseases and National Plan for prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer; creation of a National
  Radiotherapy Center; purchase of a cobalt pump to strengthen the National Cancer Institute; purchase of
  other medical equipment; and preparation of an emergency response action plan to allow for immediate
  response in case of a public health alert or emergency. At a later restructuring, additional funds were
  reallocated for purchase of a building for the National Reference Laboratory (a new subcomponent under
  the Institutional Strengthening component).




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Project cost: Actual total project cost was US$ 79.8 million, reflecting the estimated total cost at appraisal
  of US$ 80 million minus a US$ 0.2 million front-end fee. Over successive restructurings, funds were
  reallocated toward the first component and away from the second and third components, such that the
  actual cost of the first component was over one-third above what was initially planned.

  Financing: The project was to financed by a US$ 80 million loan from the International Bank for
  Reconstruction and Development. US$ 79.85 million was disbursed, and US$ 0.15 million was cancelled.

  Borrower contribution: No Borrower contribution was planned or made.

  Dates: The project was restructured five times:




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)



     • December 2012: Funds were reallocated across loan categories, as some planned activities were
     covered with government funds, and additional infrastructure and equipment needs for strengthening
     health care networks were identified.
     • February 2015: Funds were transferred from the second to the first component to cover startup costs
     for the National Radiotherapy Center, and the results framework was revised to refine indicator
     definitions.
     • March 2016: In response to the mid-term review, the results framework was revised to increase
     targets for one outcome indicator and two intermediate indicators, and to extend the closing date by 18
     months (from June 2016 to December 2017) to compensate for time lost following an 18-month initial
     delay in project effectiveness.
     • April 2017: Funds were again reallocated across component to cover building costs for a new
     National Reference Laboratory under the first component.
     • August 2017: The closing date was extended by five months (from December 2017 to May 2018) to
     allow for delivery of goods and completion of a user satisfaction survey.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  At appraisal, El Salvador had made significant gains in health outcomes since the 1990s, evidenced by
  increases in life expectancy, declines in child and infant mortality, and improved maternal and reproductive
  health outcomes. Challenges in equity and access to care, however, remained for the poor and those living
  in remote areas. The rise of non-communicable disease, if not addressed, threatened to place considerable
  fiscal pressure on the public health system. Both supply-side and demand-side factors hindered use of
  health services. Inequities in health care financing existed between the National Health Service (which, in
  2008, spent around 1.5% of gross domestic product to cover almost 80% of the population) and the
  Salvadorian Social Security Institute (which spent about the same amount covering only one-fifth of the
  population).

  MINSAL's National Health Strategy at appraisal (2009-2014) sought to address fragmentation of the health
  sector and ensure universal coverage, with a major focus on primary health care within the RIISS. It
  specifically aimed at increasing coverage and equity of access to health services, improving the quality of
  services, and strengthening the management of information systems to enhance MINSAL's monitoring and
  oversight capacity. The project was highly responsive to this strategy, specifically intending to improve the
  quality of care and increase the efficiency of referral mechanisms so that over 80% of health needs could
  be resolved at the first level of care. This reorganization was to increase health care coverage to the poor
  within their communities, as well as quality of care and efficiency of service provision. The project's
  objectives were also highly relevant to the Country Partnership Strategy (2010-2012) at appraisal, which
  had a main priority to strengthen the delivery of social services, including improvements in the quality and
  coverage of primary health care services.

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)




       The project's objectives remained highly relevant to government and Bank strategy at closing. The
       government's 2015-2019 National Health Strategy, as well as its five-year development plan (2014-2019)
       and Social Development Plan (2018), called for consolidation and strengthening of the health sector, with
       focus on guaranteeing equal access for vulnerable people to quality health care services. Specific attention
       was paid in these plans to reduction of maternal and child mortality, expanding priority health services and
       programs, formulating and implementing strategies for prevention and control of cancer, and improving the
       structure and organization of RIISS. The Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF, 2016-2019)
       prioritized inclusive growth, improved efficiency of public spending, and provision of health services through
       an integrated approach. It contained an objective to expand universal coverage of quality health care. The
       CPF also (p. 36) focused directly on the need to improve efficiency of health services delivery through
       consolidation and optimization of the four-tier service delivery network; although improved efficiency was
       not explicitly an objective of this project, optimization of the delivery network was implicit in the project's
       objective to strengthen MINSAL's capacity to manage essential health functions.



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     Expand the coverage of primary health services provided under the RIISS

    Rationale

    The project's theory of change linked purchases of equipment for health centers and hospitals, rehabilitation
    and maintenance of infrastructure, purchases of ambulances and emergency equipment, and provision of
    vaccines and medical supplies, to increased availability of child and reproductive health services, nutrition
    services, supplies and equipment in referral centers, and responsiveness to medical emergencies. The
    strengthening of referral networks and development of strategies related to non-communicable disease and
    emergency medicine were also to improve responsiveness to key health threats. The resulting increased
    identification and availability of priority services would in turn improve coverage.

    Outputs

    14,385 community health promoters and committees received training in comprehensive community health
    care. 2,437 ECOS were established, with the goal of developing local situational assessments and action




                                                                                                          Page 5 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)



plans for promoting health and preventing diseases. 4,660 health personnel were trained, exceeding the
target of 1,200. The project also trained 35 epidemiologists for the national laboratory.

269 ECOS and 30 hospitals in the 92 project municipalities were equipped according to MINSAL technical
guidelines. This met the target of 30 hospitals. It did not achieve the original target of equipping 708 ECOS,
but it exceeded the revised target of 104 equipped ECOS. Purchased equipment included dental equipment
and instruments for primary health care facilities, physical therapy equipment, transportation equipment for
central and regional storage facilities and environmental sanitation, vector control spraying equipment,
information technology equipment and mobile devices for geo-referenced family information collection, and
others (ICR, p. 47). Minor rehabilitation and maintenance works were carried out for 56 primary health care
facilities and several central MINSAL facilities. Hospitals were provided with high-tech medical equipment,
medical clinic furniture, and non-medical equipment (ICR, p. 50).

The project purchased anti-rabies, measles/mumps/rubella, yellow fever, tetanus-diphtheria adult, 13-valent
pediatric pneumoccus, and adult tetanus-diphtheria-pertussis vaccines. Medications, equipment, and supply
kits were also purchased for the treatment of chronic kidney disease. Fumigation equipment, vehicles, and
fuel benefitting 1,200 residents in areas most affected by dengue were purchased. Reproductive and sexual
health was supported with the purchase of medical equipment, equipment for human milk banks, and human
resources training.

The project financed the purchase of 44 ambulances and associated first response equipment, including for
reanimation. Eight hospitals were integrated into the National Medical Emergencies System, meeting the
target. 662 emergency personnel were trained in efficient handling of medical emergencies. The project
supported the implementation of a coordinated national system to deal with emergencies, as well as training
of medical personnel in emergency management.

158 facilities in priority departments had operating information systems at project closure, exceeding the
original target of 12 and the revised target of 134. The ICR did not define "priority" departments.

Outcomes

Coverage of children less than one year old with the third dose of pentavalent vaccine in the 92 project
municipalities was 95% (baseline) in 2012, 95% (against a target of 92.5%) in 2013, 94.4% (against a target
of 92.5%) in 2014, 92.4% (against a target of 92.5%) in 2015, 95% (against a target of 92.6%) in 2016,
80.6% (against a target of 92.8%) in 2017, and 86.12% in the first half of 2018. The end-of-project target
was 92.8%. The ICR (p. 28) explained that coverage declined due to an increase in violence that affected
health personnel's ability to reach target populations, and the fact that population projections (on which the
denominator was based) did not reflect real population growth.

The percentage of women utilizing the public network for institutional deliveries in the 92 project
municipalities increased from 81% in 2012 to 99.8% in 2017, exceeding the target of 84%. The ICR (p. 13)
provided information on falling maternal mortality, infant mortality, and adolescent pregnancy rates, but


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 18
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)



    attribution of these outcomes to the project's interventions is unclear given that the data provided did not
    correspond to the project time period, and that many factors outside the health system also influence these
    trends.

    No outcome data were provided on coverage of health services other than maternal/child/reproductive
    health.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     Expand the quality of primary health services provided under the RIISS

    Rationale

    The project's theory of change linked improvement in infrastructure and equipment, construction and
    equipping of the Radiotherapy Unit and National Biomedical Laboratory, training in emergency medical
    services, and training/updating of health promoters, to enhanced health service delivery, progress in
    comprehensive care for cancer patients, and improved response to medical emergencies. This equipment
    and training would in turn lead to improved quality of health services.

    Outputs

    The ICR (p. 14) noted that the equipment provided to ECOS and hospitals, including high-tech medical
    devices, clinical furniture, supply kits, and medicines contributed to improved quality of primary care. A
    national biomedical laboratory was established and equipped, a National Radiotherapy Center (NRC) was
    built and equipped, and an equipment maintenance system was implemented, all intended to ensure
    increased quality, appropriateness, and continuity of care. The project team later added that the NRC is
    capable of providing comprehensive cancer care free of charge for patients who were previously referred to
    local non-governmental organizations for fee-for-service treatment.

    A Quality Assurance system for health facility certification was implemented. Systematized certification
    program evaluation criteria were set up, focusing on levels of complexity, social and health realities,
    attributes, size, technological level, and qualitative/quantitative capabilities of health providers (ICR, p.
    52). 35 MINSAL staff were trained on accreditation of health facilities. The project team later added that a
    national law was passed establishing institutional responsibility for accreditation and certification of health
    facilities, and that a new accreditation and certification commission was created.


                                                                                                          Page 7 of 18
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)




    Outcomes

    As a result of the establishment of the NRC in 2017, "services that were previously not available in El
    Salvador" are now available (ICR, p. 14). The NRC is projected to serve, when fully operational, about 2,200
    patients annually, with a "measurable impact" on the reduction of cancer morbidity and mortality. The ICR
    (p. 51) noted that the NRC did not become operational until the very end of the project period. The project
    team later added that, in the first nine months of operation, the center registered 1,572 new patients who
    have undergone 730 linear acceleration therapies, 1,265 brachytherapy procedures, and 19,975 radiation
    sessions.

    30 eligible hospitals complied with the standard bio-hazard waste management system in 2018, exceeding
    both the original target of 20 and the revised target of 26. The project team added that this improved waste
    management regime reduced the risks of waste contamination around health facilities and thus reduced
    potential impacts from hazardous wastewater, atmospheric emissions, dangerous chemical substances, and
    infections. No specific measured impacts were noted.

    The ICR (p. 34) reported that two user satisfaction surveys measuring satisfaction with quality improvement
    in MINSAL services were conducted, but the results of those surveys were not provided. The project team
    later added that these surveys showed an improvement in overall satisfaction in the provision of health
    services from 86.6% in 2013 to 92% in 2018, in the friendliness of heath staff from 90.4% to 93.3%, and in
    availability of medicines from 83.7% to 92.5%.

    The ICR did not provide information on improvements in quality of primary health services that resulted from
    project-financed training, equipment, or quality assurance processes. The project team later added that the
    MINSAL's Biomedical Equipment Management Unit (BEMU), whose infrastructure, equipment, organization,
    and technical training was financed by the project, was actively implementing a monthly preventive and
    corrective maintenance program in primary, secondary, and tertiary health facilities, providing maintenance
    for 1,287 pieces of equipment.

    Based on additional information provided by the project team related to increased availability of cancer care
    and improved patient satisfaction, achievement of this objective is rated Substantial.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective



                                                                                                       Page 8 of 18
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)




     Expand equity in utilization of primary health services provided under the RIISS

    Rationale

    The project's theory of change linked strengthened services and priority health programs, improved
    coordination between the national hospital system and other entities, improved patient information systems,
    and enhanced data quality and information flow regarding the health of the population with increased equity
    in utilization of priority health services.

    The project's interventions were specifically targeted at 92 municipalities chosen because of their poverty
    status and high health risks. In principle, this targeting plausibly improved equity in utilization of health
    services. However, neither the project's indicators nor the ICR reported data on equity. The ICR (pp. 18-19)
    reported that out-of-pocket (OOP) spending fell from 50% of current health expenditure in 2011 to 28% in
    2015, and it noted that high OOP spending is usually the most inequitable type of health care financing, but
    no data on spending by income or wealth levels was provided.

    The project team later added the observation that increased equity is reflected in improvement in overall
    health outcomes, including reduced national under-five and maternal mortality rates, increased institutional
    birth delivery in the 92 project municipalities, reduced household OOP expenditure, increased overall public
    health expenditure, and decreased private health expenditure. The project team also provided additional
    data from National Household Surveys showing that, between 2008 and 2016, the percentage of those with
    reported illness who did not seek care declined across all income quintiles, with care-seeking at public health
    facilities increasing by seven and six percentage points, respectively, by those in the poorest and second-
    poorest quintiles, and by ten percentage points among the highest income quintile. The project's two million
    beneficiaries represent a substantial share of the total population represented in these national surveys (six
    million), making the survey data a reasonable reflection of project impact, particularly given the project's
    deliberate targeting of poor municipalities. The project team added that, in 2016, OOP expenditure was an
    impoverishing condition for only 1% of households with OOP expenditure, arguing that this is "clear evidence
    that the most marginalized municipalities in the country (and the most vulnerable population groups) have
    benefited directly through the interventions under this project."

    Based on the new evidence provided by the project team, achievement of this objective is rated Substantial.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 4
    Objective


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)




Strengthen MINSAL's stewardship capacity to manage essential public health functions

Rationale

The project's theory of change linked the conducting of national surveys on health status and risk factors, the
development of a SUIS, the acquisition of facilities for the National institute of Public Health and National
Reference Laboratory, training of staff on managerial competencies, development of environmental
diagnostics, and development of a national Emergency, Disaster Preparedness and Response Plan to
improved coordination, data flow, operating procedures during emergencies, and overall efficiency and
reliability in the management of analysis of data for decision making. These enhanced capacities would in
turn lead to strengthened stewardship capacity to manage essential public health functions.

Outputs

The project supported the design, preparation, and implementation of a non-communicable disease strategy,
a National Policy for Pharmaceuticals, environmental regulations related to biohazard diagnostics and
norms, and a National Certification of Quality of Care process. A non-communicable disease department
was established in MINSAL. The project provided support for SUIS, including technical and
telecommunications equipment to enable better communications across levels of reporting, data collection,
data analysis, and monitoring of the national statistical reporting system. It strengthened the capacity of the
Directorate of Health Technologies to analyze and make decisions regarding the incorporation of new
essential drugs (ICR, p. 18); 1,429 staff were trained in the rational use of medicines, pharmacovigilance,
and evaluation of health technologies.

Outcomes

Two major surveys were implemented with project financing, the 2014 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey and
the 2014-2015 non-communicable disease survey. This met the target. According to the ICR, both surveys
generated data that were used to determine where and how public health funding should be invested,
though no specific information on this use of survey data was provided.

The expansion of functionality of the SUIS was reported to have "increased the access capacity of users of
the different SUIS modules, especially in the implementation of the Patient Information System" (ICR, p.
18). No specific data on this increased user access was provided.

30 hospitals now comply with the standard bio-hazard waste management system, exceeding the original
target of 14 and the revised target of 26.

The ICR (p. 15) stated that "the project contributed to a more efficient managerial model in the areas of
resource management and strategic decision making for health policies," but no specific information to
support this statement was provided.



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 18
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)




             Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

The ICR described a large number of project activities, in varying levels of detail, that would plausibly have led to
improvements in coverage, quality, and equity in utilization of primary health services, as well as strengthening of
MINSAL's overall capacity. The project's results framework did not contain outcome indicators adequate to
demonstrate outcomes across the objectives to improve quality or equity of primary health services, and the ICR
did not provide additional information to compensate for the results framework's shortcomings. However, the
project team later provided sufficient evidence to demonstrate substantial achievement of these
objectives. Overall efficacy is therefore rated Substantial.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

     5. Efficiency


            The PAD's economic analysis (Annex 7) found a benefit-cost ratio ranging from 1.61 to 2.15, with net present
            values of US$ 49 - US$ 92 million, varying depending on assumptions about the number of deaths averted
            and avoided years of life lost due to the project's interventions. The calculation used the total project costs
            (US$ 80 million) as the cost under each scenario, a discount rate of 3%, and reasonable assumptions about
            reductions in maternal and child mortality. The PAD (p. 61) noted that this analysis likely underestimated the
            project's benefits, as it excluded averted deaths other than maternal and child deaths, and it did not take into
            account benefits from reductions in morbidity and out-of-pocket expenditures.

            The ICR's analysis (Annex 4) acknowledged that attribution of benefits to the project was complicated by the
            ongoing implementation of a comprehensive health care reform in the country, launched in 2009. Repeating
            the PAD's benefit-cost analysis, it found an economic benefit of US$ 126 million accruing from reduction of
            infant mortality (assuming that the project resulted in a 25% reduction in infant deaths, or 660 averted infant
            deaths from 2013-2017), and a further benefit of US$ 1.8 million from reduction in maternal mortality
            (assuming that the project was responsible for 18 averted maternal deaths over that time period), all based on
            an average salary of US$ 300/month. According to the ICR (p. 17), this analysis underestimated the project's
            benefit by capturing only the benefits from reduced infant and maternal mortality; reduced morbidity, out-of-
            pocket expenditure, and benefits from the new cancer enter and ambulance fleet were not quantified and
            taken into account. The ICR added an extensive analysis of the additional project benefits accruing from


                                                                                                               Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)



cancer-related investments, including projected demand for cancer treatment services through 2026 and the
estimated cost of providing those services. No resulting benefit-cost ratio was calculated.

The project efficiently coordinated activities with IADB, whose parallel project pursued similar objectives but
targeted different municipalities. The ICR (p. 22) also cited close collaboration with the Pan American Health
Organization and the Spanish Agency for Development Cooperation in terms of complementary financial
support and "enhanced activities and interventions," but no details were provided. There was "very low"
turnover of staff within MINSAL and implementing units, and only one Bank task team leader across
the project's lifetime, allowing for continuity (ICR, p. 22). Financial management was "efficient" (ICR, p. 25).

There were moderate shortcomings. The project was approved in July 2011 but did not become effective
until December 2012, requiring the Bank to approve two effectiveness extensions. The ICR did not provide
the reasons for this delay. During the extensions, some of the activities included in the original procurement
plan were carried out with funds from the parallel IADB-financed project. As a result, by the time of
effectiveness of this project, the implementation plans were outdated, requiring a re-assessment of activities
to be funded by the Bank. According to the ICR, p. 21), "it took some time for MINSAL to offset the time lost
during the initial phase of the project." Procurement challenges persisted until early 2018 (ICR, p. 25; also
see Section 10b).




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate
                                                          Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                   Available?
                                                                                   0
Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


The project's objectives were highly relevant to country context and current government and Bank
strategy. Achievement of the project's objectives is rated substantial. Efficiency was substantial, with moderate
shortcomings in implementation efficiency. These ratings indicate minor shortcomings overall, producing an
Outcome rating of Satisfactory.

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 18
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)




a.    Outcome Rating
      Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


The ICR (pp. 26-27) noted that the central, regional, departmental, and municipal levels of health care were
strengthened through the project. Key health interventions will continue to be implemented through the National
Directorate of NCDs, the qualification of the National Reference Laboratory as Level 2 for biosecurity,
integration of health information systems, increased capacity for repair and maintenance of equipment, and
increased capacity to respond to medical emergencies. Service provision was strengthened through training at
multiple levels. Ongoing maintenance for some of the project's major investments, especially the construction
of the National Radiotherapy Center, have been incorporated into the government budget. No immediate
threats to the sustainability of these achievements were identified.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

     Key lessons from other project experiences in the country were incorporated into project design, including
     the importance of early strengthening of the fiduciary capacity of the PCU, and the key role to be played by
     a range of local stakeholders. The PCU was to manage both this project and the concurrent IADB-
     financed project. The most critical identified risks at appraisal included the possibility that lack of
     coordination with other development partners could result in duplication or gaps, and the risks to
     performance stemming from MINSAL's relatively weak capacity and limited experience with Bank
     operations. Mitigation measures were well outlined in the PAD (Annex 4). Financial management risks
     were identified and led to requirements for annual financial audits, external technical reviews, semi-annual
     Interim Financial Reports, financial management training, and plans for close supervision. A similarly
     detailed mitigation plan was agreed to address procurement risks following a procurement capacity
     assessment conducted in July 2010 (PAD, Annex 3).

     The ICR stated (p. 20) stated that project design was based on thorough background analysis of health
     conditions, government priorities, and constraints in the national context and in the project's intervention
     areas, but no specific information was provided.

     Important risks were identified but underestimated. The risk of delays in initial project implementation was
     identified during preparation (see the aide-memoire of June 10-17, 2010, cited in the ICR, p. 20), but it was
     not included in the project's risk assessment framework. In addition, the risk of ongoing violence to project

                                                                                                        Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)



  implementation was not explicitly considered, despite this challenge having been discussed in the
  PAD. There were also important shortcomings in the M&E framework (see Section 9a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  In addition to seventeen supervision missions, the Bank team conducted weekly follow-up meeting to
  monitor implementation and identify bottlenecks, in particular challenges related to procurement. The ICR
  (p. 26) stated that the team exhibited well-balanced and effective teamwork, with strong coordination across
  staff at headquarters and in-country as well as specialized consultants. Environmental safeguards were
  well monitored. Restructurings were implemented in a timely manner to accommodate necessary course
  corrections.

  However, shortcomings in the results framework were never fully addressed, making the assessment of
  project achievements challenging.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The project's results framework contained four key outcome indicators: percentage of poor people using public
  health care services when needed, percentage of MINSAL-registered pregnant women receiving prenatal care
  according to MINSAL norms, percentage of eligible secondary and tertiary hospitals certified by MINSAL, and
  percentage of pharmaceutical products purchased by MINSAL through a decentralized mechanism subject to
  quality control by a MINSAL laboratory. Baselines and targets were set for all outcome and intermediate
  indicators (PAD, Annex 1), and the indicators, including numerators, denominators, and key terms were
  carefully defined for each indicator. However, the ICR (p. 22) noted that these indicators were "overly ambitious
  and difficult to measure," and the given indicators were only a partial reflection of the objectives.

  MINSAL was responsible for M&E, with project indicators tracked and analyzed through established MINSAL
  systems. Other key data instruments were to include an external technical review, statistics from MINSAL's
  national epidemiological surveillance, household surveys focused on demand for health services and financial
  barriers to access, annual health facility surveys, baseline and impact evaluation analysis, and a mid-term

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)



  evaluation report jointly reviewed by the Bank and MINSAL (PAD, pp. 11-12). The project's second
  component was to provide strategic investment to capacity development for supervision and monitoring.



b. M&E Implementation

  The indicators were revised at the project's first restructuring (February 2015). The new indicators on vaccine
  coverage and institutional deliveries were effective measures of coverage of maternal and child health
  services. However, there were no indicators to measure coverage of other kinds of health services, and the
  two new indicators did not measure improvements in quality or equity in utilization of services. The ICR (p.
  23) acknowledged this shortcoming, noting, for example, that "good data on how often health workers are
  present and how accurately they diagnose and treat patients is not available in the country yet." Similarly, the
  indicator on hospital compliance with standard bio-hazard waste management systems was too narrow to
  measure comprehensively the objective to enhance MINSAL's stewardship capacity to manage essential
  public health functions.

  The ICR (p. 23) stated that MINSAL and the Bank systematically reported on key indicators. Results were
  analyzed using MINSAL's institutional statistics and monitoring systems. Semi-annual reports were shared
  with Bank staff. A mid-term review was completed in October of 2015. A significant percentage of loan
  proceeds was allocated to the development of the National Radiological Laboratory, which did not become
  operational until a few days before the project closed. It was therefore difficult to measure outcomes resulting
  from this investment. The ICR did not specify whether the planned impact evaluation was conducted.



c. M&E Utilization

  According to the ICR (p. 23), information obtained from the project's M&E framework and from project
  surveys were used to inform project management and decision making, but no specific information was
  provided. In addition, no information was provided on whether or not the planned impact evaluation was
  conducted.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)



  The project was classified as environmental assessment category C, but it triggered safeguard policies
  OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples). Although the project was
  to support small-scale rehabilitation of existing health care facilities, it was not expected to generate
  adverse environmental impacts. An environmental assessment was conducted at appraisal, and an
  Environmental Management Plan, satisfactory to the Bank, was developed by MINSAL and disclosed in
  March 2011 (PAD, p. 15). Environmental Diagnostics developed in the country's 30 national hospitals
  facilitated compliance with safeguard policies (ICR, p. 24). The Directorate of Environmental Health
  facilities the identification and implementation of necessary measure to ensure adequate management of
  hazardous hospital waste. 100% of hospitals now have properly functioning environmental committees and
  are complying with policies on treatment of solid waste. The National Radiological Center is in compliance
  with national environmental legislation.

  An Indigenous Peoples' Planning Framework (IPPF) was prepared and also disclosed in March
  2011. Its recommendations included provision of appropriate training for MINSAL staff, improvement of an
  informed consultation process, the implementation and monitoring of an action plan through which
  indigenous people were to receive culturally sensitive and appropriate health services, and mid-term and
  final evaluations of the project's social impact. However, the project did not produce the recommended
  plans, because there were no areas within the 92 project municipalities that met the four criteria of OP/BP
  4.10 (ICR, p. 25).




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Procurement: The ICR (p. 21) reported that the project faced "numerous procurement challenges" that were
  largely resolved beginning in 2015. At the start of implementation, MINSAL's limited procurement capacity was
  a "key implementation obstacle." The ICR (p. 21) also noted "occasional protracted internal processes" and
  "the Bank's protracted review of non-objections" as key factors that "often slowed project progress." Bank
  support to improve the situation over the project's first two years was inadequate. From 2015 forward, through
  cooperative dialogue, the implementation of a procurement mitigation strategy developed by the Project
  Implementation Unit and agreed by the Bank, training of MINSAL technical units and suppliers, and "intensive
  procurement support and supervision,'" procurement guidelines were eventually aligned with national
  procurement laws and processes improved. A February 2017 procurement post review found improvement,
  but still internal delays and incomplete documentation and files; these remaining deficiencies were found to
  have been mostly addressed during a subsequent February 2018 procurement post review.

  Financial management was rated Satisfactory throughout the project's lifetime. Implementing staff had
  experience managing the financial aspects of internationally financed projects and had been previously trained
  on Bank policies and procedures. Interim Financial Reports and financial audit reports were prepared and
  delivered in a timely manner and were found to be acceptable.




                                                                                                 Page 16 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
    ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                      Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                         IEG
                                                                                      Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory                Satisfactory               ---
                                                                                      Risk assessment at appraisal
                                                                                      did not take into account
                                                           Moderately                 several acknowledged risks.
Bank Performance               Satisfactory
                                                           Satisfactory               Shortcomings in the results
                                                                                      framework were never fully
                                                                                      addressed.
                                                                                      The results framework was
                                                                                      not adequate to assess overall
                                                                                      achievement of the project's
Quality of M&E                 Substantial                 Modest
                                                                                      objectives. The main text of
                                                                                      the ICR (para 63) rated the
                                                                                      quality of M&E as "moderate."
Quality of ICR                                             Modest                     ---

12. Lessons


The ICR (p. 27) offered several useful lessons, including:

World Bank financial support can sustain priority government agenda through periods of crisis. In this case, the
negative impact of the 2009 global financial crisis threatened the social sector gains El Salvador had made in
the preceding decade. Bank support enabled continued attention to coverage and quality of health services to
the urban poor.

Risk assessments will not produce adequate mitigation measures if they do not realistically take likely
challenges into account. In this case, even though the risks posed by gang violence in targeted areas and low
procurement capacity were identified in appraisal documents, they were not acknowledged and dealt with in the
formal risk assessment framework. As these risks materialized, the project was not as equipped to cope with
their impact as it might have been with more in-depth assessment and planning.


                                                                                                       Page 17 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SV Strengthening Public Health Care Syst (P117157)



IEG offers one additional lesson:

In the absence of key outcome indicators effectively measuring a project's development objectives, assessment
of achievements and outcomes is problematic. In the case of this project, although equity concerns were
embedded in the project's selection of intervention areas, there were no actual measures of the project's impact
on improved equity in the utilization of health services.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR, while concise, lacked concrete evidence to substantiate claimed outcomes. It did not appropriately
assess, with data on results, every outcome promised in the project's statement of objectives. The ICR did not
go beyond the project's results framework to report outcome data adequate to assess achievement of the
objectives. It reported that the project conducted at least two key surveys, but information from these surveys
was not provided to assist in the assessment of project achievements. The ICR also did not provide a
complete account of project interventions that made it possible to assess the project's likely impact on reported
outcomes. As a result of these shortcomings, the project team had to provide additional information to support
assessment of the project's efficacy. The Borrower's ICR contained important detail on outputs that was not
included in the main ICR. The ICR was occasionally repetitive; for example, paragraphs 38 and 39 are
virtually identical (pp. 16-17). Some ratings were internally inconsistent (for example, project efficiency is
rated as substantial in the text of para 42, but high in the table immediately thereafter). The efficiency analysis
did not carry through its calculations to a full benefit-cost result.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Modest




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 18
