     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ACBF Regional Capacity Building Project (P122478)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0021398

1. Project Data



 Project ID                            Project Name
                                       ACBF Regional Capacity Building
 P122478
                                       Project

 Country                               Practice Area(Lead)                         Additional Financing
 Africa                                Governance                                  P127549


 L/C/TF Number(s)                     Closing Date (Original)                      Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H6470,IDA-H8760,TF-99645         31-Dec-2015                                             117,076,876.41

 Bank Approval Date                   Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Mar-2011                          31-Dec-2017

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            25,000,000.00                                   29,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            118,956,692.83                                   28,999,992.38

 Actual                                        117,076,876.41                                   28,999,992.38



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Paul Holden                 Robert Mark Lacey           Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   The project development objectives (PDOs) were to contribute to: (a) enhanced capacity for effective policy
   formation and management in the countries of the Sub-grantees; and (b) improved and sustained
   management of the Recipient’s (the African Capacity Building Foundation, ACBF) operations. (Financing
   Agreement, p. 6).
   　
   The project followed two decades of IDA support to ACBF that commenced operations in 1991.
   　

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ACBF Regional Capacity Building Project (P122478)



   There was a level 1 restructuring, which became effective on December 5, 2013, involving Additional
   Financing and an expansion of the project’s scope. The revised PDOs were: (a) to improve the capacity of
   the ACBF’s clients to deliver and measure their development results; and (b) to enhance the ACBF’s
   organizational effectiveness and efficiency (Amending and Restating Original Financing Agreement p. 6). As
   these modifications involve no substantive changes, a split evaluation will not be undertaken.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  05-Dec-2013
                                                         PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   There were two components.

   Component 1: To provide capacity building sub-grants in selected Sub-Saharan African countries
   and regional organizations that assisted those countries to finance technical assistance (TA).
   Appraised amount US$30 million ;Restructured amount US$74 million; Actual amount US$67.6
   million. 　

   This component aimed to improve institutional capacity in 4 areas: (i) the analysis of economic policy and
   development management; (ii) improved financial management, transparency and accountability; (iii)
   improved national statistical systems and the production of national statistics; and (iv) promotion of
   regional economic cooperation and integration, and the provision of regional public goods.　

   Component 2: Institutional Development: This component financed the strengthening of the
   operations and institutional capacity of the ACBF. Appraised amount US$24 million; Restructured
   amount US$45 million; Actual amount US$49.5 million.

   This component consisted of activities in four areas: (i) continued implementation of ACBF’s 2009
   Management Action Plan; (ii) the development of a medium-term strategy, including the upgrading of a
   monitoring and evaluation system (M&E) for the ACBF; (iii) the appraisal, supervision and evaluation of
   sub-projects; and (iv) the enhancement of skills and peer learning in economic and public sector
   management.



                                                                                                             Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ACBF Regional Capacity Building Project (P122478)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

   Project Cost: The original project cost was US$49 million The actual cost was US$117.08 million.

   Financing: The project at appraisal was to be financed by a US$25 million Regional International
   Development Association (RIDA1) grant and a US$29 million Recipient-Executed Multi Donor Trust Fund
   (RE-MDTF) grant. As noted, Additional Financing of US$65 million (RIDA2) was approved in
   December 2013 bringing the total funding to US$119 million.

   Borrower/Recipient Contribution: The ACBF did not contribute to the project cost.　

   Dates: The project was approved on March 17, 2011 and became effective on August 1, 2011. The first
   restructuring was approved on December 5, 2013 and involved an expansion of the mandate of the ACBF
   as mentioned in Section 2a above. A level 2 restructuring occurred on February 6, 2017, which extended
   the closing date by 11 months to December 31, 2017 and reallocated some expenditure items.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  The project’s original and modified objectives were relevant to a key aim of the World Bank Group’s Africa
  Region’s strategy -- strengthening institutional capacity of African countries, regional economic communities
  and public sector entities. Bank support under the project aimed to enable the ACBF to implement this
  strategy effectively, monitoring the impact of its support, while enhancing its managerial and operational
  efficiency. The objectives remained relevant at closure, reflected in the Bank’s continued support for capacity
  building for the African Union Commission and the preparation of a regional capacity building project to
  strengthen civil service and public administration through regional and international networks.

  The original objectives were less relevant to the situation in which the ACBF found itself at the time of project
  preparation, but this was corrected in their revision during the restructuring in December 2013. At appraisal,
  the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) noted the need for careful management of expenses (p. 20) but few
  actions were contemplated to reduce them. The 2013 restructuring specified enhancement of the
  Foundation’s organizational effectiveness and efficiency, and the project began to support actions to reduce
  costs directly and significantly through drastic cuts in staff.



  Rating

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            ACBF Regional Capacity Building Project (P122478)



       Substantial
   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To improve the capacity of the ACBF’s clients to deliver and measure their development results

    Rationale

    The theory of change underlying the first objective was that grants to ACBF-supported programs and sub-
    projects would strengthen ACBF clients’ ability to deliver, and measure results. The grants funded economic
    policy research in ministries, departments and agencies supported by policy institutes, think tanks and
    university programs, and students studying for post graduate degrees or undertaking training in economic
    policy and related fields.
    　
    Outputs

    　Under RD1:

        • The number of research projects completed by closure was 119 (target 30);
        • 446 ministries, were provided with technical assistance or training by the policy institutes that had
        received funding, (target 220);
        • 326 students (target 180) received post graduate degrees, and 842 (target 450) received training
        certificates, in the targeted disciplines;
        • 6,684 requests for ACBF products and services were received (target 1,200);
        • 100% of clients’ products were peer reviewed (target 80%);
        • 83% of ACBF clients were judged to have functional M&E systems (target 80%);
        • There were 2,111 engagements and interactions between ACBF clients and policymakers (target 360);
        • 310,171 documents were downloaded from the ACBF website (target 55,000);
        • There were 1,719 requests for knowledge and learning products (target 300); and
        • ACBF knowledge and learning products were cited 27,469 times (target 12,500).




    Outcomes

    Under RD1, the number of recommendations submitted by ACBF grantees that were used in policy
    formation by governments as measured by the ACBF increased from a baseline of zero in 2010 to 39 in
    2013--more than double the target of 15. The zero baseline casts doubt on the usefulness of the indicator as
    do the self-measured data. Furthermore, this outcome was measured only for RIDA1, so that results at
    project closure were not available.


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            ACBF Regional Capacity Building Project (P122478)




    For RIDA2, assessment of outcomes relied on satisfaction surveys conducted during the 2014-2017 period
    involving 14 sub-projects and 1,400 respondents. User satisfaction with ACBF clients’ products was reported
    to be 92% (target 90%) in December 2017, and with client services 91% (target 80%). The percentage of
    sub-projects in the ACBF portfolio rated satisfactory or above was reported to be 90% (target 77%) in
    December 2017. Again, no data had been collected previously on which to base comparative changes.
    Moreover, survey techniques and biases were not analyzed. The percentage of the total universe
    represented by the sample is unknown.

    The absence of reliable baseline data weakens evidence of enhanced capacity for effective policy formation
    and management in the recipient countries, although the client satisfaction was reportedly high.
    Furthermore, in some cases, output targets were exceeded by wide margins, suggesting that they may have
    been set too low. An additional question is the extent to which self-reported data can be relied upon in the
    light of the ACBF’s governance problems.


    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     To enhance the ACBF’s organizational effectiveness and efficiency

    Rationale
    The theory of change rested on administrative restructuring under RIDA1 to improve M&E and accountability
    and under RIDA2 on measures to reduce costs.

    Outputs

    According to the ICR (page 16), the intended outputs related to this objective comprised: (a) continued
    implementation of the activities under the MAP; (b) development of a forward‐looking medium‐term strategy
    by and for ACBF, including enhancement of the M&E system; (c) systematic appraisal, supervision and
    evaluation of subprojects, and (d) implementation of knowledge and learning activities designed to enhance
    skills and peer learning in economic and public sector management in Africa.

    There is little information concerning those project-financed activities that were expected to contribute to
    these outputs. The reforms were internally driven and did not appear to benefit from the infusion of project-
    financed consulting expertise, equipment, training or other assistance. Implementation was largely to be the
    responsibility of the Foundation, and it is noteworthy that operating expenses, including ACBF staff salaries,
    were eligible for financing under the component related to this objective.



                                                                                                       Page 5 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ACBF Regional Capacity Building Project (P122478)



Outcomes

Under RIDA1, there were three targets related to ACBF’s internal efficiency. Results fell short of
expectations:




  • The ratio of the total budget to the value of the total active portfolio value fell from 8% in 2010 to 6.5% at
  the end of 2013. The target was an increase to 12.4%, since enhanced control and audit functions,
  foreseen under the MAP, were expected to expand the budget.
  • The ratio of non-staff administrative costs to the total budget fell from 16% in 2010 to 14.7% at the end
  of 2013. Here, also, the ratio was expected to increase as a result of MAP implementation.
  • The ratio of total staff costs to the budget rose from 60% in 2010 to 70.2% at the end of 2013, whereas
  the target was a reduction to 57.7%. New staff positions were introduced; salaries were benchmarked at
  international levels (in accordance with the recommendations of a consulting firm retained by the
  Foundation); and "Bank-like processes and controls were introduced where they may not have been
  appropriate" (ICR, p. 8).




Under RIDA2, there was a stronger emphasis on cost reduction, especially of staff costs. This was because
the level of financing available to the Foundation was considerably less than had been anticipated.
According to the Restructuring Paper, 2013, US$35 million of non-IDA donor financing was expected. This
turned out to be only US$22.9 million. The financing that had been suspended in 2009 was not subsequently
reinstated to the extent foreseen. Sweden withdrew its support, and the African Development Bank and
other donors contributed significantly less than they had originally indicated. The ICR (p. 46) suggests that
an unintended impact of the decision to utilize IDA funds for the project may have been to drive away
potential bilateral donors, who saw contributing to the ACBF as double dipping in the sense that they were
already contributing to IDA. In addition, the impression had been given by World Bank staff that Additional
Financing from IDA for RIDA2 would be US$100 million, rather than the US$65 million actually approved by
the Board. Fund shortages were exacerbated by delays in presenting RIDA2 to the Board because of
concerns on the part of some shareholders regarding the speed of governance improvements, and delays in
approving new IDA contributions.

The following results had been achieved by project closure in December 2017:




  • The ratio of total disbursements to cash outflows for activities (including knowledge and learning
  products) and sub-projects was 80%, in accordance with the target. This signals that a significant
  proportion of resources was spent on programmed activities rather than on internal administration.



                                                                                                       Page 6 of 15
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       ACBF Regional Capacity Building Project (P122478)



                   • The ratio of total staff costs to cash outflows fell from a baseline of 22.3% to 14.6%, bettering the target
                   of 17%. The manner in which staff cost reductions were carried out was, however, controversial and led to
                   disagreements between the IDA and ACBF teams. The Foundation’s ICR states that "the requirement to
                   reduce staff costs to 17 percent of cash outflows within one month, which resulted in an immediate
                   reduction of ACBF staff by almost half and a significant reduction in the salaries of remaining staff, led to
                   plummeting staff morale, high turnover, and anonymous letters from disgruntled former staff" (p. 30). A
                   subsidiary aim was to ensure that, by January 2017, "core" staff costs would be fully covered by
                   contributions from African member states. It is not known whether this was achieved.




              Rating
      Modest
     PHREVDELTBL

 PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




 Rationale

 The efficacy for both objectives is rated modest.




 Overall Efficacy Rating                                                   Primary reason
 Modest                                                                    Insufficient evidence
PHREVISEDTBL



      5. Efficiency

      Neither an ex ante nor an ex post economic rate of return (ERR) was calculated. ACBF’s role as an
      intermediary between donors and ultimate recipients essentially rules such a calculation out, although a
      financial analysis of the Foundation’s operations would have been possible.

      The ICR (pp. 23-25) assesses efficiency on the basis of total project costs, which were within appraisal and
      restructuring estimates, and project performance with respect to the second objective. However, neither of
      these is an adequate gauge of efficiency, which should be a measure of the extent to which the project’s
      benefits exceeded its costs. The second criterion (project performance) is already assessed as part of efficacy.
      In this case, it would have been necessary to rely on qualitative assessments of project benefits.

      Operational inefficiencies were largely reflected in the delays associated with the Additional Financing, which
      led to a 24-month extension of the closing date. There were also some delays caused by the Ebola epidemic in
      a number of recipient countries, though their extent is not recorded.


                                                                                                                      Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ACBF Regional Capacity Building Project (P122478)



Given the lack of any quantitative analysis and of identified qualitative benefits, combined with evidence of
operational and administrative inefficiencies, efficiency is assessed as negligible.




Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                    Rate Available?        Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


The relevance of objectives was substantial. According to the ACBF’s self-assessments, and surveys of client
satisfaction, the objective of enhanced capacity for effective policy formation and management in the countries
of the Sub-grantees appears to have been substantially achieved. However, there were serious deficiencies in
the indicators, many of which were of doubtful reliability because of the absence of baseline data, the extent to
which poorly defined targets were achieved, and the near universal reliance on self-collected information and.
self-assessment. Under the second objective - improved and sustained management of ACBF’s operations and
enhanced effectiveness and efficiency of its organization – results under RIDA1 were mixed, but significant cost
reductions were achieved under RIDA2, consonant with the reduced external financing available to the
Foundation. However, while the outcome targets were met, the reach and quality of the evidence is limited.
There is no way to objectively determine the value of the advice provided to ultimate beneficiaries, or its impact
on policy-making and implementation. Client survey techniques and biases were not analyzed. The
consequences of drastic staff reductions and curtailment of external financing on ACBF’s operational
effectiveness was reported by the Executive Secretary of the ACBF to have undermined staff morale and
efficiency. There is no independent external assessment of the internal structural reforms undertaken.
Efficiency is rated modest, since no evidence is presented as to whether the project provided value for money.
On balance, shortcomings are considered to be significant, and outcome is assessed as unsatisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 8 of 15
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        ACBF Regional Capacity Building Project (P122478)



a.    Outcome Rating
      Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The extensive cost cutting measures, restructuring and changes in governance practices achieved with the
support of the project has reduced ACBF costs significantly. . However, there is a high risk to development
outcome stemming from the sharp curtailment of external donor financing, and the consequent reliance on
income from client governments. Donor contributions remain markedly short of their pre-suspension levels, and
the decision (ICR, p. 36) not to provide further IDA funding beyond the project may reduce such contributions
further.

Should the Foundation’s financial position remain precarious, it is likely that this will undermine the standard of its
services. Higher quality staff, with better alternative employment opportunities, would probably be the first to
leave, thereby contributing to declining standards.

The extent to which the viability of the sub-projects would be compromised without continued high quality ACBF
assistance is unclear. The ICR (p. 46) states that many ACBF-supported think tanks are now financially
sustainable, but this statement is not backed by evidence.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

     The project was consistent with IDA’s strategic priorities in the Africa Region (see Section 3 above).
     Initial project financing in 2011 was relatively modest. It aimed to assist the Foundation in initiating the
     implementation of its MAP following the 2-year suspension of IDA funding in 2009-2010. However,
     further, more substantial additional financing was foreseen in the PAD. This would be contingent on
     approval of the IDA replenishment, the process for which coincided with project preparation.

     Implementation was to rely heavily on the ACBF itself, and there were few if any technical assistance,
     external training activities or provision of equipment foreseen that would be financed by the project. By
     design, evaluation was to be based largely on self-assessment, with the project supporting the
     implementation of the ACBF’s own Management Action Plan.

     Although IDA had provided decade-long financial support to the Foundation, there was no close working
     relationship that might have assisted preparation of the project. ACBF staff had little familiarity with Bank
     procedures, and this contributed to RIDA1’s slow start. The principal risks were identified as fiduciary,


                                                                                                           Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ACBF Regional Capacity Building Project (P122478)



  and project design incorporated changes to ACBF’s fiduciary systems. The most important involved
  modifying the previous pass-through arrangements for sub-grants, and the adoption of World Bank
  procurement procedures (see Section 10 below).

  The ICR does not discuss any preparatory studies or other analytical underpinnings that might have
  assisted project conceptualization and preparation.

  M&E design and management arrangements relied on the strengthening of ACBF’s own M&E, which was
  a project activity (see Section 9 below).




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  The supervision team established a good working relationship with the ACBF, especially following the
  2013 restructuring, although disagreements did arise on the cost-cutting methods adopted under RIDA2.
  Regular supervision assisted the ACBF with adjustment to the new fiduciary systems and the Foundation
  adopted and applied the modified arrangements that were conditions for the project. Several
  shortcomings identified in RIDA1 were addressed in the RIDA2. This was especially the case with some
  of the initial indicators, which were not closely related to ACBF sub-projects. RIDA2 focused more on
  cost reductions, which were necessary given the curtailments in external financing.

  A Bank team visited sub-projects in 4 four of the recipient countries to assess performance under ACBF
  grants. It concluded (ICR p. 40) that there had been significant improvement in ACBF sub-grantee M&E
  capabilities, which, inter alia, had resulted in the sub-grantees being able to access funding from other
  sources.

  The Bank team followed progress on cost cutting measures and internal processes, but technical
  assistance to monitor and assist in the enhancement of internal governance does not appear to have
  been financed by the project. If technical assistance had been provided at an early stage, some of the
  internal issues would have been identified and outside expertise could have contributed to dealing with
  them. The Bank project team carried out their supervision diligently given the design shortcomings, but
  as the following paragraph indicates, management involvement was limited.

  According to the ICR (p. 43), "[Bank] management attention to this sensitive, high‐risk and potentially
  high reward project appears to have been episodic." The ICR (p. 47) quotes the ACBF Executive
  Secretary as saying, "The feeling at the ACBF is that the Bank’s leadership, especially at the Africa
  Region, showed little interest in ACBF’s work and its achievements." The Foundation also complained
  that it had received assurances from senior Bank staff that the additional financing for RIDA2 would be
  US$100, not US$65 million as approved by the Board, and that no official notification was given that


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ACBF Regional Capacity Building Project (P122478)



  there would be no further financial support from IDA following project closure.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The Financing Agreement (p. 9) required that the ACBF formalize its M&E system (it had established
  an Operations and Evaluation Department for the first time in 2008), submit M&E reports yearly
  (adjusted to twice yearly under the 2013 restructuring), and that grant recipients’ M&E systems be
  assessed prior to any financing approval. Sub-projects were required to submit quarterly M&E reports
  (PAD p. 5).　

  The results framework encompassed 2 sets of variables. The first related to the effectiveness of the
  ACBF sub-grants. These were measured by a set of output indicators that recorded such items as the
  number of pieces of policy research, the number of ministries and departments in recipient countries
  supported through ACBF TA, and students on ACBF scholarships receiving masters degrees and
  training. The outcome indicators for RIDA1 were the recommendations submitted to governments that
  were used in policy formation. For RIDA2, the intermediate results indicators consisted of the number
  of requests for products and services, of peer reviewed clients’ products, of engagements between
  ACBF clients and policy makers, of ACBF knowledge and learning products cited, and the percentage
  of ACBF clients with functional M&E systems. Outcome indicators for the first objective were self-
  assessed sub-project ratings, and client satisfaction survey results (survey techniques and biases were
  not analyzed). The severe shortcomings in the design of the indicators, particularly the lack of any
  baseline data, casts doubt on the veracity of the results that were achieved.
  The indicators for the second objective focused appropriately on financial ratios such as the ration of
  staff costs to budget.

  　




                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ACBF Regional Capacity Building Project (P122478)



b. M&E Implementation
  The ACBF improved its reporting during implementation and complied with enhanced submission
  requirements under RIDA2. All progress reports were submitted in a timely fashion.

  A "retrofitting" was carried out of sub-projects initiated before 2011, and which did not conform to the M&E
  arrangements in the project covenants. The ICR (p. 39) reports that nearly 70 sub-projects in 2011 and nearly
  40 in 2013 were retrofitted. Furthermore, the documentation of evaluation of sub-projects increased with the
  regular production of project completion reports, mid-term reviews and special evaluations for selected sub-
  projects although as the M&E Design section points out, the information may at times have been of
  questionable value.




c. M&E Utilization

  By closure, the ACBF was using the M&E system at both the corporate and the sub-project level. The
  system in place produced "accurate, validated data on all project indicators" (ICR p. 40). The effectiveness of
  the ACBF M&E system was noted at regional conferences, and as a result, the ACBF was invited to join a
  task force to develop an M&E training curriculum for the whole of Africa.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was classified as category C for environmental assessment purposes, and no safeguard policies
  were triggered. The ICR reports that there were no environmental or social compliance issues.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Design incorporated important changes in ACBF internal practices to reduce fiduciary risk. The Foundation
  was required to comply with Bank fiduciary policies for the first time. The previous pass-through
  arrangements for donor and DGF grants to the ACBF, which limited the Bank’s contractual fiduciary
  oversight both as donor and trustee were deemed inadequate. Instead, the Bank and ACBF agreed that


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ACBF Regional Capacity Building Project (P122478)



  RIDA financing required the application of standard Bank fiduciary policies and technical supervision to
  provide better assurance that Bank and donor funds were spent for intended purposes. The use of Bank
  procurement guidelines would be mandatory for all contracts financed under the project. At sub‐grant level,
  these requirements, and the particular procurement methods to be used and institutional arrangements to be
  maintained by the sub‐grantees, were elaborated in ACBF‘s Procurement Guidelines, which were updated
  and finalized as part of the updated Operations Manual, as a condition of project effectiveness. During
  implementation, contract management was systematized. Improved procedures at both the ACBF and sub-
  grantee levels enabled the Bank to reduce the fiduciary risk rating from moderate to low.

  There were several instances of 'questionable expenditures' during 2015-2016. The Bank claimed
  reimbursement of 'ineligible expenditures' following a February 2015 Travel Audit Report. Following
  an independent and verification by the Bank's Financial Management Specialist, US$182,854 remained a
  subject of non-agreement between the Bank and ACBF; however, the Bank withdrew its demand for a refund
  in September 2017 (ICR, p. 42).



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  .




d. Other
  The project had a positive impact on gender related issues. The ICR (p. 25) points out that its support for
  the Women's University in Africa epitomizes this impact. The Women's University in Africa has graduated
  more than 4800 women students. The ACBF also conducted numerous regional workshops that provide
  training for African women.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                         IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  Although outcome targets
                                                                                  were met, there were
                                                                                  deficiencies in the quality of
Outcome                       Satisfactory                Unsatisfactory          some supporting evidence.
                                                                                  Survey techniques are not
                                                                                  analyzed and sample is
                                                                                  unknown. Both objectives are



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ACBF Regional Capacity Building Project (P122478)



                                                                                  rated modest for efficacy.
                                                                                  Efficiency is rated negligible.
                                                                                  There were major
                                                                                  shortcomings in quality at
                                                                                  entry: no preparatory studies
                              Moderately                  Moderately              are mentioned, there was little
Bank Performance
                              Satisfactory                Unsatisfactory          or no technical assistance
                                                                                  planned, and evaluation was
                                                                                  to rely largely on self-
                                                                                  assessment.
                                                                                  Many indicators lacked
                                                                                  baselines, much data were
Quality of M&E                Substantial                 Modest                  unverifiable, and there was a
                                                                                  lack of discussion of survey
                                                                                  methodology.
                                                                                  The ICR is far too long. It does
Quality of ICR                                            Modest                  not discuss several critical
                                                                                  issues related to the project

12. Lessons


Among the lessons presented in the ICR (pp. 45-46) two are of particular importance (presented here with
some adaptation of language):


  • Timely notification and the formulation of an agreed exit strategy can be expected to increase an
  institution’s chances for sustainability after longstanding support is curtailed. In this case,
  discontinuing IDA support to the ACBF in the absence of clear communication and a road map towards
  independence has placed the institution’s viability at risk.
  • Avoiding perverse incentives can increase a project’s impact. In this case, the requirement that ACBF
  sub-projects be limited to 15 countries provided an incentive to select projects where the likelihood of
  success was high, rather focusing on countries with the greatest need.


IEG adds two additional lessons:


  • Linking the sub-projects of a Bank-supported capacity-building institution to other Bank operations
  in the countries concerned can produce important synergies. In this case, forging such linkages does
  not appear to have been considered.
  • Bank initiatives at regional and sub-regional levels frequently encounter difficulties in attracting
  necessary resources for supervision and adequate managerial attention. This, in turn, reflects the
  country-oriented structure of Bank operations and incentives. In this case, the ACBF complained of Bank

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ACBF Regional Capacity Building Project (P122478)



  managerial neglect. Moreover, Bank financial support to the Foundation prior to the project was not
  accompanied by adequate supervision.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR is comprehensive and informative over the complex issues surrounding the genesis of the project
and the issues that arose as it evolved. It is frank in its discussion of Bank support, both prior to and during
the project. It is internally consistent, with a logical structure, and the lessons are evidence-based.　

There were shortcomings. With 43 main text pages (in smaller-than-normal font) and over 200 pages in total,
the ICR is far too long and dwells at too great a length on minutiae. At the same time, the decision to cease
financial support from IDA after project closure could have been discussed in more detail. Greater clarity on
project-financed activities would have been useful, especially with regard to the second objective.




a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Modest




                                                                                                       Page 15 of 15
