     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP:Agriculture Commercialization & Trade (P087140)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0021624

1. Project Data



 Project ID                            Project Name
                                       NP:Agriculture Commercialization &
 P087140
                                       Trade

 Country                               Practice Area(Lead)                          Additional Financing
 Nepal                                 Agriculture                                  P128304


 L/C/TF Number(s)                      Closing Date (Original)                     Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-46030,IDA-51800,IDA-              30-Jun-2015                                                45,834,946.02
 H4860,IDA-H8130

 Bank Approval Date                    Closing Date (Actual)
 04-Jun-2009                           30-Jun-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            20,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             51,667,446.02                                                0.00

 Actual                                         45,834,946.02                                                0.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Vibecke Dixon                Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in (Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4);
   "To improve the competitiveness of smallholder farmers and the agribusiness sector in selected commodity
   value chains in selected districts in the Recipient's territory by: (i) helping farmer groups and cooperatives
   engage in profitable market-oriented production and improved access to markets through the provision of
   technology and information services and critical public infrastructure and linkages to agribusiness; (ii)


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP:Agriculture Commercialization & Trade (P087140)



   creating and strengthening industry-wide partnerships along the value chain, thus forging linkages between
   producers, traders, processors, and other stakeholders; (iii) reducing existing obstacles to agriculture and
   food trade thereby increasing the ability of farmers and agribusiness to respond to Sanitary and
   Phytosanitary (SPS) and food-quality standards to meet domestic and international market requirements".
   The PDO as stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 5) was similar and stated that the project
   was to be implemented in a total of 25 districts (out of the 75 districts in Nepal).
   The PDO was modified with the Additional Financing (AF) to remove the restriction on the number of districts
   to be covered (that is, the project coverage was expanded to the whole country).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                           PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   There were three components (PAD, pages 6 to 8). The revised estimate after AF and the actual cost are
   from the Implementation Completion and Results (ICR) Report (pages 9-10).

   One. Agriculture and Rural Business Development. Appraisal estimate US$19.92 million. Estimate with
   AF US$45.04 million. Actual cost US$27.65 million. This component financed demand-based sub-
   projects proposed by farmer groups, agribusiness and other value-chain participants through matching
   grants. Activities included: (i) providing pre-investment advisory support for helping farmers prepare sub-
   project proposals and business plans for grant financing; (ii) financing approved subprojects in technology
   support and market infrastructure; and (iii) agribusiness development by agro enterprises, commodity
   associations and cooperatives engaged in developing commodity value chains.

   This component was split into two sub-components during the project restructuring (discussed below).
   One: Commodity value chain development with the matching grant scheme; and, two: Institutional
   development for enhanced competitiveness. These activities were added: (i) rehabilitation of six agricultural
   commodity markets and 10 agriculture/Livestock service centers damaged during the 2015 earthquake;
   and, (ii) establishing an agribusiness innovation center.

   Two. Support for sanitary and phytosanitary facilities and food quality management. Appraisal
   estimate US$2.35 million. Estimate with AF US$5.39 million. Actual cost US$4.97 million. This component
   aimed at strengthening the sanitary and phytosanitary services (SPS) for improving food quality
   management systems. Activities included: (i) food quality and safety enhancing activities through improving
   laboratory and certification facilities; and (ii) capacity building measures for meeting food safety and quality
   standards.


                                                                                                               Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NP:Agriculture Commercialization & Trade (P087140)




  Three. Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation. Appraisal estimate US$4.28 million.
  Estimate with AF US$9.57 million. Actual cost US$13.18 million. This component provided support
  for project management and monitoring and evaluation and reporting.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Project cost. The appraisal estimate was US$24.50 million. Revised estimate with AF US$64.50
  million. The actual project cost was US$45.83 million.

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA credit of US$20.00 million. AF of US$40.00 was
  approved on February 2013. With this the total credit for the project was US$60.00 million. Amount
  disbursed US$45.83 million. About US$11.00 million was cancelled (discussed in section 5).

  Borrower contribution. The contribution from the government was estimated at US$0.73 million and
  contribution from beneficiaries was estimated at US$5.82 million. There was no contribution from either
  the government or from the beneficiaries.

  Dates. The original project was approved on June 4, 2009 and became effective on November 13, 2009
  and was to close on June 30, 2015. The following changes were made with the AF that was approved on
  February 13, 2013: (i) The original project was to be implemented in 25 districts (out of the total 75
  districts). This restriction on the number of districts was removed; (ii) Some indicator targets were scaled
  up, as the targets had already been met; (iii) Two core indicators - the number of direct project
  beneficiaries (gender disaggregated) were added; (iv) Given the geographic expansion of the
  project, Project Regional Implementation Support teams were to be established in five regions; (v) The
  modalities of the Matching Grant Scheme were changed. As originally envisioned, the grant was to be
  provided as an upfront installment for a portion of the grant. To mitigate the observed risk of grants being
  used by beneficiaries for purposes not stated in the Grant Agreement, henceforth the grant was to be
  disbursed in three installments, after satisfactory completion of agreed milestones: (vi) A Micro Grant
  Window targeted at smallholder farmers was introduced. This window featured a simplified selection
  process, quicker disbursement modalities and capped at US$10,000 per beneficiary; and (vii) Following a
  request from the Ministry of Agricultural Development for supporting the Integrated Pest Management
  agenda, six Rapid Bioassay Pest Residue laboratories were to be set up.
  These changes were made through the Level 2 project restructuring on June 29, 2015. (i) some activities
  were added to component one activities (described in section 2d); (ii) the results framework was modified
  and one indicator was dropped (discussed in section 9b); and. (ii) the closing date for the original project
  was extended by 18 months to December 31, 2016. The second Level 2 restructuring on June 6, 2018
  cancelled the undisbursed amount of US$11.00 million from the AF. The project closed on June 30, 2018,
  three years (36 moths) after the original closing date.



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            NP:Agriculture Commercialization & Trade (P087140)




   3. Relevance of Objectives

       Rationale


       The PDO was consistent with the government of Nepal’s priorities. The agricultural sector contributed
       about 33 percent of Gross Domestic Product and 66 percent of rural population, depended on the sector for
       their livelihoods. The incidence of poverty was disproportionately high within the country, with 35 percent of
       the rural population classified as poor (compared to 10 percent in urban areas). At appraisal, the PDOs were
       relevant to the government’s strategy articulated in the Three-Year Interim Plan for 2007-2010. The strategy
       highlighted the need for developing market linkages and commercialization of agriculture (away from
       subsistence farming). The strategy also emphasized the role of co-operatives, private sector and local bodies
       for developing the sector. The government's Agricultural Perspective Plan for 1995-2015 period, identified
       the challenges facing the sector. These included: (i) the need for diversification, given that 82 percent
       of cultivated land was used for only growing basic staple grains; (ii) lack of marketing channels
       and infrastructure; and (iii) insufficient incentives for improving farm management techniques.

       The PDO was well-aligned with the Bank strategy for Nepal. At appraisal, the second pillar of the Interim
       Strategy Note for 2009-2011, highlighted the need for laying the foundation for sustainable and inclusive
       economic growth. The first pillar of the Interim Strategy Note for 2012-2013 underscored the need for
       enhancing connectivity for growth. The second pillar Country Partnership Strategy for 2014-2018 highlighted
       the need for increasing inclusive growth through, among other things, increasing agricultural productivity and
       commercialization of the sector. The PDO was fully aligned with the Banks Maximizing Finance for
       Development Agenda, a new corporate priority, central to the CPF. The second focus area of the current
       Country Partnership Framework for 2019-2023 underscored the need for private sector led jobs for improving
       income opportunities.



       Rating
       High
   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To improve the competitiveness of smallholder farmers in selected commodity value chains in the selected
     districts.

    Rationale


                                                                                                        Page 4 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NP:Agriculture Commercialization & Trade (P087140)



Theory of change. Capacity building activities to farmer groups and other value chain participants for
preparing sub-project proposals and business plans coupled with matching grants for constructing market
infrastructure, aimed at providing the required infrastructure for developing the agricultural sector. These
activities, with technical assistance to farm-level activities, post-harvest management and processing
techniques, aimed at improving the competitiveness of small holder farmers in the local, regional and global
markets and thereby aid in the commercialization of agriculture.

Outputs (ICR. page 16. pages 56 - 62).
These outputs were largely realized or exceeded the targets.
• The Matching Grant Scheme supported 1,223 demand-driven sub projects, in 62 districts out of the 75
districts in Nepal. This exceeded the target of 700 sub-projects. The sub projects supported under the project
were mainly in the vegetables, meat and dairy value chains. The scheme supported infrastructure
investments aimed at boosting agricultural yields and processing of agricultural commodities in 43 value
chains. Assets acquired under the scheme included 3,685 tunnel houses, 1,432 animal sheds, 436 fish
ponds, 257 storehouses, 175 collection centers, 109 tractors, 98 urine/manure/compound pits, 86 farm
vehicles, 31 biogas plants and 400 other machines (such as, generators and milking machines). About 40
percent of matching grants were micro-grants for small farmers.
• 81 percent of sub-projects were fully operational six months after completion of their completion
report. This exceeded the target of 70.
• 172 staff of the state agencies were trained annually in laboratory analysis, exceeding the target of 60.
This included training 75 staff of the Department of Food Technology and Quality (target 16), 56 staff of
the District Livestock Services Office (target 41) and 41 staff of the Department of Agriculture (target 40).
• 16,172 samples were analyzed annually by the state agencies, exceeding the target of 13,777. This
included 6,783 samples by the Department of Food Technology and Quality (target 6,039), 646 samples by
the District Livestock Services Office (original and revised target 510 and 140) and 7,099 by the Department
of Food Technology and Quality (target 6018).
• 97 percent of the samples analyzed by the state agencies met minimum quality standards, exceeding the
target of 94 percent. This included, 97 percent by the Department of Agriculture, slightly short of the target of
99 percent, 100 percent by the District Livestock Services Office (target 90 percent) and 95 percent by the
Department of Food Technology and Quality, as targeted.
• A total of 386 Inspection services were provided annually to grant recipients by the state agencies at
project closure. This was slightly short of the target of 405. This included, 151 Inspection services by the
Department of Food Technology and Quality (target 160), 161 by the District Livestock Services Office
(target 180) and 74 by the Department of Agriculture (target 65).
This outputs was below the target.
• 301 additional stalls were available at the commodity markets rehabilitated by the project. This was short
of the original target of 410.

Outcomes (ICR pages 15 and 53).
The increase in yield of selected commodity value chains were as follows;




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            NP:Agriculture Commercialization & Trade (P087140)



    • The yield of tomatoes increased from 52 metric tons at the baseline to 90 metric tons at project closure,
    exceeding the target of 66 metric tons.
    • The yield of cauliflower increased from 13 metric tons at the baseline to 24 metric tons, exceeding the
    target of 17 metric tons.
    • The yield of wheat increased from 2.40 metric tons at the baseline to 2.95 metric tons. This was slightly
    short of the target of three metric tons.
    • The yield of rice increased from 3.20 metric tons at the baseline to 3.97 metric tons. This was slightly short
    of the target of 4 metric tons.
    • Milk production increased from 2,381 liters at the baseline to 3,238 liters, exceeding the target of 2,976
    liters.
    • 100, 592 people (such as, members of cooperatives and producer associations, farmer groups, individual
    farmers and small and medium agribusiness enterprises), benefitted from project activities at closure. This
    was short of the target of 150,000 beneficiaries.
    • 45.60 percent of beneficiaries were women. This exceeded the target of 45 percent.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     To improve the competitiveness of the agribusiness sector in selected commodity value chains.

    Rationale

    Theory of change. Capacity building activities to agribusiness organizations for preparing value chain sub-
    project proposals and matching grants for investments in production and processing and establishment of
    Nepal Agribusiness innovation center were aimed at improving the marketing of agricultural
    products. Activities such as laboratory and certification facilities for SPS were aimed at increasing
    compliance with food quality and safety standards. The outcomes of these post farm-gate activities together
    with farm-level activities described above, were expected to contribute to the long-term development
    outcome of boosting farmers' incomes and thereby reducing rural poverty.

    Outputs. (ICR pages 18-19 and page 54).
    In addition to the outputs described above, the following outputs were also relevant for this
    objective:
    • The Nepal Agribusiness Innovation Center was established to support innovation. growth and
    competitiveness of agribusiness, as targeted. The mandate of this center was to nurture start-ups and small



                                                                                                         Page 6 of 15
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   NP:Agriculture Commercialization & Trade (P087140)



              and medium sized enterprises in the agribusiness sector. 1,079 clients received services from the center
              at closure. This exceeded the target of 1,000.
              • Six Rapid Bioassay Pesticides Residue laboratories were established across Nepal (one in each province)
              and training was provided to the staff on the use of the equipment. (There were no targets for this indicator).

              The following activities were not completed at project closure:
              • The fumigation chamber and post-quarantine facility were not operational by project closure.
              • Only 27 agri-food subprojects supported by the project (out of 40) had either received or submitted a
              formal request for the required Food License at project closure.

              Outcomes.
              The outcomes of these activities, which focused on supporting post-farm gate segments of the agricultural
              value chain, were as follows:
              • The production of parchment coffee increased from 126 tons a year at the baseline to 180 tons a year,
              exceeding the target of 176 tons a year.
              • The production of ginger increased from 930 tons a year at the baseline to 2,364 tons a year, exceeding
              the target of 1,302 tons a year.
              • The production of honey increased from 103 tons a year at the baseline to 380 tons a year, exceeding
              the target of 144 tons a year.
              • The milk production increased from 2,381 liters at the baseline to 3,237.80 liters, exceeding the target of
              2,976 liters.



              Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL

 PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




 Rationale
 Outcomes were for the most part realized.




 Overall Efficacy Rating
 Substantial
PHREVISEDTBL



      5. Efficiency


      The expected benefits of selected value chains were to come from: (i) operating efficiency at farm
      level; (ii) value-addition at the farm gate level and at the post-farm level, due to greater integration between


                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NP:Agriculture Commercialization & Trade (P087140)



smallholder farmers, traders and processors along the value chain; (iii) increase in market access and
reduction in economic losses, due to improvements in national capacity for meeting SPS standards
for food quality.

Economic analysis. A traditional economic analysis was not conducted at appraisal, since the main portion of
the project cost was for financing demand-driven subprojects (PAD, paragraphs 69-70). However, an economic
analysis was undertaken at appraisal for what were expected to become the 'typical' subprojects (small road to
market connection, a collection center for fresh produce marketing and a smallholder irrigation system). The
Economic Internal Rate of Return for these activities ranged between 14 percent and 36 percent. The EIRR at
closure was not comparable to the ex ante EIRR, since the subprojects that were eventually financed were
different from the typical subprojects (ICR, paragraph 39). An ex post analysis was conducted for activities
associated with agriculture value chain (vegetables, meat processing, milk production, dairy processing,
fishery, goats, cereal seeds, poultry broiler, poultry layer, potato seeds and animal feed) (ICR, paragraph 41),
accounting for about 75 percent of the project cost. The Net Present Value of these investments was estimated
at Nepalese Rupees 725,000 at 12 percent discount rate and the ex post EIRR was 19 percent.

Administrative and Operational inefficiencies. There were implementation delays due to a combination of
factors such as: (i) procurement delays and not sufficient diligence by the Project Management Team to
monitor agreed annual progress plans: (ii) delays for commencing technical assistance activities (the technical
support group and the regional technical support group did not start their assignment until one and two years,
which meant that calls for proposals were managed by the Project Management Team without technical
assistance); (iii) poor coordination between the Technical Support Group at the National level and the five
Regional Technical Support Groups. These delays were exacerbated by external factors such as
the earthquakes in April and May 2015 and extended disruptions at the border with India over a six-month
period from September 2015. These delays contributed to the non-completion of project activities (discussed in
section four). The amount of AF approved for the project was well beyond the absorptive capacity of the
country and this resulted in a cancellation of 18 percent (US$11.00 million) of the total IDA credit (US$60.00
million). The expected outreach of the project in terms of direct project beneficiaries was only 67 percent of the
target. In view of the operational inefficiencies, efficiency is rated as Modest.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                    Rate Available?        Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 15
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        NP:Agriculture Commercialization & Trade (P087140)



                                                                                       75.00
ICR Estimate                                                19.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


Relevance of the PDO to the government and Bank strategy is High. Efficacy of the objectives - to improve the
competitiveness of smallholder farmers and the agribusiness sector in selected commodity value chains -
is rated as Substantial, as the objectives were for substantially achieved. Efficiency is rated as Modest, in view
of the administrative and operational inefficiencies during implementation.


a.    Outcome Rating
      Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


Technical risk. Some activities such as the fumigation center and commodity markets were not complete when
the project closed. Also, though the Nepal Agribusiness Innovation Center was operational when the project
closed, it is unclear whether there would be adequate financing for operating the center in the coming years.
Institutional risk. It is not clear if there is adequate institutional capacity to ensure the sustainability of
investments made under the project, with regard to meeting SPS measures for enforcing food quality standards.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

     The implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the Project Management Team housed in the
     Ministry of Agriculture Development - the agency in charge of implementing the project (PAD, paragraph
     43). Several risks were identified at appraisal, including risks associated with political instability and
     frequent breakdown of law and order, inadequate understanding of government departments on
     fostering public-private partnerships and fiduciary risks. Mitigation measures incorporated at design,
     included greater role in decision-making to communities, organized farmer groups and private
     sector, consultations with institutions in the private sector to create viable partnerships and close
     monitoring and external audit ( PAD, paragraphs 63-65). Appropriate arrangements were made at
     appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10).


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP:Agriculture Commercialization & Trade (P087140)




  There were significant drawbacks at design. First, although the PDOs aimed at improving the
  competitiveness of smallholder farmers through farm-level activities, there was little or no follow-up in
  terms of activities, such as agricultural advisory services for smallholder farmers (ICR, paragraph 27).
  There was a disconnect between farm-level sub-project activities and activities aimed at supporting the
  government agencies in implementing SPS measures for food quality standards. This issue was resolved
  only in the latter years of the project, with the Project Management Team and the respective departments
  (Department of Agriculture, Department of Food Technology and Quality Control and the Department of
  Livestock Services), conducting subproject inspections (ICR, paragraph 78).

  The project overestimated the absorptive capacity in the country context. The original project was to be
  implemented in 25 districts. Following the Mid-Term Review (MTR) in August 2012, AF of twice the
  original amount (US$40.00 million) was approved to expand the geographic scope of the project to all
  districts in Nepal. The AF was approved when the overall disbursement under the original project was
  slow and three years into implementation, disbursement represented less than a quarter (24 percent) of
  the original credit (ICR, paragraph 71). At closure, despite an extension to the project closing date, more
  than US$11.00 million of the credit had to be cancelled and over 250 subprojects (representing 18
  percent of all grant agreements signed) were not completed as planned.

  There were minor shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in section 9a).


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  Supervision missions were held twice a year, with18 supervision missions over a nine-year project
  implementation period. The Bank team also provided support to the project management team through
  technical missions (ICR, paragraph 22). The missions included systematic visits to project
  implementation sites and engagement with stakeholders. The team was proactive in responding to
  challenges such as, taking preventive measures to prevent the risk of grants being used by beneficiaries
  for purposes other than those stated in the grant agreement, by changing the modalities of grant
  financing (from upfront disbursement of the grant to disbursements in three installments, subject
  to satisfactory completion of agreed milestones). The team introduced micro grants, with simplified
  selection process and quicker disbursement modalities to smallholder farmers and micro entrepreneurs,
  in response to the Borrower's concern that the project would be perceived as primarily benefitting larger
  farmers (ICR, paragraph 18). Bank supervision flagged areas that needed attention from the project
  management team, such as: (i) ensuring that the agricultural commodity markets were begun only after
  the requirements had been met (such as, consultations with stakeholders and completion of
  environmental studies; (ii) ensuring that funds provided to matching grant beneficiaries in excess of
  milestones were fully recovered; and (iii) ensuring compliance of agri-food subprojects with the



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP:Agriculture Commercialization & Trade (P087140)



  requirements of the Food Law (ICR, paragraph 97). The ICR provides no information on the continuity of
  leadership.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The original two key outcome indicators (a) increase in productivity (measured as value added per unit
  of input) in the production of selected commodity value chains and (b) the increase in the volume of
  marketable agricultural products passing through the value chain), were appropriate for monitoring
  performance. The third indicator (c) increase in the sales of commodities supported by the project, was
  inappropriate, given attribution issues. Indicators for the number of direct project beneficiaries and the
  share of women beneficiaries was added during implementation.
  The Project Management Team was in charge of monitoring project performance. The team was
  expected to work closely with the Monitoring and Evaluation division of the Ministry of Agricultural
  Development. The Monitoring and Evaluation also envisioned development of a management
  information system facility for maintaining the database of the system (PAD, paragraph 60).
  Given that the PDO aimed at improving the competitiveness of smallholder farmers, there were no
  intermediate indicators aimed at monitoring activities pertaining to farm-level activities.



b. M&E Implementation

  The indicator pertaining to the increase in the sales of commodities supported by the project was dropped. A
  core indicator - the direct project beneficiaries disaggregated by gender, was added.
  A live web-based Monitoring and Evaluation system was launched in 2016. This system enabled field level
  data entry with smartphone and allowed for real time, user-developed reporting at Project Management Team
  level (ICR, paragraph 85). The ICR (paragraph 22) notes that the results framework was regularly updated
  with data collected by the Project Regional Implementation Support team and the Project Management Team,
  with panel data for the main indicators and the validation of data was strengthened by the findings of the
  Independent Assessment of the Matching Grant Scheme. During implementation, a detailed glossary of



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP:Agriculture Commercialization & Trade (P087140)



  indicators was also developed after the second Mid-Term Review. The ICR (paragraph 82) notes that this
  glossary helped in facilitating technical discussions on indicators.



c. M&E Utilization

  The data was mainly used for monitoring project performance. The ICR (paragraph 86) notes that the project
  also experimented with direct entry of data at field level with smartphones, although this feature of the
  Monitoring Information System was not fully scaled up.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was classified as a Category B project. Four safeguard policies were triggered: Environmental
  Assessment (OP 4.01); Pest Management (OP 4.09); Involuntary Resettlement (OP/ BP 4.12); and
  Indigenous People (OP/ BP 4.10).

  Environmental assessment, Pest management and Indigenous People safeguards. The adverse
  environmental impacts expected at appraisal, included adverse impacts on land due to land degradation and
  deficiency in soil nutrients, localized air and odor pollution, water pollution due to mismanagement of wastes
  from processing units, chemical pollution impacts due to improper use of chemical pesticides and fertilizers
  and health and occupation safety issues due to use of chemicals (PAD, page 95). An Integrated
  Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 77).
  The safeguards on indigenous people was triggered, as the project covered areas with significant indigenous
  peoples (referred to as Janajatis). The ESMF provided a framework for preparing an Integrated Nutrient and
  Pest Management Plan (PAD, page 9). The ESMF included a strategy for addressing issues associated with
  indigenous peoples and their participation in project activities. The ICR (paragraph 90) notes that as per
  ESMF requirements, all sub-projects were subject to an environmental and social screening during
  implementation. The ICR (paragraph 91) notes that compliance with environmental and pest management
  safeguards was satisfactory during implementation.

  Involuntary resettlement. A Resettlement and Rehabilitation policy framework was developed to address
  resettlement issues at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 14). The ICR (paragraph 90) notes that a grievance and
  redressal mechanism was developed in 2017. According to the clarifications provided by the team, there
  were no resettlement issues during implementation.



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP:Agriculture Commercialization & Trade (P087140)




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial management. A financial management assessment conducted at appraisal, concluded that
  financial management risk was High, due to the weak implementation capacity (PAD, page 59). This risk was
  to be mitigated through close monitoring by the Project Management Team and external financial audits. The
  ICR (paragraph 93) notes that there was compliance with financial management. Audited project accounts
  were submitted within the grace period and the auditors provided unqualified audit opinions.

  Procurement management. An assessment of the procurement management capacity of the implementing
  agency conducted at appraisal and risk mitigation measures were incorporated at design (PAD, pages 69-
  71). A procurement plan was developed (PAD, page 72). The ICR (paragraph 92) notes that procurement
  management was mostly satisfactory, except for one significant issue when the implementing agency,
  against the recommendation of the Project Evaluation Committee awarded a contract to the third-ranked
  candidate (while negotiations with the top-ranked candidate was still on-going). Consequently, the Bank
  declared mis-procurement.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                      ICR                          IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                             Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory   ---
                             Satisfactory
                             Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory   ---
                             Satisfactory
                                                                                The ICR also rates Quality of
Quality of M&E               High                     Substantial               M&E Substantial (para 88,
                                                                                page 36).
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial               ---

12. Lessons



                                                                                                 Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NP:Agriculture Commercialization & Trade (P087140)



The ICR (pages 40-41) draws these lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with some
adaptation of language.

(1) A careful assessment of both investments at the farm level and off-farm level investments is
required at design for designing projects on agricultural markets. Although this project aimed at
commercialization of agriculture, activities pertaining to fam-level investments (such as through agricultural
extension services) were lacking.

(2) A careful consideration of the absorptive capacity in the country context is required prior to scaling
up project activities. In the case of this project, an AF of double the original amount was approved for
increasing the geographical scope of the project at a time when more than 75 percent of the original credit was
yet to be disbursed. The operationalization of the AF proved to be difficult, as provisions for scaling up project
activities had not been made in a timely manner and no human resources strategy had been adopted to cater
to the additional needs.

(3) Matching Grant schemes can be an effective instrument for reaching out to smallholder farmers and
agribusiness small and medium sized enterprises. This can be particularly useful in countries where the
commercial banking system is unable to cater to the needs of smallholder farmers and small and medium sized
enterprises.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR is clear and clearly provides a good exposition of the issues during implementation. The discussion
of the matching grant scheme is clear and the ICR candidly acknowledges the problems associated with the
lack of absorptive capacity in the country context. It also clearly discusses the ways the supervision team
addressed the issues that rose during implementation. The ICR draws reasonably good lessons from the
experience of implementing this project.
The ICR could have provided more information on the continuity of leadership during the lifetime of the
project. The ICR is unduly long (with the main text of the ICR at 44 pages, almost three times the length of
the recommended text) and could have benefitted from better editing.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
NP:Agriculture Commercialization & Trade (P087140)




                                                                                  Page 15 of 15
