     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig (P114931)



                                                                                   Report Number : ICRR0021510

1. Project Data



 Project ID                            Project Name
                                       RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill
 P114931
                                       Irrig

 Country                               Practice Area(Lead)                          Additional Financing
 Rwanda                                Agriculture                                  P124785,P147543


 L/C/TF Number(s)                      Closing Date (Original)                      Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-46740,IDA-53600,TF-               30-Jun-2014                                                 85,284,461.56
 10953,TF-11435

 Bank Approval Date                    Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Dec-2009                           29-Jun-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             34,000,000.00                                     21,065,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              34,000,000.00                                     21,065,000.00

 Actual                                          85,284,461.56                                     21,065,000.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Keith Robert A. Oblitas     John R. Eriksson             Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   To increase the productivity and commercialization of hillside agriculture in target areas in the Recipient’s
   territory.

   Source: Financing Agreement, February 8, 2010




                                                                                                     Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig (P114931)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                           PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   A. Capacity Development and Institutional Strengthening for Hillside Intensification.
   (Estimated cost at Appraisal: US$ 13.85 million. Actual cost at closure: US$ 19.47 million.)

   Developing the capacity of individuals and institutions for improved hillside land husbandry, stronger
   agricultural value chains, and expanded access to finance, through four sub-components: (i) Strengthening
   Farmer Organizations; (ii) Extension; (iii) Marketing and Finance; and (iv) Capacity Development and
   Institutional Strengthening of the Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) and its
   agencies. Activities financed under Component A included institutional strengthening through mobilization,
   community outreach, training, extension and marketing capabilities.


   B. Infrastructure for Hillside Intensification.
   (Estimated cost at Appraisal: US$ 20.75 million. Actual cost at closure: US$ 102.08 million.)

   Infrastructure (in three sub-components) for: (i) land husbandry; (ii) water harvesting; and (iii) irrigation.
   Activities under the component included soil conservation with technologies depending on topographic
   slope, e.g. terracing, contour bunding, green manure, downstream reservoir protection, fencing, planting of
   perennials, water harvesting, and conveyance structures for irrigation.


   C. Implementation through the Ministerial SWAp Structure.
   (Estimated cost at Appraisal: US$ 10.47 million. Actual cost at closure: US$ 13.72 million.)

   Management to enable effectiveness of project activities within the new Sector Wide Approach (SWAp)
   structure for implementation of programs and projects at MINAGRI and the Land Husbandry, Water
   Harvesting and Hillside Irrigation Project (LWH ). Broader ministerial activities under the SWAp, included:
   technical assistance, training workshops, surveys, studies, strengthening M&E, management information
   systems, and equipment.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

   Project Costs:

                                                                                                               Page 2 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig (P114931)




Total project costs estimated at appraisal were US$ 45.1 million and actual costs at closure were US$
135.2 million – 200 percent more than the appraisal estimate. The primary reason was due to a
substantial increase in project activities for most of the project’s components and sub-components. In
particular, the infrastructure program under component B, the largest project component, increased five-
fold.

Financing:

As approved at appraisal, financing was to be through an IDA Credit of US$ 34 million, but this was
considerably augmented during project implementation through additional funding: IDA provided an
additional US$ 35 million (effective March, 2014), US$ 50 million was provided under the Global
Agriculture and Food Security Program (effective June, 2011), a grant of US$ 13.3 million was provided
by USAID (effective May, 2012), and a grant of US$ 7.8 million was provided by CIDA (effective May
2012). In combination the additional IDA Credit and development community funds amounted to US$
105.8 million. Together with the original IDA Credit of US$ 34 million, the total financing provisions were
US$ 139.8 million. This excludes the borrower contribution.

Borrower Contribution:

The original borrower contribution is stated in the ICR at US$ 23 million. The actual contribution is not
shown in the ICR’s financing table.

Restructurings:

The project was restructured in 2011, 2013, 2015 and 2017 (all retructurings were Level 2). There were
no changes to the project’s Development Objectives, and only minor adjustments to Component activities,
but there were a number of implementation and disbursement changes, and increases in project targets
and project size based on the larger financing made available during project implementation. Main
restructuring features were:

2011:
Adjustments were primarily to accommodate the US$ 50 million financing from the GAFSP and the US$
35 million additional financing from IDA, to which was added the contributions from USAID and CIDA.
Together, the total additional financing (including IDA) was US$ 105.8 million. Accommodating these
financing increases, the disbursement profile was updated, adjustments made to disbursement
categories, project targets were increased, and the project closing date extended (from June 2014 to
December 2015). A basket approach to project funding was also set up to enable multi-agency financing
from a common pool.

2013:
Following the mid-term-review and additional IDA financing, a reallocation was made from components A
and C to component B to enable a larger infrastructure program. Baseline values for productivity
indicators were revised downwards due to initial overestimates of the baseline situation at appraisal (the

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig (P114931)



   ICR advises that at appraisal only national level figures were available and these were adjusted during
   implementation based on site-specific Implementation targets which were increased to reflect the larger
   funding available.

   2015:
   A reallocation between disbursement categories to accommodate changes in disbursement amounts.

   2017:
   A last extension of the project closing date, to June 2018.

   Additional to these formal restructurings, there was a change in management, through merger of the
   implementation units of LWH and the Rural Sector Support Project followed by transfer of the combined
   implementation unit from the Ministry of Agriculture to the Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources
   Development Board. This was to be in line with Rwanda’s policy to transfer implementation activities from
   the ministries to implementing agencies.

   Dates:

   LWH was approved on December 22, 2010, with a projected closing date of June 30, 2014 - an estimated
   project period of just over 4 years. Actual closure was on June 2, 2018 - a project period of eight years,
   double the appraisal estimate (refer above and section
   4).




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  Development Scenario. The two Objectives of the Rwanda Land Husbandry, Water Harvesting and Hillside
  Irrigation Project (LWH) – to increase: (i) productivity and (ii) commercialization of hillside agriculture – were
  centrally situated within the agricultural and overall development strategies of the Bank and the Government
  of Rwanda. The country’s post-conflict recovery had seen rapid GDP growth (8 percent per annum between
  2000 and 2009) and the poverty headcount ratio had fallen from 59 percent in 2000 to 45 percent in 2010.
  But growth was starting to slow down, not least in the agriculture sector where increases in value added had
  fallen to 5.5 percent per annum. Agriculture was the fundamental driver of economic growth and poverty
  alleviation. In 2009 the farming sector contributed 30 percent of the country’s economy, about half of export
  revenues, and 81 percent of employment. Poverty was mainly rural (at 67 percent) and tied to subsistence
  farming.



                                                                                                       Page 4 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig (P114931)



       In order to raise agricultural growth and accelerate poverty alleviation, both the Government’s development
       strategy – the Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture in Rwanda Phase II, 2009-2012; and the
       Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy for Rwanda (FY09 – 12), stressed the need to enhance agricultural
       growth as a means to drive the economy forwards and reduce poverty.

       The Government’s development strategy – as articulated in its succession of Strategic Plans, has
       consistently emphasized rural transformation to a modernized agricultural economy, containing much of the
       elements espoused under the project – notably, addressing poor yields through modernization of production,
       and the commercialization of agriculture by providing access to finance and market linkages. The Fourth
       Strategic Plan issued in 2018, approximately at the time of project closure, continues and intensifies the
       above thrusts.

       The Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy of FY 09-12, coincident with the beginning of the project, and the
       Country Partnership Strategy for FY14-18, the document relevant at project closure, have broadly similar
       thrusts and support Government’s strategy. The FY14-18 CPS sees agriculture as a key focus area, and
       explicitly emphasizes intensifying productivity and promoting a more commercially based sector.

       The Project’s Theory of Change is well aligned to the two objectives. By increasing productivity and
       commercialization, the incomes and welfare of the rural population, and an enhancement of the agriculture
       sector’s contribution to the economy, could be expected. Project actions were in most respects
       knowledgeably identified for likely impact, and designed practically to achieve the corresponding outputs,
       though some sub-components (e.g. irrigation), achieved targets but were less cost-effective than other
       activities like terracing. Such differences can be expected in a multi-component project, and, in general, the
       design provided a good base for the project’s implementation, and, in turn, for achieving the project's
       objectives.

       The realism of LWH's Theory of Change was proven by project achievements. For most project outputs and
       for assessing project outcome, achievements were well beyond appraisal targets. This might suggest that the
       "bar" for achievements was set too low, but at appraisal the targets would reasonably be considered already
       ambitious relative to the baseline situation. The actual increase in productivity under the project was over 10
       times baseline productivity for irrigated agriculture and over seven times the baseline for non-irrigated
       agriculture, and commercialization of agricultural production went from 35 percent of production to 81
       percent. The ICR does not indicate exogenous variables (e.g. weather, pricing) which would have
       significantly affected project achievements.relative to its theory of change. Thus, the realism of the theory of
       change established at appraisal was realistic. The Relevance of LWH's Objectives was High.



       Rating
       High
   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL



                                                                                                         Page 5 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig (P114931)




Objective 1
Objective
Increase Agricultural Productivity

Rationale
The project's first Objective - to increase agricultural productivity - was addressed through a variety of
measures to improve farming practices and provide supporting infrastructure. Actions covered crop
husbandry, cropping patterns, varieties, and crop mix; use of fertilize; upgrading of soils; sustainable land
management; terracing; increased irrigated area including establishment of water user associations;
provision of agricultural extension services; technical and organizational training; and provision of credit.

Key Outputs (achievements) are summarized below:

1.      The proportion of male farmers using improved farming methods rose to 93% compared with 30%
baseline and 90% targeted. Achievements for female farmers were 90% compared with 25 % baseline and
90% targeted originally (at appraisal)
2.     The area developed for irrigation reached 2,555 ha, as against the original target of 900 ha and the
revised (including the extension period) target of 2368 ha.
3.     55,000 kitchen gardens were established, compared with 15,000 originally targeted and a revised
target of 19,000.
4.     The cost recovery ratio for operations and maintenance of water user associations (WUAs) reached
66% compared with the original and unchanged target of 40%.

Outcome

At project design stage, three monitorable indicators were chosen to assess the outcome of the project’s first
objective. At project completion, productivity of irrigated land was over 10 times baseline productivity and
was 230 percent higher than the original target at appraisal. Non-irrigated agriculture also had high
increases. Productivity was seven times the baseline productivity, and 150 percent greater than the targeted
productivity set at appraisal. There was also an increase in the number of beneficiaries, which increased
threefold compared with the target. Results are shown below:

1. The Productivity of Irrigated Areas reached 5,600 US$/ha compared with targets of US$1,700 (original)
and US$2,800 (revised), and baseline (pre-project) productivity of US$ 492/ha.

2. The Productivity of Non-Irrigated Hillside Agriculture reached 3,500 $/ha compared with the original
target of 1,400 US$/ha and the revised target of $2,500/ha, and the baseline productivity of US$ 469/ha.

3. The Number of Beneficiaries of the project was 310,000 of which females were 150,000. The target
number of beneficiaries was 105,000, of which the target for women’s participation was 52,000.

(A survey conducted by the World Bank’s Development Impact Evaluation Unit (DIME) also shows impacts
on agricultural production. The survey commented that: “households in LWH project sites witness large and

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig (P114931)



    statistically significant impacts on agricultural production indicators that can directly be attributed to project
    interventions.”)

    Overall Efficacy of Objective 1.

    LWH’s productivity targets were exceeded - by an estimated 230% for irrigated lands, and by 150% for non-
    irrigated land - and formed a robust base for the outcome of the project; and the number of project
    beneficiaries increased threefold beyond expectations (comparison is with the original targets (4 years)
    against achievements at eight years.). However, these figures are indicative rather than based on known
    data collection processes, about which the ICR provides little information (section 9 provides commentary on
    LWH evaluation processes). Nevertheless, significant changes in productivity can be expected from the
    intensive agricultural extension and infrastructure introduced under the project,, and are not inconsistent with
    international experience of agricultural yields. Accordingly, the reported data is taken to be sufficiently
    accurate to provide a broad picture of the project's efficacy. The Efficacy of the objective to Increase
    agricultural productivity is rated Substantial..




    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     Increase the Commercialization of Hillside Agriculture

    Rationale
    An extensive program to increase commercialization of agriculture was mounted, including comprehensive
    training across the spectrum of activities that could support development of market chains, promotion of rural
    finance and credit, and construction of marketing infrastructure.

    Outputs for Objective 2

    The main outputs under objective 2 were: training in group formation and marketing, establishing
    cooperatives and market channels, post-harvest storage and processes; and the use of credit and other
    financing sources. Quantified results from available data are:

    1. 17,000 farmers were trained in group formation; 3,000 farmers were trained in horticultural production
    and marketing; and 7,000 farmers were trained in post-harvest handling.(no targets provided).



                                                                                                             Page 7 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig (P114931)



2. The number of financial institutions participating in the project was 45. The target was 12 (original) and
25 (revised).

3. Several finance channels were developed, including agricultural production credit, harvest credit, and
credit for investments developing marketing value chains. (no target/achievement data).

4. 27 cooperatives and 3,270 self-help groups were established, with 47% women. (targets not provided)..

Outcome of Objective 2

The degree to which agriculture was commercialized (monitorable indicator 1 below) was the central
indicator of the outcome of this objective. Data such as the opening up of financial markets and increases
in the number of farmers establishing bank accounts (monitorable indicators 2 and 3) indicate development
of a rural market economy which would be consistent with the increases in commercialization reported in the
monitorable indicator for commercialization.

1. The percentage of total agricultural production that was commercialized rose to 81 percent as against
the baseline situation (35 percent commercialized), the original target (60 percent commercialized) and
revised target of 70 percent commercialized.

2. Usage of formal financial institutions rose to 92 % for males and 89% for females as against targets of
40% (original) and 90% (revised) for males, and 36% (original) and 85% (revised) for females.

3.   57,000 farmers (41% women) opened bank accounts. (no targets established).

Efficacy of Objective 2

LWH undertook a comprehensive set of actions to increase the commercialization of agriculture, ranging
from training for marketing infrastructure and group formation, and facilitating development of financing
institutions. Commercialization increased during the project period from 60% baseline to 81% achieved.

There is little commentary in the ICR on the quality and reliability of M&E, leaving questions on the reliability
of some project results, especially for commercialization (section 9). Nevertheless the magnitude of the ICR
estimates of increases in commercialization during the project period is large and could reasonably be
ascribed primarily to the concerted effort under LWH to develop agriculture’s market economy. Additionally,
the increases in banking activity are consistent with increased commercialization. The Efficacy of the
objective to Commercialize the Agricultural Sector is therefore
rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 17
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig (P114931)


     PHREVDELTBL

 PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




 Rationale
 Given that the efficacy of each of the two sub-objectives is rated Substantial, overall efficacy is rated Substantial.
 :"




 Overall Efficacy Rating
 Substantial
PHREVISEDTBL



      5. Efficiency

      Efficiency will be assessed from the perspectives of Economic Viability, Implementation Efficiency, and Cost
      Effectiveness:

      Economic Viability

      The ICR estimates the project’s economic rate of return to be 55%, which is moderately sensitive to varying
      costs and benefits - a 20 percent increase in costs together with a 20 percent decrease in benefits yielding an
      ERR of 39 percent. The calculation is based on data from the Project Implementation Unit, the Development
      Impact Evaluation Unit, M&E reports, and field visits. Environmental benefits were also assessed, based on
      estimates of carbon sequestration, but the relative size of sequestration benefits is not clear. The ERR
      estimated in the ICR (55%) is substantially higher than the ERR calculated at appraisal of the LWH (29%),
      likely due to the higher achievements in productivity of LWH against the targets set at appraisal The ERR
      estimate may be on the high side due to some analytical assumptions - for instance, benefits from farmer
      organizations would already be expressed in general crop yield and value benefits, and an assumed life of
      20 years is long for some infrastructure such as small-scale irrigation or terraces. Nevertheless, the productivity
      and value increases under the project could be expected to yield an ERR above the cost of capital.

      Implementation Efficiency

      LWH’s physical achievements and productivity increases can, as a crude indicator of implementation efficiency,
      be compared with the increases in project duration and financing. Thus, the yardstick could be the doubling of
      the project period, and the fourfold increase in financing. Under the project, the number of beneficiaries
      increased to three times the targeted increase; the productivity of irrigated and unirrigated land grew by 230
      and 150 percent respectively, compared with targeted productivity and the share of commercialized production
      in total agricultural output rose from 35% baseline (and 60 targeted) to 89 percent. Accordingly, the very


                                                                                                            Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig (P114931)



substantial increase in the project period and in project funding does not appear to have unduly compromised
either the pace of development or the increase in productivity.

Cost Effectiveness.

Comparative data on costs of similar projects are not provided in the ICR. Changes in cost-effectiveness over
the project life, can, nevertheless, be assessed, At project completion, the total costs of the project’s field
components (i.e. components A and B and excluding the broader institutional development costs under
component C), were US$ 121.6 million and the number of direct project beneficiaries was 310,000, an average
cost per direct beneficiary of US$ 392. A number of the project’s investments would have required on-site
works (e.g. irrigation, catchment investments for sediment control and post-harvest facilities). At appraisal,
costs per beneficiary were estimated to be US$ 330/beneficiary. Hence,at least as concerns actual cost-
effectiveness versus appraisal estimates, cost-effectiveness was broadly the same.

Overall Efficiency

Although the two estimates available of LWH’s economic viability have different results, both show significant
gains in economic returns. Available data indicate likely cost-effectiveness, and the project’s considerably
longer implementation period is matched by the threefold increase in the project’s physical achievements.
Overall Efficiency is assessed Substantial.



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                    Rate Available?        Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    100.00
Appraisal                                                 29.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
ICR Estimate                                              55.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome

LWH was Highly Relevant. It responded to Rwanda’s strategic need to enhance welfare and reduce poverty in
rural areas, and to drive GDP growth forwards. The project’s twin objectives – to increase productivity and
commercialize the sector – were both key elements in the economic growth and poverty alleviation strategy. The

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 17
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig (P114931)



Efficacy of both Objectives was Substantial – productivity increased by 230 and 350 percent respectively on
irrigated and non-irrigated land, and, based on the information available, the proportion of production
commercialized is estimated to have grown from 60 percent to 89 percent. Efficiency was also Substantial. LWH
was, economically viable and cost-effective, and the doubling of the project period was matched
by commensurate increases in implementation. Overall, LWH’s Outcome was Satisfactory.


a.    Outcome Rating
      Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Interest in the project is widespread across various actors - farmers, entrepreneurs, government and
development agencies - due to positive experience in the implementation of project activities. An important issue,
however, is the organizational and financial health of the irrigation water user associations. Only 66% of farmers
pay their water fees, and construction at the largest irrigation site was only completed in June 2018, at the end of
the project, leaving little time for training and technical assistance to farmers and their WUAs. The ICR (pages 26
and 27) considers that, in general, WUAs are weak in financial, technical, and institutional capacity, and also
comments that: “Capacity building efforts and technical assistance will need to continue.” As irrigation is one of
the larger project components, the project's development outcome entails significant risks.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     Project objectives were well aligned to Rwanda’s strategic needs for economic growth and poverty
     alleviation, and with the appraisal report’s theory of change which presented a generally clear institutional
     and technical pathway to reach these objectives. Project preparation was informed by the experience of
     an earlier project. The monitorable indicators were limited in coverage, especially for the
     commercialization objective which covered the extent of commercialization but without indication of
     sources of commercialization, quality or enhanced value.

     Project design was detailed and proved a mostly effective base for implementation, enabling only minor
     changes throughout the project period, including the extension period. But irrigation required adjustments
     in the scheme selection process – its development was initially slow as planned locations of irrigation
     systems included some schemes not suitable for hilly terrain. Land husbandry improvements alone would
     have been more suitable in such conditions. An adaptive approach was therefore adopted with decisions
     on the type of infrastructure based on watershed characteristics. Performance improved, and by project
     closure, with more favorable conditions for irrigation, the area irrigated exceeded initial targets by 180%.
     Project risks were tabulated in the PAD which indicated what was being done to reduce component-wide


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig (P114931)



  risks, or what the project would do to tackle such risks. Although there were some shortfalls, overall
  quality of design was good, as attested by: first, the way that the project was aligned with Rwanda’s and
  the Bank’s policies and integrated within the rural sector’s institutional structure. And second, by the
  detailed design that provided a practical guide during implementation and required few changes. These
  features did not significantly change during the extension period, facilitating taking up the much larger
  program adopted. The Quality at Entry was Satisfactory.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  Supervision was regular and made more effective by the location of the Task Team Leader in the country
  office, thereby enabling close interaction between the TTL and the project implementers and policy
  makers. Basic supervision activities such as financial management, procurement, and progress in
  implementation, were assiduously carried out, and adjustments were made to a component’s
  implementation when bottlenecks arose. Interchange of experience with other Bank projects, such as the
  Rural Sector Support Project provided mutually useful exchange of ideas. Team staffing included
  contributions from appropriate specialists.

  The integration of LWH as part of Rwanda’s combined Sector Wide Approach (SWAp), wherein the
  project was a key factor in Government’s intentions to scale up the agricultural and land and water
  husbandry program, was largely effective, despite the major increase in the dimensions and funding that
  the task team took on. The Bank was also effective in attracting development partners in project funding
  and implementation, and, in association with Government, coordinatiing of activities between partners,
  and establishing a "common basket," funding mechanism combining resources to a single funding
  channel.

  Overall Bank Performance

  Bank performance, both at design stage and during supervision, carried a complex project
  forwards, broadly achieving the project’s objectives. LWH’s design required little change during project
  implementation. Though risky, the radical increase in project funding, was accommodated without undue
  loss in quality. The Bank team played a lead role during implementation, facilitating adjustments as
  issues or bottlenecks occurred. The overall Quality of Bank Performance was Satisfactory.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig (P114931)




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  M&E was based on a clear Theory of Change with well-defined impact pathways and generally
  practical indicators for monitoring changes. M&E was embedded into the Ministry of Agriculture’s
  monitoring system, providing better means for consistency over time and across activities. Farmers’
  self-help groups and cooperatives were used as a primary means of collecting data. Beneficiary
  surveys were also used.



b. M&E Implementation
  Monitorable indicators over the project period were not changed, except in physical targets which were
  increased to reflect the larger size of the program resulting from the additional financing. The indicators
  enabled comparisons over time of project outputs, and, to a lesser extent, impacts and outcomes.

  Monitoring and analysis of outcomes could have been further elaborated, to add to the understanding of what
  the outcome was. For instance, for the commercialization objective – the only indicator chosen was the
  changes in “commercialization.” Yet only to know that agriculture had been “commercialized” conveys little
  idea of what happened and why. Greater elaboration of the types of crops and interventions which were
  particularly impactful, and of the main sources of commercialization – e.g. cooperatives, private businesses,
  individual farmers - would have provided additional operationally useful information. Also, monitorable
  indicators for outcomes could have been buttressed by other information that might be expected to be
  consistent with the primary indicator – for instance, from different sources, or from tracking variables with
  proxy value to the main indicator.

  There is little commentary in the ICR on the quality and reliability of M&E data (for instance, as relevant, brief
  remarks on sources of data, survey design, sampling, capacity of enumerators, etc.). Such information would
  have helped ascertain the reliability of some key project results, especially for commercialization (section 4).



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E operated within a performance-based culture receptive to M$E findings. Data was used for operational
  decision making by government policy makers, and in Bank supervision missions.The mainstreaming of
  M&E into the overall LWH program enabled project data to be integrated into Rwanda's Sector Wide
  Approach.for the agriculture sector, enhancing utility in this broader program. Data from the independent
  DIME survey (section 4) could have been more integrated into the overall evaluation framework.

  M&E Quality Overall


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig (P114931)



  The M&E system provided a base for project implementation, but with some weaknesses in monitoring of
  outcomes. Considering the M&E program as a whole though, the overall Quality of M&E is rated
  Substantial.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
  Environmental

  The project was category B and triggered the following safeguards: Environmental Assessment OP/BP4.01);
  Involuntary Resettlement ( (OP/BP 4.12); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Forests (OP/BP 4.36); Pest
  management (OP 4.09); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37); and
  Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). An Environmental and Social Framework and a Pest
  Management Plan were prepared. The Framework was needed as locations and types of investments could
  not be predicted in advance, hence the Framework provided overall guidance for environmental and social
  screening of the sub-projects. Where an investment was large or diverse, a dedicated environmental and
  social assessment was made.

  Although the issues and actions for the environmental and social aspects of the project are well covered in
  the ICR, and preparation of a Pest Management Plan is mentioned, for the majority of safeguards, there is
  no or minimal information on the situation and any actions taken. Five of the safeguards triggered are in this
  situation (natural habitats, forests, physical cultural resources, safety of dams and projects on international
  waters). Even if some of these are found to be not relevant to LWH, brief reference to the safeguard and
  why there are no issues to be addressed, would have been desirable, or where some issues are identified,
  appropriate actions could have been identified.

  Social

  As the sites of works could not necessarily be predetermined under a community driven project, a
  Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared, and screening and review procedures were issued to provide
  guidance on resettlement. For sites identified as requiring a comprehensive resettlement program, a
  Resettlement Action Plan was prepared. Six irrigation sites had such RAPs, but resettlement policy was also
  applied for compensating farmers affected by terracing and other small infrastructure. There was a total of
  2,135 Project Affected Households, of which 117 required relocation. Compensation and job opportunities
  were provided in advance of any civil works. Equitable compensation was facilitated by the requirement that
  land titles and bank accounts of married couples had to be shared between both partners. And locally led
  grievance committees were established for resolving disputes between project affected persons.


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig (P114931)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  Once financial staff had gained experience, accounting was up to date and LWH’s financial management,
  which had been rated moderately satisfactory during the first two years of the project, was rated satisfactory
  throughout subsequent project implementation. Financial statements and audit reports were provided in
  timely fashion and all audits were unqualified. Disbursements were also timely. Good internal control and
  adequate staffing contributed to this generally good performance.

  Procurement

  Procurement was carried out following Bank procedures, though with implementation issues initially - in
  particular, delays in design studies, and cases of non-responsive bids. The latter was due to capacity
  constraints of local contractors, which were too small to handle the financing needs for larger contracts.
  Other issues were unrealistic procurement plans and uneven contract management. Nevertheless, the ICR
  does not refer to any irregularities, the issues being more a matter of weak administration. The
  procurement problems were progressively resolved, with intensive supervision from Bank staff, over the first
  several years of the project, and do not appear to have significantly delayed project implementation. By the
  fourth year of the project, procurement was rated satisfactory, although it was downgraded to moderately
  satisfactory in 2017, due to understaffing in the procurement unit. In the event, the existing staff were able to
  shoulder the workload, made easier by closure of other projects with procurement managed by the LWH
  procurement unit.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                         IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                       Satisfactory             Satisfactory               ---
Bank Performance              Satisfactory             Satisfactory               ---


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig (P114931)



Quality of M&E                Substantial              Substantial               ---
Quality of ICR                                         Substantial               ---

12. Lessons

 1. A major extension of a project’s implementation period might be appropriate if the extension is for strategic
reasons, is expected to be economically viable, is adequately resourced. and is practically implemented.
The unusual step of doubling the project period was: to maintain the momentum of the field development
program, which was still acquiring experience, to facilitate the involvement of financing partners in Rwanda's
sector-wide agricultural development program; and, to further consolidate institutional links. An alternative
would have been a new project providing opportunity for a fresh look at the development program, but the
LWH’s extended program was effectively implemented, contributing to the broader and longer-term goals of
Rwanda's rural development program.

2. Success with a long-term project extension is facilitated by a clear strategy and technical features.
Amongst the factors driving the success of the project’s additional 4 ½ year program were: the extension
benefitted from the experience of LWH’s first four years; technical and institutional features were already tested
and remained largely the same; Government and the Bank were dedicated to a sector-wide rural development
program; and other donors were willing to support LWH's program without variance in project implementation
features, including combining their funds with the Bank into a common financing basket.

3. Monitoring should place particular focus on monitoring the outcomes of the development objectives.
For assessing the outcome of the commercialization objective, the only direct measure of outcome was the
share of “commercialized” products as a percentage of total farm production. It would have been desirable to
know how commercialization was defined, how it was measured, what commercialization activities were most
viable, and what particular crops and marketing or processing activities were involved. Other supporting
evidence. proxy data, or additional monitorable indicators, would also have been desirable.

4. A flexible approach in the proportion of different components and activities in rural development projects
provides scope for enhancing outcomes.
LWH’s field development program was adjusted during project implementation to increase the proportion of the
land husbandry activities, thereby reducing the proportion of the larger irrigation schemes, which provided lower
returns and were more difficult for farmers to manage. Local conditions were taken as the determining factor for
developing each watershed.




13. Assessment Recommended?

Yes



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig (P114931)



Please explain
 As part of an assessment of the experience in watershed improvements of several projects to ascertain
factors that can contribute to success.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is thorough, thoughtful and candid. It is particularly strong in its strategic orientation, which provides
context for the report. Supporting information is also generally provided. And the lessons are practically
oriented, and well anchored in the project’s experience. The boxes in the text, and photographs at the end of
the report add understanding to the project’s achievements (several additional boxes or small tables in the
efficacy section highlighting some of the output achievements would also have been useful). Significant
changes and key factors affecting implementation and outcome are clear and in sufficient detail.
There are several areas where the ICR could have been improved : (i) information on the sources of data
and its reliability (critical for assessing the project’s outcome) are largely missing; and there could have been
greater use of other relevant sources of data, such as the Bank’s DIME survey; (ii) the reasons behind the
decisions for scaling-up, and for categorizing the project as a SWAp could have been elaborated; (iii) the
project’s situation or role within the overall lending program, both pre-project and planned, was only cursorily
described; and (iv) any actions taken regarding safeguards beyond environmental, social and pest
management aspects could have been noted. Overall, though, the ICR is an informative and analytical
review and its Quality is Substantial.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 17 of 17
