     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL:Decentralized Service Delivery Prog 2 (P119355)



                                                                                     Report Number : ICRR0021553

1. Project Data



 Project ID                             Project Name
                                        SL:Decentralized Service Delivery Prog
 P119355
                                        2

 Country                                Practice Area(Lead)                            Additional Financing
 Sierra Leone                           Social Protection & Labor                      P156548,P162615


 L/C/TF Number(s)                       Closing Date (Original)                       Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H7390,TF-12665                     31-Dec-2015                                                   28,729,342.95

 Bank Approval Date                     Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Dec-2011                            29-Jun-2018

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              26,000,000.00                                        2,889,331.02

 Revised Commitment                               30,007,921.50                                        1,501,057.50

 Actual                                           28,729,342.95                                        4,603,763.14



 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Katharina Ferl               Judyth L. Twigg               Eduardo Fernandez                IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                            Maldonado



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 7) and the Financing Agreement of February 14, 2012
   (p. 5), the objectives of the project were: "to (i) strengthen government capacity to manage decentralized
   services; (ii) improve availability and predictability of funding for Local Councils (LCs); and (iii) strengthen the
   Recipient’s intergovernmental fiscal transfer system. For purposes of this assessment, objectives (ii) and (iii)
   are discussed and rated together, as strengthening of the fiscal transfer system meant improving availability
   and predictability of LC funding as part of this project.


                                                                                                        Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL:Decentralized Service Delivery Prog 2 (P119355)




   Two outcome targets were revised downward, and therefore a split rating is performed.

   The project was the second phase of a planned three-phase Adaptable Program Loan (APL) whose overall
   objective was the same as for the second phase.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  06-May-2016
                                                          PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components

   The project included four components:

   Component 1: Grants to Local Councils (LCs) (appraisal estimate US$22.9 million, actual US$16.6
   million): This component was to finance grants to LCs to complement inter-government fiscal transfers,
   both flowing through the same mechanism that was part of the comprehensive decentralization
   policy informing the revision of the Local Government Act (LGA) launched in February 2004. The grants
   covered five sectors: health and sanitation, education, rural water, solid waste management, and social
   assistance services for the disabled and other vulnerable groups. The funds were to be provided based on
   the LCs' budgets and local development plans to finance service operations and civil works.

   During the restructuring in June 2012, this component received an additional US$5.4 million through a
   Trust Fund from the European Union (EU).

   Component 2: Capacity development and technical assistance to strengthen LCs' and ministries,
   departments, and agencies' (MDAs') capacity (appraisal estimate US$3.0 million, actual US$5.0
   million): This component was to finance LCs to carry out their core functions and central government
   capacity to provide adequate strategic guidance and oversight to LCs. Capacity building was also to be
   supported to MDAs for provision of strategic guidance and oversight to LCs.

   Component 3: Results and social accountability (appraisal estimate US$4.1 million, actual US$4.7
   million): This component was to support a focus on community monitoring throughout the project, to be
   scaled up gradually to cover all five sectors over the project implementation period. It was to support

                                                                                                              Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SL:Decentralized Service Delivery Prog 2 (P119355)



  monitoring of results at the LC level and also support LCs in implementing a results-based approach with
  service providers.

  Component 4: Project management (appraisal estimate US$1.3 million, actual US$2.2 million): This
  component was to finance administrative costs related to the implementation of grants to LCs, capacity
  development, and social accountability components (Components 1, 2, and 3). It was also to finance
  specific operational costs of the Integrated Project Administration Unit (IPAU), as well as capacity building
  to strengthen such areas as fiduciary management, intergovernmental coordination, monitoring,
  administration, supervision, and auditing.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Project Cost: At approval, total project cost was estimated at US$31.4 million. Actual cost was US$28.73
  million. The project experienced exchange losses from the SDR to the US$ in the amount of US$1.8
  million. Also, the project had to reimburse the EU for ineligible expenditures in the amount of US$1.4
  million.

  Financing: The project was financed through a US$26 million grant from the International Development
  Association, of which US$24.1 million was disbursed. The project also received an EU Trust Fund of
  US$5.4 million, of which US$4.6 million was disbursed.

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower planned to contribute US$105 million, which materialized.

  Dates: The project was restructured five times:

    • On August 31, 2012, the project was restructured to adapt disbursement arrangements.
    • On January 30, 2015 the project was restructured to reallocate funds between disbursement
    categories and to change the closing date from December 31, 2015 to December 31, 2016, to allow for
    completion of project activities that had been delayed due to an Ebola outbreak.
    • On May 6, 2016 the project was restructured to modify the Results Framework: i) decrease the target
    values for PDO Indicator 3, “Local Councils (LCs) with Comprehensive Local Government Performance
    Assessment System (CLoGPAS) social accountability aggregate score over 60,” and PDO indicator 4,
    “citizens satisfied with service delivery in key sectors”; ii) change data sources for two intermediate
    outcome indicators; and iii) drop two intermediate outcome indicators.
    • On December 8, 2016, the project was restructured to change the closing date from December 31,
    2016 to October 31, 2017 to allow for the completion of activities in the post-Ebola time frame.
    • On October 23, 2017, the project was restructured to reallocate funds between disbursement
    categories and to change the closing date from October 31, 2017 to June 29, 2018 to allow for
    disbursement of the remaining project funds.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            SL:Decentralized Service Delivery Prog 2 (P119355)




   3. Relevance of Objectives

       Rationale


       After a decade of civil war, Sierra Leone started to make improvements in terms of increasing economic
       growth and reducing poverty. Between 2003 and 2011, the poverty ratio declined from 66.4 percent to 52.9
       percent, and the Gross Domestic Product grew at a rate of 15.2 percent in 2012 and 20.1 percent in
       2013. However, the country still experienced low human development outcomes, lack of essential social
       services, and weak governance. In order to address these challenges, the government initiated in 2004
       decentralization reforms with the approval of the LGA. The LGA established 19 elected LCs and respective
       Ward Committees (WDCs) and implemented a legal framework for the devolution of a large number
       of functions. Also, the LGA aimed to improve the transparency of Sierra Leone’s intergovernmental transfer
       system and to reduce resource and expenditure inequalities between regions. The decentralization process
       was supported by the World Bank’s first phase of the Decentralized Service Delivery Program (APL I, 2009-
       2011).

       The objectives of the project were in line with the Bank’s most recent Country Assistance Strategy (FY10-
       FY13), which identified decentralized service delivery to be a key element for improving basic services in
       education, health, and water and sanitation. The project’s objectives were also aligned with the Bank’s 2018
       Systematic Country Diagnostic, which stressed the importance of finalizing the devolution of competencies to
       LCs in line with the LGA, and of providing more reliable inter-governmental transfers and social
       accountability measures. In addition, the project’s objectives were in line with the Bank Africa
       Region's 2012-2022 Social Protection Strategy, which supports increasing access to and quality of basic
       services.



       Rating
       High
   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     Strengthen government capacity to manage decentralized services (original outcome targets)

    Rationale




                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SL:Decentralized Service Delivery Prog 2 (P119355)



The project’s theory of change linked the provision of workshops, LC capacity-building grants, upgrading
of the M&E system, and piloting of social accountability mechanisms with strengthened capacity to manage
decentralized services.

Outputs


  • Subsidiary agreements were concluded consistently and in a timely manner between LCs and service
  providers. However, results were not consistently monitored by LCs.
  • 448 civil works sub-projects were implemented across 1,139 sites. These sub-projects included
  rehabilitation of 122 primary health clinics and hospitals; rehabilitation and building of 129 primary schools,
  junior secondary schools, and adult literacy centers; and rehabilitation and construction of 177 water
  supply systems. Also, six infrastructures on solid waste/social welfare were financed.
  • In addition to civil works activities, the project funded procurement of drugs and medical supplies,
  vehicles, power supply and equipment, and medical equipment; training of health workers on family health
  and infection prevention/control; chlorination of wells and other water sources; and the purchase of solid
  waste collection vehicles and equipment. Funds were also provided for specialized educational support
  for children with disabilities, as well as support for survivors of Ebola and their families.
  • 98.2 sub-projects were finalized, and 97.3 percent of supported facilities were functioning by the time the
  project closed.
  • All 19 LCs had integrated development plans, budgets (finalized in accordance with sector plans), and
  procurement plans (which included LC transfer and project funds), achieving the target of 19 LCs. All 19
  LCs had January to December budget execution rates of 90 percent of available funds, achieving the
  target of 19 LCs. All 19 LCs were producing annual updates on the implementation progress of the
  development plans by project closure, achieving the target of 19 LCs. All 19 LCs’ M&E units received,
  processed, and transmitted data related to sector activities to relevant stakeholders, achieving the target.
  • All MDAs in the project’s sectors (Ministries of Education, Health and Sanitation, Water, and Social
  Assistance) requested and received demand- (US$133,000 in total in two tranches) and supply-driven
  (US$50,000 per LC) grants for the technical supervision of LCs. The ICR (p. 18) stated that during the first
  phase of the program, grants for MDAs were available but were not requested.
  • A disaggregated list of project-related investments (by type and sector) was kept at all times during
  project implementation by LC civil work officers, achieving the target.
  • The number of LCs assessed in the Comprehensive Local Government Performance Assessment
  Survey (CLoGPAS) increased from 5 out of 19 in 2011 to 10 out of 15 in 2018. The CLoGPAS is a
  composite instrument that measures institutional capacity at LCs by evaluating performance on
  management, transparency, planning, financial management, and procurement. CLoGPAS scoring
  assessed how well LCs performed their duties and whether they exhibited functional capacities that were
  supposed to be in place according to the LGA and other regulations.




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SL:Decentralized Service Delivery Prog 2 (P119355)



  • The project facilitated a South-to-South knowledge exchange between the project and the Ethiopia
  Promoting Basic Services Program Phase 3, resulting in lessons being incorporated into Sierra Leone’s
  decentralization strategy and strengthening of LC capacity.
  • An Integrated National Public Service Survey (INPSS) was conducted in May 2016 and was part of a
  partial Impact Evaluation in June 2018, achieving the target this survey being conducted at least once
  during project implementation.
  • A Community Monitoring Intervention (CMI) was taking place in four LCs and four sectors by the end of
  project implementation. The CMI used scorecards that allowed citizens to evaluate services in the health,
  solid waste management, water, and social assistance sectors and was managed by LCs with assistance
  from the government.
  • The percentage of ward committees that performed spot checks on service providers increased from 46
  percent in 2012 to 95 percent in 2018, surpassing the original target of 75 percent and the revised target
  of 65 percent.


Outcomes


  • The LCs' aggregate CLoGPAS score increased from 42 percent in May 2012 to 60.2 percent by the end
  of 2017, not achieving the original target of 75 percent.
  • The percentage of citizens who were satisfied with service delivery in key sectors increased from 37
  percent in 2012 to 85 percent in 2018, surpassing the original target of 70 percent and the revised target
  of 60 percent.


Progress of the overall program as it moved from APL II to APL III was to be assessed by four national-level
indicators on service delivery:

  • The proportion of clinics with essential drugs in stock increased from 32 percent in 2007 to 56 percent in
  2018, surpassing the target of 50 percent.
  • The percentage of rural households with access to an improved water source increased from 52 percent
  in 2008 to 67.8 percent in 2018, surpassing the target of 65 percent.
  • The percentage of people with access to improved health and sanitation services increased from 30
  percent in 2007 to 92.47 percent in 2018, surpassing the target of 48 percent.
  • The percentage of schools with Teaching and Learning Materials (TLM) was 58 percent in 2018, not
  achieving the target of 80 percent. This indicator lacked a baseline because TLMs were not being
  distributed before project implementation.




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            SL:Decentralized Service Delivery Prog 2 (P119355)



    Although the original target for improvement in aggregate CLoGPAS score was not met, other targets for
    citizen satisfaction and service delivery were surpassed. These achievements are indicative of substantially
    strengthened capacity to manage decentralized services.


    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL
    PHINNERREVISEDTBL
    Objective 1 Revision 1
    Revised Objective

    Strengthen government capacity to manage decentralized services (revised outcome targets)

    Revised Rationale

    Outcomes


        • The LCs' aggregate CLoGPAS score increased from 42 percent in May 2012 to 60.2 percent by the end
        of 2017, achieving the revised target of 60 percent.
        • The percentage of citizens who were satisfied with service delivery in key sectors increased from 37
        percent in 2012 to 85 percent in 2018, surpassing the revised target of 60 percent.



    Revised Rating
    Substantial
PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     Improve availability and predictability of funding for LCs/Strengthen the Recipient’s intergovernmental fiscal
     transfer system

    Rationale

    The project's theory of change linked the transfer of funds to LCs and monitoring of regular window transfers
    from the central level to LCs with strengthening of the intergovernmental fiscal transfer system, enhancing
    the predictability and availability of funding for LCs.

    Outputs, in addition to capacity-building activities listed under Objective 1:




                                                                                                         Page 7 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       SL:Decentralized Service Delivery Prog 2 (P119355)



                   • All LCs received transfers from the project and the EU Trust Fund within each quarter from November
                   2012 through September 2014. However, LCs did not receive transfers within each quarter of each fiscal
                   year from the Consolidated Revenue Fund (the government’s budget) during project implementation, not
                   achieving the target of doing so. However, funds were provided once per semester, which was more
                   frequently than during APL I.


              Outcomes

                   • 20.73 percent of domestic revenues were transferred to LCs during FY 2017, not achieving the target of
                   40 percent. However, the ICR (p. 15) stated that in three out of five FYs during which the indicator was
                   calculated, the target was met. The target was achieved in December 2015, the project’s original closing
                   date, with 49.3 percent.
                   • The percentage of funds transferred to LCs as a percentage of government expenditure increased from
                   6 percent in 2012 to 6.78 percent in 2018, surpassing the target of 6 percent.



              The decrease in transfer of domestic revenues to LCs during the last two years of the project is indicative of
              instability and lack of predictability in funding of LCs, and of insufficient strengthening of the
              intergovernmental fiscal transfer system. Achievement of this objective is therefore rated Modest.


              Rating
      Modest
     PHREVDELTBL

 PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




 Rationale

 Though the intergovernmental transfer system was only modestly strengthened and therefore there was only
 modest improvement in the availability and predictability of funding for decentralized entities, the capacity of
 those entities to manage services improved substantially. Overall efficacy is therefore rated Substantial under
 both the original and revised outcome targets.




 Overall Efficacy Rating
 Substantial
PHREVISEDTBL



      5. Efficiency




                                                                                                                  Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SL:Decentralized Service Delivery Prog 2 (P119355)



The PAD did not conduct a traditional economic analysis, because at appraisal it was not pre-determined how
the different LCs would allocate resources. Instead, the PAD presented a summary of the economic impact of
the range of possible expenditures in the priority sectors of health and sanitation, education, and rural water.
Also, the PAD provided a discussion of the positive impact of social accountability as a monitoring tool.

The ICR (p. 20) stated that efficiency-related data was limited under the project, making the conducting of an
economic analysis difficult. Instead, the ICR assessed the operational efficiency of the project. Out of 448 civil
works completed, only eight sub-projects were not finalized at project closing, and only three sub-projects
experienced cost overruns of more than five percent compared to their initial contract amounts. The ICR also
provided a comparison of unit costs in the construction of health centers and schools (57.8% of total project
costs) across Africa that were constructed by the same engineer. It cost only US$9,319 on average
to construct a new school in Sierra Leone, compared with much more expensive average new school
construction costs of US$65,752 in Guinea Bissau, US$32,943 in Comoros, and US$29.230 in
Madagascar. Similarly, the construction of a new health center cost on average only US$9,350 in Sierra
Leone, compared with US$18,867 in Madagascar.

According to the ICR (p. 20), administrative costs under components 2 and 4 were higher than expected due to
implementation delays, requiring three project restructurings to reallocate funds from component 1 to
components 2 and 4. The implementation delays were mainly due to ineligible expenditures under the EU Trust
Fund, resulting in the freezing of funding until the issue had been addressed.

In the absence of a formal economic analysis, and with increased administrative costs due to implementation
delays, overall efficiency is rated Modest.



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                    Rate Available?         Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 16
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        SL:Decentralized Service Delivery Prog 2 (P119355)




The objectives were highly relevant to country context and to government and Bank strategy. Though the
intergovernmental transfer system was only modestly strengthened and therefore there was only modest
improvement in the availability and predictability of funding for decentralized entities, the capacity of those
entities to manage services improved substantially. Overall efficacy is therefore rated Substantial under both
the original and revised outcome targets, though only marginally so. Efficiency is rated Modest due to the lack
of a formal economic analysis and implementation inefficiencies. These ratings are indicative of moderate
shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation under both the original and revised outcome
targets. Outcome is therefore rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a.    Outcome Rating
      Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


The project was able to consolidate key institutional structures and build capacity within LCs; in particular, the
Decentralization Secretariat (DecSec), which implemented the project and linked the government to LC, was
mainstreamed into the Ministry of Local Government. According to the ICR (p. 30), DecSec staff turnover was
low during project implementation, but several key employees of the agency were replaced after closure. Given
the importance of this institution in the decentralization process, this turnover might have a negative impact on
development outcomes. Another risk might be the availability of sufficient funding for DecSec’s operation. The
ICR (p. 31) stated that the current government does not have a parliamentary majority, and even though cutting
the budget of the LGA is unlikely to happen, the country has a weak track record of following statutory
provisions. Providing the LCs with insufficient transfers or recentralizing devolved functions would present a
significant risk to development outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

     According to the ICR (p. 29), the project built on previous Bank-financed operations, the Institutional
     Reform and Capacity Building Project (2004-2008) and the first phase of the program (APL I, 2009-
     2011). The project’s design took into account lessons learned from the first phase of the program,
     including the importance of signing LC agreements with service providers, better integration of sector
     plans into LC budgets and LC development plans through a new indicator, incorporation of the
     Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL:Decentralized Service Delivery Prog 2 (P119355)



  to ensure the project’s compliance with safeguard policies for construction activities, and social
  accountability activities ensuring a bottom up approach to service delivery.

  Also, while the M&E framework built on the first phase’s systems, it was modified to better capture
  intended outcomes. However, data collection depended on several different sources, which resulted in
  data collection challenges.

  Several risks, which were identified and mitigated during the first phase of the project, were also
  addressed during this second phase. According to the ICR (p. 23), several mitigation measures were
  implemented: supporting the enhancement of coordination between LCs and WDCs; clarification of
  responsibilities of LCs and MDAs through the introduction of subsidiary agreements; hiring
  of environmental and social safeguards officers at DecSec and all LCs to reduce the risk of changes in
  land use; and close monitoring of sub-projects by implementing agencies and LCs, resulting in lower than
  expected deviations in delivery and quality of sub-projects.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  According to the ICR (p. 29), the Bank continuously monitored project implementation and produced
  Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) as planned. Supervision missions cooperated
  effectively with implementing agencies, and findings were reported in aide memoirs and management
  letters. However, although the ICR (p. 29) stated that performance reporting was candid, data on
  indicators were not always methodologically consistent across project documents and ISRs. The Bank
  team tried to mitigate this issue by searching for funding to develop a Management Information System
  (MIS) to consolidate data. However, due to budget issues the development of a MIS was postponed.

  The Bank team provided appropriate technical assistance in several areas such as M&E, civil
  engineering, financial management, procurement, safeguards, social accountability, capacity building,
  and governance.

  The Bank team restructured the project five times to adapt project activities in line with government
  efforts to address changing circumstances such as the Ebola outbreak. The Bank team was able to seek
  additional funding through a grant to address financing gaps that the project could not cover. It also
  addressed an issue of ineligible expenditures by reimbursing the EU (see Section 10b) and taking
  measures to ensure that this issue would not happen again.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory



                                                                                                       Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL:Decentralized Service Delivery Prog 2 (P119355)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The objectives of the project were clearly specified, though there was redundancy in the second and
  third objectives. The theory of change specifying how key activities would lead to intended outcomes
  was reflected in the Results Framework. The selected indicators were specific and measurable, and all
  had a baseline. The project’s M&E design built on the first phase of the project and used similar
  evaluation instruments and data sources. The Results Framework benefited from data gathered by
  the CLoGPAS and INPSS, allowing the use of methodological frameworks that were already used in
  the first phase and providing comparable data. However, the M&E design did not centralize all required
  reports at the local level, resulting in a large number of reports including LC reports, LC M&E reports,
  LC output reports, etc.

  The following triggers were proposed for movement from Phase II to Phase III, which is still under
  consideration:

    • At least 30 percent of domestic revenues (excluding wages, interest obligations, and statutory
    transfers to Recipient’s National Revenue Agency and Road Fund) transferred to LCs on an annual
    basis, excluding project funds.
    • Transfer of funds to LCs equaling at least 6 percent of total government expenditures.
    • 75 percent of LCs with CLoGPAS results and social accountability aggregate scores over 60
    percent.
    • At least two rounds of CLoGPAS (or lighter version of CLoGPAS) completed, as well one round of
    a National Services Perception Survey (NSPS).
    • Lessons from pilot phase of community scorecards prepared and community scorecards
    implemented.



b. M&E Implementation

  The project’s Results Framework was revised during the May 2016 restructuring to decrease the target
  values for two outcome indicators. Also, the data sources for two intermediate outcome indicators were
  changed, and two intermediate outcome indicators were dropped. According to the ICR (p. 25), data from the


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL:Decentralized Service Delivery Prog 2 (P119355)



  government and external firms was triangulated by the Bank to provide more realistic accounts. Progress
  reports were submitted by M&E officers at the Program Fiduciary Management Unit (PFMU) and
  DecSec. However, the ICR (p. 26) stated that these reports were not always submitted in a timely manner,
  and several exchanges with the Bank team were required to complete them. The PFMU was responsible for
  ensuring compliance with the Grant Agreement and had a tool to track indicators to inform the Bank’s ISRs.
  Sub-projects were supervised by the Bank and the client. A civil works specialist from the Bank verified the
  information in the consolidated sub-projects list during supervision missions and developed a consolidated
  database of all sub-projects funded by the project. According to the ICR (p. 26), LC reports were submitted
  more frequently than LC M&E reports and LC output reports but were not consistently submitted throughout
  project implementation. In 2017, the Bank introduced a new format for LC reports. However, since most of
  the funds had already been disbursed and grant funds had been reduced, a consistent adaptation of the new
  format across all LCs did not materialize.

  According to the Bank team (March 25, 2019), the validity and accuracy of M&E data varied depending on the
  instrument used. The project factored in this uncertainty by producing several independent assessments and
  by triangulating results of the monitoring instruments used. Overall, the data was found to be reliable.



c. M&E Utilization

  According to the ICR (p. 26), M&E data informed all project restructurings and was shared with the public
  frequently to increase transparency. For example, scores assigned by CLoGPAS to LCs were published in
  the press, radio, and television, resulting in best performing LCs being praised in public. The Bank created a
  blog and a documentary on the project, with the latter aired on national television. However, the ICR (p. 26)
  also stated that M&E utilization experienced some challenges with data sharing between different levels such
  as line ministries, decentralization units, LCs, and WDCs, resulting in limited utilization of data. According to
  the ICR (p. 26), the M&E system lacked a shared standardized platform with parameters that provided alerts
  when information was not delivered in a timely manner.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was classified as environmental assessment category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard
  policies OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). The project
  developed an ESMF and RPF to provide guidance, mitigation, and management of the triggered safeguards.
  The ICR (p. 27) stated that, since most of the sub-projects were located within already purchased lands and


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL:Decentralized Service Delivery Prog 2 (P119355)



  were being used by public agencies, no follow-up preparation of resettlement action plans, abbreviated
  resettlement action plans, environmental and social impact assessments, and environmental and social
  managements plans was needed. DecSec hired a safeguards specialist, and the LCs hired environmental
  and social safeguard officers who received training and mentoring. The ICR (p. 27) stated that Bank
  specialists monitored safeguards on routine field visits every six months. Several issues were identified: i)
  limited sub-project monitoring by LCs in some localities; ii) improper documentation for voluntary land
  donations; and iii) development of dumpsites into landfill sites. The project addressed these issues by
  providing supervision vehicles to LC safeguard officers to overcome previously limited means of
  transportation to visit sub-projects. Additional training was also provided to LCs, and additional supervision
  missions were conducted by the Bank’s safeguard specialist to ensure the proper implementation of land
  donation guidelines. Also, the government registered dumpsite sub-projects with the Sierra Leone
  Environmental Protection Agency to ensure appropriate monitoring. According to the ICR (p. 28),
  implementation of OP/BP 4.01 was rated Moderately Satisfactory and OP/BP 4.12 was rated Satisfactory
  throughout project implementation. The project complied with all safeguard policies and produced a
  safeguards closure report.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial Management

  According to the ICR (p. 28), project audit reports had unqualified opinions and were submitted in a timely
  manner. At the project’s mid-term, an in-depth financial management review was conducted, confirming that
  financial management systems at the project coordination unit and at the LCs met the Bank’s minimum
  requirements. The project’s financial management experienced some issues with grant disbursements due
  to late submission of expenditure returns for the EU Trust Fund by several LCs. The ICR stated that this
  issue was addressed in a satisfactory manner. Also, the project faced an ineligibility claim by the EU Trust
  Fund due to the late use of funds. The client had wrongly assumed that funds that were transferred from the
  government to LCs were considered as expenditures; however, according to the Bank’s disbursement policy,
  grants were only considered eligible when they were accounted for by the end-beneficiary based on actual
  expenditures. The partial reimbursement amounted to US$1.4 million in October 2017. In order to avoid this
  issue in the future, the project ensured that Interim Financial Reports were cleared by the financial
  management team at the PFMU prior to providing Bank clearances, and it provided additional quarterly
  financial management supervisions as well as capacity building and mentoring of LCs. The final external
  audit of the EU Trust Fund was conducted in December 2013, and no issues of ineligible expenditures were
  identified.

  Procurement

  According to the ICR (p. 29), the project built on the procurement capacity of APL I and was rated
  Satisfactory in all ISRs. The implementing agency prepared procurement documents that were Satisfactory

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 16
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        SL:Decentralized Service Delivery Prog 2 (P119355)



  throughout implementation. Comments by the Bank were addressed in a timely manner. The ICR (p. 29)
  stated that ISRs and aides-memoire reported minor delays in drafting and submitting Terms of Reference
  and technical specifications during the first semester of 2014. The Bank provided the procurement officers of
  the LCs with training on the new bank procurement framework.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
      ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                       Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                         IEG
                                                                                       Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                      Moderately Satisfactory   ---
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                             Moderately Satisfactory   ---
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                      Modest                    ---
Quality of ICR                                               High                      ---

12. Lessons


The ICR (p. 31-32) provided useful lessons learned, adapted here by IEG:


  • Developing data-sharing mechanisms through an integrated Management Information System (MIS)
  across different government agencies, Local Council (LCs), and service providers to better
  understand, promote, and manage resources and local services is critical. In this project, gathering
  and disseminating data to inform decision making was challenging between the different levels such as line
  ministries, decentralization units, LCs, and Ward Committees. The M&E system lacked a shared
  standardized platform with parameters that provided alerts when information was not delivered in a timely
  manner.
  • Coordination and knowledge exchange between LCs are critical for building capacity in all
  entities. In this project, LCs benefitted from LC officers rotating from one LC to another. More intensive and



                                                                                                       Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SL:Decentralized Service Delivery Prog 2 (P119355)



  formal fostering of peer-to-peer learning, mentoring between officers, and exchange visits of best-performing
  officers/managers between LCs would be useful to ensure capacity building in all LCs.
  • A decentralized government framework can reduce social tensions in post-conflict countries with
  deep geographic and ethno-political divisions. In Sierra Leone, the decentralization process introduced
  services closer to beneficiaries, increased citizen engagement and ownership of local agendas, and mitigated
  tensions between ethnic groups, fostering cooperation among these groups.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR provided a comprehensive overview of project preparation and implementation. It was internally
consistent and candid, provided excellent sourcing of all the data, and included an explicit assessment of the
quality of the data. Furthermore, it used data outside the Results Framework to compensate for inadequate
project M&E. In addition, the ICR provided an explicit attribution discussion and demonstrated the results
chain well. Also, it included several useful and interesting lessons that drew directly from the main-text
discussion. It did not include a formal economic analysis, but overall, the quality of the ICR is rated High.




a. Quality of ICR Rating
     High




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 16
