     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Emergency DPO(P163285)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0021526

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P163285                                    Gambia Emergency DPO

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Gambia, The                                Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-61230,IDA-D2220                        31-Dec-2017                                         57,224,482.37

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2017                                31-Dec-2017

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            56,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                             56,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                         57,224,482.37                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Robert Mark Lacey            Malathi S. Jayawickrama         IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The program development objective (PDO) of the Emergency Development Policy Financing (EDPF) was to
   support strengthening of the government’s fiscal position while restoring provision of essential public services.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Emergency DPO(P163285)



   The operation had three pillars:

   Pillar 1: Supporting fiscal stabilization measures, including revised budgeted expenditures and revenues
   for 2017 with due protection of social sectors; and eliminating irregularities in the payroll of the civil service
   and security forces.

   Pillar 2: Addressing critical fiscal risks from state-owned enterprises (SOEs) by (i) assessing and
   enhancing transparency with regard to the financial situation of SOEs; and monitoring and limiting contingent
   liabilities; and (iii) laying the groundwork for reforms of the state electricity utility, National Water and
   Electricity Company (NAWEC) and the two national telecommunications companies Gambia
   Telecommunications Cellular Company (GAMCEL) and Gambia Telecommunications Company (GAMTEL).

   Pillar 3: mitigating the social impact of the economic crisis in health centers by preventing disruptions
   in the supply of vital medicines to health facilities; and enhancing fiscal efficiency in the procurement of
   essential medicines.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   An IDA Credit of SDR 22.3 million (US$30.8 million equivalent) and a grant of SDR18.3 million (US$25.2
   million equivalent) were approved on June 30, 2017, became effective on July 28, 2017, and closed on
   schedule on December 31, 2017. The full amounts were disbursed.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  The objectives were relevant to the country situation and to the World Bank Group's Country Engagement
  Note (CEN) for fiscal years 2018-2021, and to the government’s immediate priorities. However, following
  elections in December 2016, the winner, who had ruled The Gambia for close to 20 years, voluntarily
  resigned, leaving a new and relatively inexperienced government with an uncertain political outlook, and
  economically with large fiscal and external imbalances, a massive public debt stock and costly domestic debt-
  service obligations, and high contingent liabilities generated by several loss-making SOEs. The situation was
  aggravated by a weak agricultural season and political uncertainties arising from the change in
  government. The operation was intended to address The Gambia’s looming economic crisis by establishing a
  pathway to macroeconomic stability; protecting the poorest; and restoring sustainable growth. It was also
  fully consistent with the government’s immediate priorities as articulated in its Accelerated National Response
  Plan (ANRP), including the need to ensure a secure and cost-effective supply of drugs in public health
  facilities.



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 11
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Gambia Emergency DPO(P163285)




       Rating
       High

   b. Relevance of Design
       Program design was relevant to both objectives. It was expected to contribute significantly to achieving the
       first, and primary, objective - a stronger fiscal position. The choice of Development Policy
       Financing recognized the need for quick-response budget support, while the policy and results matrix
       focused on a narrow set of key issues in recognition of the weak institutional environment. Prior actions
       focused on stabilizing the fiscal and public debt situation, and consisted of a set of legal, regulatory, and
       administrative measures consistent with that focus: an affordable 2017 budget, better control over the public
       sector wage bill, and stricter financial oversight of SOEs. At the same time, the program design sought to
       protect budget allocations for health and education.

       The results framework for the second objective applied a narrow interpretation to essential public services,
       focusing on one (albeit key) area of the public health system, i.e. ensuring the availability of affordable
       essential drugs in public health services by introducing international competitive bidding (ICB) for essential
       drugs.

       The macroeconomic policy framework was deemed adequate for the operation despite significant signs of
       fragility and downside risks. A joint Bank-IMF debt sustainability analysis (DSA) prior to Board approval had
       concluded that the country was in external debt distress and that the public debt was not sustainable and
       required restructuring. Commitments and assurances about highly concessional support were received from
       bilateral creditors, as well as the Bank and the IMF, allowing the latter organizations to conclude that the
       public debt was sustainable in the medium term and that the operation could proceed.



       Rating
       Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To support strengthening of the government's fiscal position

    Rationale
    The objective was to be achieved by a combination of medium-term fiscal consolidation; an audit of the
    public sector wage bill as a first step towards better control over the payroll; by special purpose audits of the


                                                                                                          Page 3 of 11
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Gambia Emergency DPO(P163285)



main SOEs as a first step towards tightening monitoring and oversight of SOEs; liberalizing fuel supply to
reduce the cost of fuel supplies and improve NAWEC’s financial position; and changing oversight authority of
GAMTEL and its mobile subsidiary GAMCEL as a first step in a longer-term restructuring plan of the
telecommunications companies.

Fiscal consolidation

The government approved a revised 2017 budget consistent with fiscal consolidation objectives and revised
revenue forecasts as a prior action. As a result, the overall fiscal deficit was projected to narrow from 9.8
percent in 2016 to 2.5 percent (of GDP) in 2017. This target was not met, as the government did not
introduce a number of intended consolidation measures (sale of land, presidential planes, etc.). Instead, the
overall fiscal deficit narrowed to a still unsustainable 7.9 percent of GDP.

Budget appropriations for health and education were to remain at the same level as in the original 2017
budget, while execution rates for health and education were to remain at 2016 levels. This target was not
met, with execution rates falling below 2016 levels: 65 percent for basic and secondary education; 19
percent for tertiary education, and 43 percent for health expenditures.

Public sector wage bill

In order to reassert control over the payroll, the government undertook a nation-wide staff audit coupled with
a payroll verification exercise for the civil service and the security forces (prior action). This supported the
reduction of the wage bill equivalent to 0.30 percent of GDP in the old GDP series, and 0.20 percent of a
rebased GDP. This target was met.

SOE monitoring and oversight

In-depth audits of the financial situation and financial controls of five SOEs were undertaken – NAWEC, the
National Petroleum Company (GNPC), GAMTEL/GAMCEL, the Social Security and Housing Finance
Corporation (SSHFC), and the Gambia Ports Authority (GPA) – as a prior action. The target of making
public the audit findings had not been met by closure.

To improve financial transparency in the SOE sector as a whole, the government has published on its
website the most recent audited financial statements (not Special Purpose Audits) of all thirteen SOEs (prior
action) as a first step towards setting up a system of timely publication of SOEs' audited financial statements,
and to improve monitoring and oversight over the medium term.

To limit contingent liabilities generated by SOE-related external borrowing and government guarantees to
SOEs, the government issued a circular conditioning future borrowing on an inventory of current activities,
and on prior oversight of SOE borrowing by the Ministry of Finance (prior action). The baseline for
contingent liabilities, set in April 2017 was 10.7 percent of 2016 GDP, and the target to be achieved end-
2017 was to remain at no more than 10.7 percent of 2017 GDP. However, subsequent SOE borrowing went


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 11
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Gambia Emergency DPO(P163285)



    against the prior action, and raised contingent liabilities to 11.2 percent of GDP in December,
    2017. Moreover, no database on SOE-related government guarantees - a PDO indicator - was made
    public.

    Improving the financial situation of the electricity utility NAWEC

    To improve the financial situation of NAWEC, the government mandated an open and competitive
    procurement process for the importation of fuel oil (prior action). As a result, NAWEC was expected to
    achieve savings of some US$1.5 million in 2017. Actual savings as a result of these measures amounted to
    US$6.8 million.

    Institutional framework of telecommunications companies

    As a first step in restoring the financial viability of the telecommunications utility GAMTEL and its mobile
    subsidiary GAMCEL, the government took action to improve the institutional arrangements governing the
    companies by transferring the oversight function from the President's Office, where it had resided under the
    previous administration, to the Ministry of Information and Communications Infrastructure. No further action
    on telecommunications was contemplated under the operation. However, the Special-Purpose Audits of
    selected SOEs and conducted as part of this operation, are expected to help re-position the companies and
    begin to restore their financial viability.

    Summary. The key objective of strengthening the government's fiscal position, which also was the main
    focus of the operation, and essential to sustaining essential public services, was not met. The deficit
    remained unsustainable, and social spending was flat in budgeted terms. Special purpose audits of key
    SOEs were undertaken but have not been made public, contrary to the prior actions; while contingent
    liabilities generated by SOEs exceeded targets.




    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     To restore provision of essential public services

    Rationale
    The objective was to be achieved by mitigating the social impact of the economic crisis on health centers




                                                                                                      Page 5 of 11
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Gambia Emergency DPO(P163285)



    While the objective talks of "essential public services", the operation is more narrowly focused on ensuring a
    steady and cost-effective supply of drugs in public health facilities. This was viewed as an urgent priority by
    the government. The government was to secure efficient and timely provision of drugs by shifting from
    single-source procurement to ICB, by introducing an essential drugs list, and by issuing a list of accredited
    local suppliers for emergency procurement of drugs by health facilities (prior action). The share of health
    facilities reporting no stock-outs of tracer items was applied as an indicator of success. The 2016 baseline
    was 37 percent, with a target of 60 percent for 2017. The actual number for 2017 was 54 percent. While
    this was a notable improvement in availability of drugs, it did not meet the broader target of restoring
    essential public services.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  Relevance of objectives is rated high, given relevance to country circumstances and to Bank and government
  strategies. Relevance of design is rated substantial, as the prior action could, for Objective 1, be expected to
  contribute significantly to attainment of the stated objectives, albeit against an uncertain macroeconomic
  background. In the case of the second objective, the prior actions were sufficient to attain the narrow goal of
  mitigating the impact of the crisis on health centers. However, this is a very partial dimension of the over-
  ambitious objective of restoring provision of essential public services. Efficacy for both sub-objectives is rated
  modest - in the case of the first sub-objective, the majority of targets were not met, the fiscal deficit and
  contingent liabilities are still at unsustainable levels, and social spending has remained flat. While efficacy for
  the second objective demonstrated a notable improvement in the availability of essential drugs, the broader
  target of restoring essential public services was not addressed. With significant shortcomings in efficacy, the
  outcome is assessed as moderately unsatisfactory.


  a.      Outcome Rating
          Moderately Unsatisfactory


  6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

  Political risk is still high in the aftermath of regime change and in the absence of a common vision in the
  government coalition; as is macroeconomic risk given the heavy dependence on donor support and the high



                                                                                                         Page 6 of 11
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Gambia Emergency DPO(P163285)



degree of debt distress. While project design appears to have been well-calibrated to national capacity
limitations, the uncertainties that came with the unexpected government changes points to high institutional risk.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
    High

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The proposed operation was relevant to the prevailing fiscal-financial situation although some of the
  objectives were overly ambitious. Its emphasis on budget support recognized the urgent need to intervene
  in a fragile economic environment under high debt distress. Operational design was preceded by a fragility
  assessment, and took into account capacity constraints in the administration, focusing on straightforward,
  short-term actions as a springboard for developing longer-term policies. The operation drew on and
  complemented ongoing other Bank operations in the country. Collaboration with other external
  partners contributed to containing the debt situation and helped clear the way for the operation. The team
  undertook a risk assessment prior to the project, with a high risk rating driven by an uncertain political and
  macroeconomic situations, and by weak institutional capacity in government. However, targets may still
  have been set too high, since, in many instances, the program fell short of its intentions. In addition to
  institutional weakness, the political situation would prove to be uncertain in the absence of a common
  vision on policy in the new government coalition (ICR, Section 2.2), as the country went through
  fundamental political transition towards democracy and greater openness to regional neighbors and the
  international community. Strong initial commitment to fiscal reform by the new government was not
  sustained, and ambitious targets for fiscal consolidation were not met (see also Sections 4 and 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The emergency nature of the operation and the limited institutional capacity of the client would seem to
  have required extensive hands-on supervision. Instead, a relatively small supervision team was mobilized,
  combining its work with that of other operations taking place at the same time. This raises the question as
  to whether more could have been done with a more intense supervision effort when faced with a client
  that had significant institutional and capacity weaknesses. For example, supervision relating to NAWEC
  and the SOEs, while active, may have been insufficient - in one case the target was met, in the other
  not. More generally, this operation may have suffered from the tendency to design development policy
  operations with little emphasis on supervision, relying instead, as in this case, on support through other
  operations.




                                                                                                     Page 7 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Emergency DPO(P163285)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  Government commitment to improving the fiscal and debt situation initially appears to have been strong
  at the outset despite a weak institutional environment. However, commitment unraveled as differences
  appeared in the government coalition. As a consequence, many of the operation's targets were not met.



  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  Not assessed


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The outcome indicators were broadly appropriate - most had a baseline and measurable targets (for
  instance, a revised budget for 2017 was to show a deficit of not more than 0.7 percent of GDP) -
  although targets would prove to be unattainable during the course of the operation. Monitoring was the
  responsibility of the Ministry of Finance charged with day-to-day coordination and verifying implementation of
  the prior actions. It did not, however, have the necessary resources to adequately supervise implementation,
  especially since monitoring capacity in other participating agencies and ministries also was low.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was carried out through dialogue between the Bank team and the government as part
  of the preparation of a follow-up programmatic series, and relying on the IMFs macro-fiscal monitoring
  efforts in the context of its staff-monitored program supporting a Rapid Credit Facility. Relevant investment

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Emergency DPO(P163285)



  projects, such as the Financial Management MIS project, and related procurement of technical assistance,
  also provided support for monitoring of the operation.



c. M&E Utilization
  The operation introduced the use of M&E in the management of public employment, including personnel
  audits. Likewise, the regular publication of audited financial information on key SOEs was initiated; as was
  the use of monitoring instruments for debt management.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  No safeguards policies were triggered by the operation, and the ICR does not discuss any possible
  environmental impact. No negative social effects were identified and some of the measures may have a
  positive effect.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
The ICR does not identify any fiduciary issues.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None



d. Other
  None



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                     IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 11
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Gambia Emergency DPO(P163285)



                              Moderately              Moderately
Outcome                                                                            ---
                              Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
Risk to Development
                              High                    High                         ---
Outcome
                                                                                   The quality of supervision is
                                                                                   rated moderately
                                                                                   unsatisfactory, since
                              Moderately              Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                   insufficient support was given
                              Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   to the Authorities in their
                                                                                   attempts to meet program
                                                                                   targets
                              Moderately              Moderately
Borrower Performance                                                               ---
                              Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                  ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

The first two lessons are drawn from the ICR, and IEG adds the third.

Operations in fragile countries need to be selective. The team focused on a few policy interventions that
could be put into place in the short term, to be subsequently built upon. While the needs are great in fragile
environments, programs need to be selective and carefully assess the risks inherent in each policy action.

Expectations from a reform program are best tailored to a realistic assessment of implementation
capacity. In this case, outcome targets were over-ambitious for a politically and institutionally fragile
environment, and proved, in many instances, to be out of reach. Insufficient attention to political and
institutional risk can critically affect program outcomes.

An emergency DPO in a fragile environment is likely to require more rigorous supervision than is often
allocated to policy operations. Insufficient attention to program implementation, especially in an environment
of limited capacity, can critically affect outcomes. Although, in this case, supervision was leveraged through
collaboration with other external partners and through drawing on the resources of ongoing Bank operations, a
more intensive and direct Bank effort during implementation may have enabled the Authorities to attain more of
their targets.

A regime change creates both political and institutional uncertainties. While a program may be fully
aligned with government's priorities and programs in the early stages of regime change, insufficient attention to
changing political priorities as the new government gains footing can adversely influence project success. In


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 11
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Gambia Emergency DPO(P163285)



the Gambia project, early post-election enthusiasm gradually gave way to weakening reform momentum and
reversal of some policy actions.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

For the most part, the ICR provided sufficient information and a solid enough analysis to evaluate the
operation and complete the ICRR. However, a broader discussion of the causes of non-achievement of many
of the objectives would have been useful. The ICR was consistent with the guidelines.




a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                             Page 11 of 11
