     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10) (P115247)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0021545

1. Project Data



 Project ID                            Project Name
 P115247                               GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10)

 Country                               Practice Area(Lead)                         Additional Financing
 Ghana                                 Social Protection & Labor                   P146923


 L/C/TF Number(s)                      Closing Date (Original)                     Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-47350,IDA-54660                   30-Jun-2016                                               132,636,652.39

 Bank Approval Date                    Closing Date (Actual)
 20-May-2010                           31-May-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            88,600,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            137,914,078.58                                                0.00

 Actual                                        132,636,652.39                                                0.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Katharina Ferl              Judyth L. Twigg             Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. viii) and the Financing Agreement of September 8,
   2010 (p. 5) the objectives of the project were “to improve targeting in social protection spending, increase
   access to conditional cash transfers nationwide, increase access to employment and cash-earning
   opportunities for the rural poor during the agricultural off-season, and improve economic and social
   infrastructure in target districts.”




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10) (P115247)



   As part of a May 2014 restructuring, the objectives were revised: “to improve targeting of social protection
   programs and provide income support to poor households through Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty
   (LEAP) Grants and Labor-Intensive Public Works (LIPW) infrastructure in targeted districts.” Outcome
   targets were all revised upward.

   The project’s original first three objectives were similar to counterpart elements of the revised objectives
   and are assessed together in Section 4. The project’s fourth original objective is assessed separately. It
   should be noted that the scope of the first two original objectives was nationwide and the third and fourth
   original objectives focused on target districts, while all revised objectives focused on target districts.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  27-May-2014
                                                           PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components

   The original project included five components:

   Component 1: Rationalize National Social Protection Policy (appraisal estimate US$2.5 million,
   actual US$9.79 million): This component was to finance technical assistance, studies, training, and
   Secretariat services to support the government in redirecting social protection expenditures to the most
   effective areas and reduce those in less effective activities. Capacity was to be built within the Ministry of
   Finance and Economic Planning (MoFEP) and the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development
   (MLGRD).

   At the May 2014 restructuring, this component’s name was revised to Social Protection Policy and
   Systems Strengthening. The component received additional financing of US$ 9 million to implement two
   sub-components: i) Social Protection Policy Formulation: the sub-component was to strengthen the
   coordination and implementation of social protection programs through the preparation of a national social
   protection policy, strategy, and implementation action plan; ii) Social Protection Systems Strengthening:
   The sub-component was to support the strengthening of social protection systems through the
   establishment of the Ghana National Household Registry (GNHR) to improve the efficiency and
   effectiveness of social protection interventions.



                                                                                                               Page 2 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10) (P115247)



Component 2: Labor Intensive Public Works (LIPW) (appraisal estimate US$56 million, actual
US$66.44 million): This component was to provide targeted rural poor households with access to
employment and income-earning opportunities through rehabilitation and maintenance of public or
community infrastructure in northern Ghana to respond to external shocks and the agricultural off-season
from November to March/April. The aim was to maximize local employment while rehabilitating productive
infrastructure assets through establishing a LIPW-based social protection scalable instrument, which was
to provide quick-response mechanisms against external shocks, such as floods or droughts, during a
crisis. The payment modality for LIPWs was to be cash. The scope of works eligible for LIPWs were to be
defined based on labor content and scope to generate significant local employment.

At the May 2014 restructuring, the component’s name was revised to LIPW Implementation and
Capacity Building. The component received additional financing of US$19.2 million to support the scale-
up of LIPW to reach approximately 173,000 additional beneficiary households. Several modifications of the
component, including to manage oversubscription, improve targeting, and enhance delivery and monitoring
of payments, were introduced. Also, system delivery and accountability were strengthened through the
introduction of a management information system (MIS) and electronic payments system. Capacity
building activities for LIPW were moved from component 5 to this component.

Component 3: Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty program (LEAP) (appraisal estimate
US$20 million, actual US$32.21 million): This component was to support the full rollout of the pilot phase
of the LEAP program by strengthening its management and administration, providing technical assistance
to improve targeting, providing cash transfers to beneficiaries under LEAP, and providing incentives to
ensure that the government’s annual budget allocations were sufficient through a results-based financing
instrument with disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs).

At the restructuring in May 2014, this component’s name was revised to LEAP Implementation and
Capacity Building. The component received additional financing in the amount of US$15.7 million to
provide LEAP grants to an additional 250,000 beneficiary households. The scale-up included deepening
coverage in the existing districts with higher poverty incidence. In addition, this component was to
strengthen the program’s operations at the national, regional, and district levels and improve systems
delivery through the introduction of MIS and e-payment systems (which were previously under component
5).

Component 4: Capacity Building (appraisal estimate US$4.1 million, actual US$6.64 million): This
component was to build capacity at the national and local levels to implement the National Social
Protection Strategy (NSPS) in selected project districts, with the view of enabling gradual scaling up and
targeting at the national level. Several capacity-building activities were to be supported: i) establishing a
LIPW-supportive policy and institutional framework; ii) building capacity to support LIPW implementation;
iii) building capacity to support implementation of LEAP; iv) building district and regional capacity; and v)
other activities and pilot programs that were to become necessary during implementation to support the
overall objective of strengthening safety nets and providing safety ladders, including building capacity for
disaster risk management.

This component was dropped when the project was restructured in May 2014.

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10) (P115247)




   Component 5: Project Management and Coordination (appraisal estimate US$6.5 million, actual
   US$18.72 million): This component was to finance project management and coordination; relevant
   technical assistance; project monitoring and evaluation; consultancy services; communication and training;
   equipment and vehicles; and incremental operating costs. In addition, the component was to include the
   cost of annual impact evaluation surveys, including a baseline study and an end-of-project comprehensive
   impact evaluation study.

   At the May 2014 restructuring, this component became component 4, as the original component 4 was
   dropped. The component received additional financing in the amount of US$6.1 million.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$89.1 million. In May 2014, the project received
   Additional Financing in the amount of US$50 million. Actual cost was US$133.8 million.

   Financing: The project was to be financed by a IDA credit of US$88.6 million, an additional credit of
   US$50 million, and Borrower contribution in the amount of US$500,000.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$500,000 through in-kind community
   contribution, which were exceeded by the government and local communities.

   Dates: The project was restructured three times:

   • On September 24, 2014 the project was restructured to reallocate funds between disbursement
   categories to roll out the National Targeting System and strengthen support to districts under LIPW.
   • On May 27, 2014 the project received Additional Financing to scale up the existing interventions under
   LIPW and LEAP, modify the PDO, and revise the Results Framework and project activities. The use
   of DLIs was discontinued because the system as established -- to provide financial incentives to the
   unified treasury account to ensure that the government would allocate sufficient budget for LEAP to meet
   its targets -- did not function. In addition, the newly created Ministry of Gender, Children, and Social
   Protection (MoGCSP) was added as implementing agency. The project’s closing date was extended from
   June 30, 2016 to June 30, 2017.
   • On June 20, 2017 the project’s closing date was extended from June 30,2017 to May 31, 2018 to allow
   for the completion of data collection for the Ghana National Household Registry (GNHR) and for LIPW
   sub-projects.




3. Relevance of Objectives



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10) (P115247)



       Rationale


       Despite Ghana’s remarkable progress in decreasing its national poverty levels from 52 percent in 1992 to 29
       percent in 2006, at appraisal the country had been experiencing an accelerating geographically-based
       socioeconomic gap. According to the PAD (p. 1), while the three northern regions made up about 18 percent
       of the total population of Ghana, their national share of the poor was about 40 percent at the time of project
       appraisal. Over one-quarter of all 38 districts had poverty levels above 80 percent, and these districts were
       located predominantly in the Northern Region, Upper East Region, and Upper West Region, with pockets in
       the Coastal and Forest Zones of the Central Region. There were many reasons for under-development in
       these areas, including being landlocked, poorly developed transport structure, a pre-disposition to droughts
       and floods, and soil and land degradation. These factors had a negative impact on agricultural production
       and those people depending on it.

       In 2007, the government of Ghana put in place a comprehensive NSPS that represented its vision of creating
       an all-inclusive and socially-empowered society through the provision of sustainable mechanisms for the
       protection of persons living in situations of extreme poverty and related vulnerability and exclusion. The
       original and revised objectives of the project supported this strategy. Also, the original and revised objectives
       were in line with the country’s Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy, which aimed for Ghana to achieve
       middle-income status and the Millennium Development Goals, in addition to ensuring that the benefits of
       growth were shared across the population. The original and revised objectives were in line with the Bank’s
       Country Partnership Framework (2013-2018) that was in place when the project closed, and which focused
       under pillar III on protecting the poor and vulnerable. The revision of the objectives did not make them less
       relevant, but streamlined them and their links to the main components of the project.



       Rating
       High
   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     Improve targeting in social protection spending (original objective) / Improve targeting of social protection
     programs (revised objective)

    Rationale

    The project’s theory of change linked the conducting of a rationalization study, the approval of a social
    protection policy by the cabinet, and the focus on inclusion of beneficiaries from the poorest 20 percent (for




                                                                                                           Page 5 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10) (P115247)



    LEAP) and the poorest 30 percent (for LIPW) of the population with improving targeting in social protection
    spending/social protection programs.

    Outputs

    • The project financed the development of a rationalization study to review expenditures on social protection
    with a view of redirecting parts of national resources toward the poor and vulnerable. The study
    suggested scaling up the LEAP program and identified 11 social protection programs (out of 44
    programs that were included in the study) for the government to increase coverage to the poor and
    vulnerable, with an estimated cost of about 2.1 percent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP).

    Outcomes

    • In May 2014, the percentage of social protection spending allocated to programs targeted to the poor was
    30.35%, surpassing the target of 6%. This indicator lacked a baseline. This indicator was dropped during the
    restructuring, as data were difficult to collect.
    • LEAP and Ghana Health Insurance indigent exemption expenditures in the government's overall package
    of pro-poor expenditures, as defined by the MoFEP, was 0.73% in May 2014, not achieving the target of 3%.
    The baseline for LEAP was 0.19%. The health insurance exemption part of the indicator lacked a baseline.
    This indicator was dropped at the restructuring. According to the ICR (p. 17), the target value was achieved
    before the project closed, but no specific information was provided.
    • The project’s impact evaluation showed that between 2014 and 2018, the percentage of LEAP
    beneficiaries who were from the poorest 20 percent of the population increased from 19 percent in 2014
    to 46.3 percent in 2018, not quite achieving the target of 50 percent.
    • According to the project’s impact evaluation, the percentage of LIPW beneficiaries who were from the
    poorest 30 percent of the population increased from 39 percent in 2014 to 86.9 percent in 2018, surpassing
    the target of 50 percent.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     Increase access to conditional cash transfers nationwide (original objective) / Provide income support to
     poor households through LEAP grants (revised objective)

    Rationale



                                                                                                       Page 6 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10) (P115247)



    The project’s theory of changed linked the identification of districts to participate in LEAP programs, the
    conducting of sensitization activities and enrollment of LEAP beneficiaries, the administration of proxy means
    testing to identify LEAP beneficiaries, and building capacity to institutionalize LEAP with increasing access to
    conditional cash transfers nationwide and provision of income support to poor households through LEAP
    grants.

    Outputs


        • The project supported the expansion of a government-funded LEAP pilot. Beneficiaries were sensitized
        to send children between the age of 5 and 15 years to school and to ensure regular clinical visits and full
        immunizations for all children in beneficiary households. However, according to the ICR (p. 18), the
        project did not implement penalties if the beneficiaries did not comply.
        • A social protection policy was drafted by the MoGCSP and submitted to the cabinet, achieving the
        objective of doing so.



    Outcomes


        • 944,000 people directly benefited from the cash transfers, exceeding the original target of 80,000 and
        revised target of 200,000 beneficiaries. 55% of the LEAP beneficiaries were female, surpassing the target
        of 25% but not meeting the revised target of 70%.
        • An impact evaluation conducted in 2013 found that LEAP increased school enrollment among secondary
        school age children and reduced grade repetition among both primary and secondary school age children,
        but no specific data were provided in the ICR. Absenteeism among primary school age children was
        reduced by 10 percentage points. Preventive care among girls between the age of zero and five was
        increased by 15.7 percentage points.
        • 78 percent of beneficiaries were satisfied with the LEAP program, surpassing the target of 70 percent.




    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective

     Increase access to employment and cash-earning opportunities for the rural poor during the agricultural off-



                                                                                                         Page 7 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10) (P115247)



season (original objective) / Provide income support to poor households through LIPW infrastructure in
targeted districts (revised objective)

Rationale

The project’s theory of change linked sensitizing and enrolling beneficiaries to participate in LIPW, as well as
the training of district assembly monitoring teams, with increasing access to employment and cash-earning
opportunities for the rural poor during the agricultural off-season and providing income support to poor
households through LIPW infrastructure in targeted districts.

Outputs


  • The project provided rural poor households with access to employment and income-earning
  opportunities through the LIPW program, especially during the agricultural off-season between November
  and March/April and in response to external shocks. 902 LIPW sub-projects were completed in 1125
  communities. Among these, 250 climate initiatives were completed, with 2,268 hectares planted with fruit
  trees and multi-purpose woodlots, almost achieving the target of 2,360 hectares. 263 small earth dams
  and dug-outs were rehabilitated, not achieving the target of 300. 1,340 kilometers of road were
  rehabilitated, surpassing the target of 700 kilometers.
  • 60 maintenance programs were established for completed sub-projects, achieving the target of 60
  programs.
  • The number of private contractors technically capable of implementing and supervising LIPW increased
  from 74 contractors in 2014 to 284 contractors in 2018, surpassing the target of 125 contractors. The
  percentage of completed sub-projects inspected annually by communities under the supervision of a
  district technical specialist increased from 50 percent in 2010 to 87.4 percent in 2018, almost achieving
  the target of 90 percent.
  • 35 percent of payments to workers under LIPW program were made within 20 days after the attendance
  at the work sites, not achieving the target of 80 percent. The average time lapse between submission of
  interim certificates by LIPW contractors and payments by designated accounts decreased from 30 days in
  2013 to 24 days in 2018, not achieving the target of 20 days.



Outcomes


  • 13.6 million person days of unskilled work disaggregated by district were achieved, surpassing the
  original target of 1.5 million and the revised target of 9.5 million. One person-day of work referred to LIPW
  tasks expected to be performed in 6 hours. In 2016, an independent analysis of the LIPW found that over
  the 2012-2015 period, LIPW generated a total of 2.93 million person-days of employment, of which feeder
  and access roads sub-projects contributed about 36 percent, climate change mitigation activities


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10) (P115247)



        contributed 14 percent, and small earth dams/dugouts contributed about 50 percent of the employment
        created. A 2017 analytical study found that the LIPW program increased the youth employment rate by
        34.2 percent, 28.6 percent, and 32.8 percent among beneficiary households through the feeder road,
        climate change, and small earth dam/dugout sub-projects, respectively.
        • 167,000 persons directly benefited from the LIPW program, exceeding the original target of 16,800 but
        not quite achieving the revised target of 190,000. Of these, 61% were female, exceeding the original
        target of 30% and the revised target of 50%.
        • The number of person days of unskilled labor was 13.6 million, surpassing the original target of 1.5
        million days and meeting the revised target of 13.6 million days. The share of total unskilled worker
        earnings increased from 40 percent of LIPW cost in 2010 to 51 percent in 2018, not achieving the target of
        62 percent. The average annual earnings of unskilled workers in LIPWs was 560 cedi, surpassing the
        original target of 150 cedi and the revised target of 200 cedi. Targets were adjusted annually for inflation.
        • 81.3 percent of beneficiaries were satisfied with the LIPW program, surpassing the target of 70 percent.




    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 4
    Objective

     Improve economic and social infrastructure in target districts (original objective)

    Rationale

    The project’s theory of change linked rehabilitating works for small earth dams and dug outs, planting trees
    and maintaining them in woodlots, and hiring people for maintenance work with improving economic and
    social infrastructure in target districts.

    Outputs are listed under Objective 3 above.

    Outcomes

    As noted under Objective 3, 902 LIPW sub-projects were completed in 1125 communities. Among these,
    250 climate initiatives were completed, with 2,268 hectares planted with fruit trees and multi-purpose
    woodlots, almost achieving the target of 2,360 hectares. 263 small earth dams and dug-outs were
    rehabilitated, not achieving the target of 300. 1,340 kilometers of road were rehabilitated, surpassing the
    target of 700 kilometers. The ICR did not provide information on access to or use of this improved
    infrastructure, but access/utilization were not part of the objective.


                                                                                                         Page 9 of 17
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10) (P115247)




              Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL

 PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




 Rationale

 All four sets of objectives (original and revised) were substantially achieved. Overall efficacy is rated Substantial
 under both the original and revised objectives.




 Overall Efficacy Rating
 Substantial
PHREVISEDTBL



      5. Efficiency


      Economic Efficiency

      The PAD did not include a traditional economic analysis. The PAD (p. 24) stated that no overall rate of return
      for the project was calculated because specific LIPW investments were to be determined by targeted districts
      only during the course of implementation. Instead, the economic analysis included the following: (i) a brief
      review of past assessments of the benefits of cash transfer and LIPW programs; (ii) a rough estimate of
      potential employment and income impacts for those participating in LEAP and LIPW; (iii) an ex-ante
      assessment of the return to investment of public works based on indicative models of road and dam
      rehabilitation; and (iv) an initial assessment of cost-effectiveness of LEAP and LIPW components. The PAD
      stated that analysis at the appraisal stage confirmed the general viability of project investments and the strong
      potential for high levels of return to LIPW investments, particularly in feeder road rehabilitation. The impact of
      both the programs on improving consumption of the poor appeared to be good.

      The ICR (p. 24) cited an independent cost-effectiveness analysis for the LIPW finding that the economic rate of
      return (ERR) for typical feeder road rehabilitation was approximately 26 percent. The benefit-cost analysis of
      typical dam rehabilitation estimated a base case ERR of 16 percent. Both ERRs indicate that the investments
      were worthwhile, though the ICR did not provide exact information on project costs by type of works, making it
      impossible to determine what percentage of total costs is represented by these ERRs.

      Operational Efficiency




                                                                                                           Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10) (P115247)



According to the ICR (p. 23), the project’s administrative costs included service charges for LIPW wages and
cash transfers, research and consultancies, communication and awareness campaigns, and salaries of project
staff and other related expenses. The ICR stated that the administrative costs, which were 16 percent of the
total, were higher than those of similar projects in other countries (the global standard being 10 percent). The
higher administrative costs were due to limited capacity at the district assemblies, resulting in delays and
requiring the support of the project’s national coordinating unit and regional coordinating offices which hired
consultants to support implementation. The administrative costs for LEAP declined from 24 percent at the start
of project implementation to 12 percent after the mid-term project restructuring, against a target of 11
percent. Also, according to the ICR (p. 28), the project experienced infrequent payments of LEAP grants
between 2010 and 2013, producing trust issues between the beneficiaries and the government.

During project implementation, the government in Ghana changed twice, resulting in staff changes and
therefore implementation delays. The project’s closing date was extended twice after it received additional
financing, with a total extension of 23 months. Importantly, however, the project was able to use the extension
period to reach a larger number of beneficiaries, also leveraging financing from another donor (about US$30
million in parallel funding annually from the United Kingdom Department for International Development,
DfID, for cash grants) and about US$ 20 million annually from the government.

Although there were moderate implementation inefficiencies, the positive rate of return for some of the LIPW
projects and large gains made during the additional financing period produce an overall efficiency rating of
Substantial.



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate Available?        Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10) (P115247)



The project's objectives were highly relevant to country conditions, Bank strategy, and government
strategy. Achievement of each of the original and revised objectives was Substantial. Efficiency was
Substantial, given positive rates of return for some of the public works projects and strong gains during the
additional financing period. These ratings are indicative of only minor shortcomings under both the original and
revised objectives, leading to an overall Outcome rating of Satisfactory.


a.    Outcome Rating
      Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


According to the ICR (p. 32), the current government continues to be committed to the social development
agenda and has requested more support from the Bank for the two main programs of the project, LEAP and
LIPW. The project was anchored in national, regional, and district structures as well as in local
communities. Capacity was developed and is likely to be sustained in areas such as targeting, management,
coordination, and policy oversight for social protection programs within national ministries. Furthermore, regional
and district assembly administrative structures received support with technical planning and supervision,
implementation, and oversight of LEAP and LIPW activities. However, there are several risks to the sustainability
of the project outcomes. First, social protection systems are relatively costly, and strong, continuous political will
is necessary to maintain them. Second, funding of these systems might be affected by changing government
priorities, resulting in the deterioration of established systems.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

     According to the ICR (p. 31), the project built on experience from previous operations in the country, such
     as the Community-Based Rural Development Project (US$100.55 million, 2004-2011), the Bank’s global
     knowledge on the implementation of conditional cash transfers and public works within social protection
     frameworks, and analytical studies. For example, the project design was informed by a study on
     improving targeting of social protection programs. Throughout project implementation, the project
     conducted additional studies such as two on proxy means tests in 2014 and 2016, and a Social
     Protection Expenditure Review in 2016, to inform implementation. According to the Task Team
     Leader (March 12, 2019), the Bank team was adequately staffed with all the requisite expertise including
     financial management, procurement, social and environment safeguards, and M&E The PAD (p. 21)
     identified several risks to implementation. However, all identified risks were rated low or moderate, and
     mitigation activities were adequate.



                                                                                                      Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10) (P115247)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  According to the ICR (p. 31), the Bank’s supervision was proactive, and the Bank team cooperated
  effectively with the government and other operations. The Bank team addressed implementation
  bottlenecks promptly, including issues involving the use of contractors versus unskilled labor,
  development of sub-project menus, completion of policy and operational reviews on social protection,
  and recognition of changes in local conditions. The ICR further stated that the Bank provided expertise
  for MIS implementation support when requested by the government team. During political transitions, the
  Bank provided additional support as necessary. When the project was negatively affected by an unstable
  macroeconomic environment between 2010 and 2013, the Bank cooperated with DfID to mitigate these
  effects. The project was flexibly restructured three times, and additional financing was processed in 2014
  to expand its scope. The ICR (p. 30) stated that due to the Bank’s proactive approach, the project's M&E
  design was adjusted through “learning by doing,” resulting in the project’s M&E being rolled out into a
  sector-wide M&E framework.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The project’s original objectives were clearly specified, and the theory of change connecting outputs
  to intended outcomes was adequate. Most indicators included a baseline and were sufficiently specific
  and measurable. The project was to conduct a detailed impact evaluation to track project contributions
  to improved household income, impacts on local economies, and improvements in service delivery. The
  impact evaluation was to include a baseline survey (year 1) and two follow-up surveys (years 3 and
  5). Overall responsibility for M&E was to sit with the MLGRD, in collaboration with the Ministry of Social
  Welfare for the LEAP component.


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10) (P115247)




b. M&E Implementation

  According to the ICR (p. 29), data collection was well structured at the community, district, regional and
  national level. The project developed data collection templates that were completed on a regular basis. Four
  completed impact evaluations for LEAP and LIPW (two each) provided useful information on implementation
  bottlenecks. The ICR (p. 29) stated that the 2012 and 2013 LEAP impact evaluations showed that late
  payments to beneficiaries reduced the impact of the program, resulting in the government improving financing
  sources to ensure timely payments.

  The project designed a MIS for delivery of payments to LIPW beneficiaries; linkages to banks and other
  commercial players resulted in increased transparency and a transition from manual to electronic payment
  systems, reducing the amount of time needed to process beneficiary payments.

  When the project was restructured in May 2014, the PDO was modified to be better aligned with the two main
  project components. Indicators in the Results Framework were adapted to better measure the PDO
  statement, and targets were increased to reflect the expansion of the scope of project activities.



c. M&E Utilization

  According to the ICR (p. 30), the project produced quarterly M&E reports to inform on the project’s
  implementation progress and allow for improvement. Project managers at all different implementation levels
  used M&E data to provide feedback to lower levels. Also, project M&E was extensively used for
  management purposes and informed decision making. For example, M&E data supported the team's
  request for additional financing when project monitoring showed that implementation took place at a faster
  pace than originally expected. The development of the MIS and electronic payment system allowed for a
  close to real-time monitoring approach and more transparency and accountability with regard to beneficiary
  payments.

  According to the ICR (p. 30), learning from the project’s M&E implementation was translated into
  development and implementation of a sector-wide M&E framework. The ICR (p. 30) stated that project M&E
  tools are still being used even after project closing.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

                                                                                               Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10) (P115247)




  The project was classified as environmental assessment category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard
  policies Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), Safety of Dams (OP
  4.37), and International Waterways (OP 7.50). The ICR (p. 30) stated that the project disclosed an
  Environmental and Social Management Framework and Resettlement Policy Framework and included these
  frameworks in the project implementation manuals. According to the PAD (p. xi), a dam safety plan was
  developed during project preparation and was included in the project implementation manuals as
  well. According to the Bank team (March 12, 2019), the project complied with the necessary safeguards
  policy requirements by screening all sub-project activities, conducting broad stakeholder consultations
  especially with community beneficiaries, preparing and implementing an environmental and social
  management plan for earth dams, and developing and implementing an environmental and social audit for
  the project. The project conducted a safeguards audit, and the report showed no incidence of involuntary
  resettlement. Most of the rehabilitation (feeder roads, small earth dams, and dugouts) was built on existing
  facilities and did not cause any displacement. By project design, works were undertaken during agricultural
  off-seasons, which minimized impacts on crops. Land for planting under the climate change activities was
  arranged on a voluntary land donation basis.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial Management

  According to the ICR (p. 31), the project’s financial management built on a solid foundation which created
  through previous Bank projects implemented in Ghana. The project complied with Ghana’s and the Bank’s
  financial management provisions. According to the Bank team (March 12, 2019), the project’s audited
  financial statements were submitted on time either on or before the due dates of June 30. The most recent
  audit (for the year ending December 2017)was submitted to the Bank on June 30, 2018. Throughout
  implementation, auditors issued an unqualified audit opinion on the financial statement for both implementing
  agencies. The project fully complied with financial management covenants, and acceptable audit reports
  were submitted. However, the reports by the MoGCSP experienced some delays in meeting quarterly
  submission dates, but invariably the reports were always eventually submitted.

  Procurement

  According to the Bank team (March 12, 2019), the Bank’s procurement guidelines were always followed. The
  project did not experience any significant implementation delays due to procurement-related issues. The
  Bank always provided timely support to resolve procurement difficulties.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


                                                                                                 Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10) (P115247)



  None reported.



d. Other
     ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory              Satisfactory              ---
Bank Performance                Satisfactory              Satisfactory              ---
Quality of M&E                  Substantial               Substantial               ---
Quality of ICR                                            Substantial               ---

12. Lessons


The ICR (p. 32-33) provided useful lessons, adapted here by IEG:

• Mainstreaming social protection into national and decentralized structures and identifying roles and
responsibilities is critical to ensure sustainability. While this project made efforts to mainstream social
protection into national and decentralized structures, it lacked a clear transition plan in terms of roles and
responsibilities for supervision of activities for the decentralized government to fully take over the program when
the project closed.
• Impact evaluations and studies that are conducted by local academic institutions in cooperation with
local governments are more likely to be implemented. Under this project, the LEAP and LIPW impact
evaluations were conducted by the Institute of Social and Statistical Research at the University of Ghana,
allowing for analysis and dissemination of results in a locally comprehensible manner that resulted in policy-
making in near real time.
• Introducing strong management tools impacts outcomes and trust among beneficiaries. This project
designed a MIS for the delivery of payments to LIPW beneficiaries that linked beneficiaries to banks and other
commercial players and allowed for a transition from manual to electronic systems for the LEAP and LIPW
programs.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No


                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GH-Social Opportunities Project (FY10) (P115247)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR provided a strong, candid overview of project preparation and implementation and was outcome-
driven. It was internally consistent and concise. It brought data outside the formal results framework to bear
on the assessment of outcomes. Furthermore, the ICR provided useful lessons learned. However, the ICR
did not include a traditional economic analysis, and it provided limited information on financial management,
procurement, and safeguard compliance and little information on quality at entry. The ICR did not rate each
objective individually, instead providing overall efficacy ratings before and after restructuring (which does not
follow established guidelines for a split rating).



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 17 of 17
