     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional REDD Congo Basin (P113167)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0021576

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P113167                                   Regional REDD Congo Basin

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Africa                                    Environment & Natural Resources


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-10038                                  31-Aug-2016                                         13,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Jul-2011                               31-Jul-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          13,000,000.00                                    13,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           13,000,000.00                                    13,000,000.00

 Actual                                       13,000,000.00                                    13,000,000.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ebru Karamete             Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   The formulations of the project development objectives were identical in the Project Appraisal Document
   (page 6) and in the Global Environment Facility Grant Agreement (page 9), which were:” to strengthen the
   capacities of the Congo Basin countries on REDD+ issues and on forest carbon stock
   measurements, in particular”.




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional REDD Congo Basin (P113167)



   For this ICR Review, IEG has parsed the PDO into two objectives: (i) to strengthen the capacities of the
   Congo Basin countries on REDD+ issues; and (ii) to strengthen the capacities of the Congo Basin countries
   on forest carbon stock measurements.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                         PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   The project had four components:

   1. Improving knowledge and coordination on REDD+ in the Congo Basin (Appraisal Estimate:
   US$4.7 million, Actual: US$4.7 million).

   The Component aimed to support, improve and accelerate the regional knowledge and coordination on
   REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation), as well as conservation,
   sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks) by: (i) strengthening the
   regional dialogue on REDD+ across the Congo Basin countries (Republic of Congo, Democratic Republic
   of Congo, Central African Republic, Cameroon and Gabon) with a specific focus on learning and
   knowledge exchange between the political and technical levels; (ii) promoting inclusive participation and
   representation of stakeholder groups in policy and strategy discussions at the regional level; and (iii)
   responding to incremental capacity building needs to maintain regional cohesion.

   2. Building technical capacities for measurement and monitoring of carbon stocks in the Congo
   Basin Forests (Appraisal Estimate: US$4.0 million, Actual: US$4.5 million).

   The Component aimed to carry out: (i) the setup of a scientific partnership for forest carbon measurement
   and monitoring; and (ii) the elaboration of specific allometric equations for the Congo Basin forests to
   enable countries to accurately report changes in forest carbon stock for a future results-based financial
   incentive system for REDD+. Other aspects of the Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification (MRV) system
   was planned to be supported by other partners (e.g. Congo Basin Forest Partnership-CBFF and French
   development Agency- AFD) in collaboration with this project.

   3. Mainstreaming REDD+ Concept into sustainable forest management projects (Appraisal
   Estimate:US$3.0 million, Actual: US$2.5 million).

   The Component aimed to support REDD+ project developers to enhance their capacity, through
   exchanges of information as well as preparation of methodologies and technical guidelines for REDD+
   project preparation and implementation.

                                                                                                             Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Regional REDD Congo Basin (P113167)




  4. Project Management (Appraisal Estimate: US$1.3 million, Actual: US$1.3 million).

  The Component would support overall project management including monitoring and evaluation, fiduciary
  aspects and auditing.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Project Cost: Total project cost at appraisal was estimated at US$16.0 million, actual costs were
  US$13.0 million (81 percent).

  Financing. According to the PAD (p. 7), the project was planned to be financed by a GEF grant with the
  amount of US$13 million, with the International Development Association (IDA) acting as the
  implementing agency for the GEF. At project closing, 100 percent of the GEF grant was disbursed.

  Borrower Contribution. The Central African Forest Commission (COMIFAC) and the Congo Basin
  countries would provide in-kind contributions of in-kind staff time and office operational costs estimated at
  $3.0 million. It had not been possible at project closure to estimate the real value of the Borrower’s
  contribution as the COMIFAC Executive Secretariat had three full time institutional members and about 10
  technical experts one of which was mandated to oversee the technical aspects of project. As reported by
  the project team (meeting with IEG on March 18, 2019), there was no time reporting system for their staff,
  nor a financial management accounting system to track how much this work represented, it was not
  possible to quantify precisely the value of this in-kind contribution. The project team reported that from a
  technical and operational point of view, the contribution (in time and administrative resource) that was
  expected from COMIFAC Executive Secretariat was delivered.

  Dates: The project was approved on July 14th, 2011 and effective three months later, on Nov 30th, 2011.
  The original closing date was August 31st, 2016. This date was extended for 23 months through
  restructurings in April 2016 and March 2018 to make up for the time lost during the start‐up phase of the
  project and the longer than expected time needed to launch the field activities under component 2 in six
  countries. The actual closing date became July 31st, 2018.

  Restructuring: The project went through two Level II restructuring. The first restructuring in April 2016
  revised some indicators and targets to reflect the project priorities and the closing date was extended for
  19 months. The second restructuring in March 2018 extended the closing date for an additional four
  months until July 31, 2018, making it a total extension of 23 months. A reallocation of US$0.5 million was
  also made from component 3 to component 2b (allometric equations) which was facing additional cost
  increases due to logistical challenges.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional REDD Congo Basin (P113167)



3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  The Project development objectives were highly relevant to the global environment, the World Bank, and to
  the Congo Basin country strategies in general. The Congo Basin forest is the world’s second largest tropical
  forest with large amounts of carbon stored in its rich flora, encompassing the territories of Cameroon,
  Central African Republic (CAR), Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Equatorial Guinea, Gabon and the
  Republic of Congo. Under the climate change agreements, the Kyoto Protocol only rewarded reforestation
  (restocking of existing forests that have been depleted usually through deforestation) or afforestation
  (establishment of a new forest) activities; and thus, the Congo Basin countries, which had a low historic
  deforestation rate, could not benefit from a significant incentive for protecting their forests. The United
  Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) launched negotiations to formally establish
  the Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) mechanism to compensate
  countries in their efforts to reduce deforestation and forest degradation. The Congo Basin countries had to
  advocate in the subsequent negotiations to ensure that the REDD+ mechanism would be tailored to their
  situation. The Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) spearheaded by the World Bank, would be the
  first step to pioneer how a REDD+ mechanism could work before the official UNFCCC system was
  operational. The idea for the Regional REDD+ Project came from a Global Environment Facility (GEF)
  sponsored meeting in February 2008 in Libreville, Gabon, where the six Congo Basin countries decided to
  propose a regional REDD+ project to the GEF to access specific climate change funding aimed at
  strengthening capacities in these countries to complement the activities that were supposed to take place
  under the backing of the FCPF. Five of the six countries (except for Equatorial Guinea) had indicated their
  interest to develop national REDD+ mechanisms to anticipate the future UNFCCC mechanism and to join
  the FCPF initiative.

  The Central African Forests Commission (COMIFAC) was established in 2005 as the regional body to
  guide, monitor and coordinate conservation and sustainable management of the Central African forest
  ecosystems. A Convergence Plan for the period 2005‐2014 was adopted in February 2005 by the heads of
  state to provide a joint vision and implementation plan for sustainable forest management in the region. A
  second phase of the Convergence Plan was adopted in July 2014 to cover the years 2015‐2025, with a
  stronger focus on REDD+.

  The project development objectives were highly relevant to the World Bank regional and country strategies.
  The Regional Integration Assistance Strategy (RIAS) for Sub‐Saharan Africa, aimed to strengthen
  collaboration across borders. In addition, forestry as a sector was mentioned in the Country Assistance
  Strategies (CAS) and Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSP) of five of the countries, except for
  Equatorial Guinea, which did not have a country strategy document. At appraisal REDD+ was specifically
  mentioned in the CAS/CPS of Cameroon (FY2010-2013), CAR (FY2009-2012) and DRC (2008-2011) as an
  important approach to explore to ensure the sustainable management of natural resources as well as the
  access to future carbon finance resources. At completion, REDD+ was mentioned in Cameroon (FY 2017-
  2021), DRC (FY 2013-2017), and ROC (FY 2013-2016) (ICR para 44-45).



                                                                                                  Page 4 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Regional REDD Congo Basin (P113167)



       Regarding GEF strategies, the project fell under the larger framework of the GEF Strategic Program for
       Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) in the Congo Basin during the GEF’s 4th replenishment cycle.

       The project was developed alongside parallel work supported by the FCPF, the Forest Investment Program
       (FIP), as well as the UN‐REDD+ Program (a joint program of UNEP, UNDP, and FAO), and the Congo
       Basin Forest Fund (CBFF).



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To strengthen the capacities of the Congo Basin countries on REDD+ issues.

    Rationale

    Theory of Change (TOC)

    The TOC developed by the ICR (pages 8-10) was clear in terms of the types of inputs/activities and their
    links to the outputs and the expected outcome. While the PDO was not clear in terms of what type of
    capacities were to be strengthened, this was however clarified via the selected PDO indicators. According to
    the TOC, the project aimed to improve capacities in the project countries to increase their influence in
    international climate negotiations as the REDD+ mechanism was being developed and the FCPF was taking
    its first steps and to lay some of the building blocks needed to create an enabling environment for the
    development of REDD+ activities particularly on forest carbon measurements and monitoring. Project
    activities were identified based on the needs that were identified during appraisal. Activities under
    Component 1, improving knowledge and coordination, and under Component 3, mainstreaming REDD+
    concept in sustainable forest management projects, were mainly linked to the first objective. Particularly the
    project would train delegations and civil society from Congo Basin countries on international negotiations,
    would support REDD+ developers for advisory services through an incubator and define methodologies to
    promote REDD+ projects in the Congo basin. Assumptions were mainly regarding COMIFAC’s ability to form
    strong collaboration between the countries and its convening power.

    Outputs:

    1.Improving Knowledge and Coordination on REDD+ in the Congo Basin




                                                                                                       Page 5 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Regional REDD Congo Basin (P113167)



• 13 Climate Working Group (GTC), made up of climate focal points of the countries and the COMIFAC
secretariat, meetings held, exceeding the target of 10 meetings.
• One South‐South exchange held (against an original target of three and a revised target of two).
• 20 consultative meetings on REDD+ held, exceeding the target of 16 meetings.
• 1,780 direct project beneficiaries reached, exceeding the target of 1,000 people.
• 21% of beneficiaries were female, which was less than the target of 30 % female beneficiaries.

2. Mainstreaming REDD+ Concept in Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) Projects

• Regional Environmental and Social Assessment (RESA) was prepared to identify themes for technical
guidelines (this was reported as an output but was not included as part of the result framework)
• Incubator for REDD+ established and functioning (no target provided).

Outcomes:

1. The PDO indicator “Coordinated submissions on a future REDD+ mechanism to the international
UNFCCC negotiations”, was achieved (11 submissions against an original target of 4 and a revised target of
8). The indicator measured position papers prepared jointly by the six participating Congo Basin countries
and submitted to the various UNFCCC meetings. The Bank team received these submissions and verified
them. The project achieved this through supporting the governments with the UNFCCC negotiations in Paris
(COP21) and the REDD+ agenda, including by financing the finalization of various studies and key REDD+
documents (Readiness Preparation Proposals (RPPs), Emission Reduction-ER Program Documents). The
project helped the countries to understand the legal implications of the Paris Agreement and prepare their
technical and legal framework for the implementation of the Paris Agreement. Specifically, COMIFAC helped
CAR to get "Readiness" resources from the Green Climate Fund (GCF), which is a concrete result of project
support; the project also supported civil society organizations to submit GCF proposals.

GTC is the main driving force for the political agenda on REDD+. However, the GTC was constrained by
limited facilitation support and by inadequate technical input. The project helped to build this capacity.

2. The PDO indicator, “Technical guidelines on prioritized REDD+ issues developed and approved by the
Project Steering Committee”, was not achieved. This indicator was dropped because the countries had
already progressed beyond the stage where guidelines would have been useful.

3. The PDO indicator “Percentage of beneficiaries satisfied with the REDD+ negotiations at the international
level and by the knowledge sharing provided in the regional studies”, was achieved as it met the target of 80
percent satisfaction by beneficiaries. This new PDO indicator was introduced at the 2016 restructuring, and
was measured through a beneficiary survey conducted by an individual consultant interviewing 24 key
beneficiaries, including the national climate change focal points and national REDD+ coordinators. A total of
19 beneficiaries were satisfied or very satisfied with the preparation sessions prior to the international
events, the logistical support provided to the official delegation and civil society, as well as the increased
participation to the REDD+ discussions that the project allowed. The project team reported that for the


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Regional REDD Congo Basin (P113167)



    beneficiaries that reported not being satisfied by the support, the main issue mentioned was the delays and
    the perception of slow implementation, as well as weak financial support, the complexity of the procedures
    (and the rejection of some proposed activities that would not be compliant or would be deemed as redundant
    with national level FCPF operations), and the late involvement of some Civil Society organizations.

    Nevertheless, the project helped sub‐regional civil society prepare a regional message for COP 21 and
    actively participated in the negotiations, as well as supported “Network for Indigenous People and Local
    Stakeholders for Sustainable Management of Forests in Central Africa” design and validate its 2017‐2025
    strategy. The REDD+ Incubator provided support to project developers in getting ready to launch REDD+
    projects.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     To strengthen the capacities of the Congo Basin countries on forest carbon stock measurements.

    Rationale

    Activities under Component 2, building capacities for measurement and monitoring of carbon stocks were
    linked to the second objective. Specifically, these activities included setting up scientific partnership for forest
    carbon measurement and monitoring and elaborating allometric equations for tree species representative of
    forest types in the Congo Basin. These activities expected to result in an operational scientific platform;
    country teams trained and deployed on field work on measurement and monitoring of carbon stocks, and
    publicly available database and relevant scientific publications. All of these outcomes would lead to building
    capacities on measurement and monitoring of carbon stocks. The increased capacity on carbon was
    measured through achieving the identified milestones and resulting publications from field studies.

    Outputs:
    Building Technical Capacities for Measurement and Monitoring of Carbon Stocks in the Congo Basin
    Forests

    • Scientific platform operational, as targeted.
    • 65 people active on the platform, exceeding the target of 60 people.
    • One scientific report on defined allometric equations published, 3 publications being worked on; this was
    less than the original and revised target of 8 scientific reports.
    • 37 students participating in field work, exceeding the target of 30 students.
    • All six countries have national teams trained and deployed on field work, as targeted.

                                                                                                            Page 7 of 14
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Regional REDD Congo Basin (P113167)




             Outcomes:

             The PDO indicator: ”Milestones for the elaboration of allometric equations specific to the Congo Basin”, was
             achieved. The defined milestones were: (1) methodology defined; (2) national teams operational and field
             work initiated; (3) field work completed by national teams and (4) analysis completed, data available in
             publicly accessible database and scientific publication prepared for submission. The project supported a
             study in the six countries to produce new allometric equations for each of the countries and a sub‐regional
             one for the Congo Basin. After some delays, work on the ground was conducted and completed in all six
             countries. The project produced high‐fidelity datasets that will allow future REDD+ projects to use accurate
             data to capture the magnitude of emission reductions. Scientific papers are being prepared using the data
             gathered and the first published article appeared in the journal Forest Ecology and Management in July
             2018. The equations constitute a regional public good which can be utilized in the future if any of the Congo
             Basin countries enters into carbon transactions under the mechanisms foreseen by the Paris Agreement or
             through the FCPF. In fact, DRC has now signed an Emission Reductions Payment Agreement (ERPA) with
             the FCPF and the RoC is planning to negotiate one shortly.



             Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

There is sufficient evidence that the Congo basin countries were able to engage effectively in REDD+ at the
international level and influence the development of REDD+ rules. Most of the targets were achieved or
exceeded, except for PDO indicator #2, which became redundant over the course of implementation.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

     5. Efficiency


            Economic Efficiency: Due to the technical assistance nature of the project, an economic analysis was not
            carried out, therefore it is difficult to quantify the efficiency of the project. As per the requirement for all the
            GEF projects, an incremental cost analysis was prepared. The GEF alternative provided financing for some
            key activities that were not covered by other donors. The ICR reported that (para 63), similar work on
            allometric equations was also conducted in the Amazon but detailed costs for those studies were not
            available for comparison purposes.

                                                                                                                      Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Regional REDD Congo Basin (P113167)




Administrative and Operational Efficiency: There were procurement delays in the beginning of the project
due to lack of capacity regarding procurement to deal with large and complex contracts that was not handled
adequately during preparation. This was resolved over time. However, the project completion date had to be
extended twice for a total of 23 months mainly to complete the activities on allometric equations. Also, since it
was decided to introduce country envelopes for country‐specific purposes, this required an additional layer of
financial and procurement capacity in‐country, which proved to be cumbersome to manage. However, project
management costs of 10% of the project amount were lower than for regional projects in general. The project
also did not encounter cost over-runs.

Due to the lack of an economic analysis or cost efficiency analysis in addition to administrative inefficiencies
at the beginning of the project, overall efficiency is rated modest.



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate
                                                         Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                   Available?
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome

The Project development objectives were highly relevant to the global environment, World Bank, and Congo
Basin country strategies in general. Efficacy is rated substantial as both project development objectives were
substantially achieved. Due to the lack of an economic analysis/cost efficiency analysis in addition to
administrative inefficiencies of the project, overall efficiency is rated modest. These ratings result in a
moderately satisfactory outcome rating.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Regional REDD Congo Basin (P113167)



7. Risk to Development Outcome


Financial and Institutional Risks: There is some risk that development outcomes might not be sustained as
the capacity building that the project started needs to be continued through continuing financial means.
Capacities in the individual countries were increased through the project both at the governmental and civil
society levels and most concretely by the preparation of the allometric equations. This allows them to engage in
future REDD+ opportunities when they emerge. However, this capacity building needs further strengthening, as
REDD+ was and still is an emerging concept in the Congo Basin countries. Gabon particularly needs more
resources as it remained outside the project for most of the project lifetime. While the country eventually agreed
to a partial Implementation Agreement, this did not allow the country to benefit from the country envelope under
the project. Thus, COMIFAC is identifying other sources of funds to allow capacity building to continue for
Gabon and for the other participating countries as well. Regarding the work on allometric equations, the data
collected is planned to be further distilled into more publications, and again more funds are needed, and
external funds are being sought for this purpose as well.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  The project had the following strengths regarding quality at entry:

  • The project was reinforced by the fact that all six Congo Basin countries had indicated their interest to
  develop national REDD+ programs and formal agreements (by at least three countries) was an
  effectiveness condition.
  • Civil society was largely involved in preparation through various workshops.
  • As part of the preparation work, a comprehensive assessment was also conducted on potential future
  trends of deforestation in the Congo Basin, which demonstrated the research gaps related to knowledge on
  carbon stocks in the Congo Basin forest ecosystems.
  • Country specific envelopes were allocated to each of the national REDD+ coordination teams ($350,000)
  to ensure that they received the needed technical support to fully engage and contribute to the regional
  processes. While this might have reduced power struggles among countries, it also brought other
  challenges, as the PMU was not responsible for the envelopes, but each envelope needed its own
  additional capacity in‐country to effectually implement.

  One weakness was related to M&E design, i.e. some project activities were not monitored via indicators,
  and concrete criteria to define capacity improvements under the project was not adequately defined.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional REDD Congo Basin (P113167)



b. Quality of supervision

  There were four task team leaders (TTLs), but the ICR reported that this did not significantly affect
  continuity of leadership and decision making on the Bank side (ICR para. 111). The TTL supervising the
  second half of the project had been part of the preparation team, which prevented loss of institutional
  memory (ICR para. 89). The Bank undertook two supervision mission per year, and mission teams were in
  general adequately staffed. The Implementation Supervision Reports candidly disclosed issues that the
  project encountered needing client and management attention. The Mid‐Term Review (MTR) was
  conducted with a delay in January 2015 due to the slow start of the activities.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The M&E design did not create strict criteria for how the increased capacity in REDD+ issues would be
  determined, but it included some proxy output level indicators to measure outcomes. For example, while the
  PDO indicator “Number of UNFCC submissions” sounds like an output-oriented indicator, the submissions to
  the UNFCCC captured the importance and effect of background efforts required to prepare these submissions,
  and the increasing capacity and collaboration needed. A beneficiary survey also assessed the beneficiaries’
  perception of the project’s support on improved capacity. The increased capacity on carbon was measured
  through achieving the identified milestones and resulting publications from field studies. Also, further indicators
  to capture the results of activities to regional civil society as well as the REDD+ incubator to develop projects
  could have been designed and monitored.



b. M&E Implementation

  The quarterly, semi‐annual and annual reports that were prepared by PMU were shared with the World Bank,
  COMIFAC, and focal points in the six countries. A project website was also created for the publication of all
  the documents of the project concerning the development of allometric equations. In addition, some reports
  were posted on COMIFAC’s website, but since this was done later and as not all reports were available, the
  project had poor visibility. Two reports were prepared at the end of the project, one report on achievements
  prepared in‐house and one final evaluation prepared by an independent consultant.



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional REDD Congo Basin (P113167)




c. M&E Utilization

  The M&E reports were used by the Project Steering Committee (PSC), the World Bank team and PMU to
  monitor implementation progress. The M&E data were used to record the achievements, provide feedback
  on the operational issues and take timely actions on implementation and make revisions in project design.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was classified as Category B (Partial Assessment) for the Safeguards Category, triggering
  OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment). As this is a regional technical assistance project, the Regional
  Environmental and Social Assessment (RESA) was identified as the appropriate safeguards instrument for
  the project. The RESA was prepared to guide the preparation of possible REDD+ projects, and it was
  presented locally via a workshop, but it was not officially disclosed via the World Bank (the ICR did not
  provide the reasons for that). Thus, the project has not fully complied with this requirement. The project
  team informed IEG (on March 18, 2019]) that not disclosing the document was probably an oversight on the
  Bank side. However, it was also noted that the document was disclosed by the COMIFAC, put on the
  project website and shared broadly at the time it was approved via a workshop. The RESA was seen at that
  time an exercise of strategic brainstorming on the potential implications of REDD+ at Regional level. Thus,
  the most important part was the brainstorming process, not the final document, as those discussions
  influenced the Region, and contributed to REDD+ becoming part of the COMIFAC Regional second “Plan
  de convergence” that was designed in 2016. In addition, the REDD+ projects were independent from the
  project and were following the national safeguard systems designed by the FCPF, they were not concerned
  by the RESA.

  While five of the Congo Basin countries are members of the FCPF and thus committed to conduct a SESA
  as part of their readiness process, the intent was for the RESA not to duplicate aspects that were
  anticipated to be covered by the national‐level SESAs but rather focused on environmental and social
  issues of regional relevance. The ICR reported that no issues on safeguard mitigation was encountered on
  the ground (ICR para. 105). The ICR also did not report on whether RESA guided preparation of any
  REDD+ projects (in DRC and ROC).




                                                                                                Page 12 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Regional REDD Congo Basin (P113167)



b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial Management. The ICR reported that (para. 107) the FM performance of the project was mostly rated
  moderately satisfactory during the implementation period. Interim Financial Reports were submitted on time
  and were deemed acceptable. Audit and FM supervision recommendations were followed up appropriately
  despite not all of them being implemented in a timely manner. The 2017 external audit issued a qualified
  opinion pointing out the delay in the justification of the advances while the internal control revealed some
  issues pertaining to the lack of systematic annual asset inventories, the deficiencies in the supervision of the
  records and the lack of proper follow up and justification of mission advances.

  Procurement. Procurement of equipment needed for the project was managed centrally from COMIFAC with
  equipment subsequently shipped to where it was needed, which caused considerable delays. Capacities with
  procurement were initially limited within the PMU but improved over time with Bank support. Procurement
  support training was given over several months in September 2013.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  No unintended impacts were reported by the ICR.



d. Other
    ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                              Moderately               Moderately
Outcome                                                                           ---
                              Satisfactory             Satisfactory
Bank Performance              Satisfactory             Satisfactory               ---
Quality of M&E                Substantial              Substantial                ---
Quality of ICR                                         Substantial                ---

12. Lessons


The ICR provided some important lessons particularly for regional projects. The most relevant ones follow with
some modification of language.

Addressing complex coordination needs between regional and national activities as well as among
donors can lead to successful implementation of regional projects. The coordination between national

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Regional REDD Congo Basin (P113167)



and regional activities remained a challenge. With four national level FCPF REDD+ readiness activities
implemented at the same time as the project, extra work was needed to avoid duplication and ensure alignment
with FCPF. In addition, it is critical for national projects to pay close attention to the regional context during their
design, this can also be resolved through coordination. The support provided by Forest Carbon Partnership
Facility to civil society and indigenous peoples reshuffled the distribution of power within the civil society
organizations nationally. Meanwhile, leaders at the regional level were not involved nor in control of the events
at the national level, which led to a disconnect between the national and the regional levels. This created issues
with the legitimacy of the civil society groups working on climate change under the project. In addition, in order
to avoid duplication of works and activities, communication was established between national FCPF projects
and FAO, and no-objections were only provided by the World Bank after verification with these parties.

Including small budget envelopes for country‐specific activities in regional projects can increase buy‐in
of countries. Although the amounts under the national envelopes was administratively cumbersome (created
procurement challenges), these were very useful and flexible. These envelopes helped to have direct
discussions with the national teams; therefore, to keep them engaged and involved with the project. Also, this
led to the regional team better understand the challenges and be perceived as a service provider.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The report was comprehensive, followed the guidelines, and was focused on results. The project’s theory of
change was adequately presented and clear in terms of how the ratings had been reached. The ICR’s lessons
were useful. The only weakness was at times the ICR did not report on the underlying reasons for
shortcomings in the project achievements. For example, the ICR did not report on why the Borrower in-kind
contribution was not reported; or why the RESA was not published by the Bank and whether it was used to
guide any REDD+ initiation.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                         Page 14 of 14
