     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LK: Transforming School Education (P113488)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0021533

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P113488                                   LK: Transforming School Education

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Sri Lanka                                 Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-50370,TF-13267                        30-Jun-2017                                        131,487,637.84

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Nov-2011                               30-Jun-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                   39,110,485.00

 Revised Commitment                           138,238,112.59                                   39,110,485.00

 Actual                                       131,487,637.84                                   39,110,485.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl             Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. ii) and the Financing Agreement of May 18, 2012 (p.
   5), the objective of the project was “to enhance access to, and quality of, primary and secondary education
   to provide a foundation for the knowledge-based economic and social development of the country.”




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LK: Transforming School Education (P113488)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                          PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   According to the PAD (p. 3), the project contained three themes that were based on the five-year national
   education sector rolling plan. The national sector plan consisted of the education sector plan of the central
   Ministry of Education (MoE) and the education sector plans of the nine Provincial Councils. These plans
   were prepared through a collaborative process of consultation and joint work between the MoE, the
   Provincial Councils, the Ministry of Finance and Planning, and the Finance Commission. The education
   sector plan sought to improve the efficiency and equity of education expenditures. The education sector
   rolling plans were to be updated every year jointly by the MOE and the provinces.

   Theme One: Promoting Access to Primary and Secondary Education (appraisal estimate US$30
   million, which was completely disbursed): This theme was to finance initiatives to improve opportunities
   for children in the age group 6-10 years to complete primary education, and for children in the age group
   11-16 years to complete secondary education up to grade 11. This theme was also to support the
   improvement of education opportunities for youth aged 17-18 years in grades 12-13. Flagship primary and
   secondary school learning environment improvement programs in 5,000 primary schools and 1,000
   secondary schools were to be implemented. Demand-side incentives were to consist of tuition-free primary
   and secondary education in government schools; a set of free textbooks and school uniforms for children
   in grades 1-11; the appointment of school attendance committees in each local school community to
   promote school enrollment and attendance; and school health and nutrition programs, including meals for
   children from poor communities and sanitation facilities to promote attendance, especially among girls.
   Supply-side measures were to include ensuring the availability of a good quality primary school within easy
   reach of all primary school-aged children, and the availability of a good quality secondary school offering
   science, arts, and management curriculum streams within reasonable travelling distance for all students.

   Theme Two: Improving the Quality of Education (appraisal estimate US$50 million, which was
   completely disbursed): This theme was to assist the government to strengthen the quality of national
   assessments to international standards. The project was to support Sri Lanka in participating in
   international assessments such as the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study and
   Program for International Student Assessment. The information and feedback from these national and
   international assessments were to be used by policy makers and technocrats in key areas such as
   curriculum development, pre-service teacher education, continuing teacher development, and the
   production of educational material including textbooks. The learning assessments were also to provide
   feedback to the Provincial Councils on the performance of education systems in the provinces.

   Theme Three: Strengthening Governance and Delivery of Education Services (appraisal estimate
   US$20 million, which was completely disbursed): This theme was to support the establishment of
   Programs for School Improvement (PSIs). Under the PSIs, school officials such as principals, teachers,

                                                                                                              Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LK: Transforming School Education (P113488)



   and administrators were to be joined by stakeholders in the local school community, including parents, past
   pupils, and well-wishers, in the management and administration of schools. The government was also to
   provide grants to schools to improve education outcomes, particularly to improve student learning, and for
   initiatives to strengthen the “soft skills” of students, such as team work, an industrious and disciplined work
   ethic, good communication skills, leadership, and enterprise, that are in demand by employers.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$100 million. Actual cost was US$131.48 million.

   Financing: The project was to be financed by a US$100 million credit from the International Development
   Association, of which US$92.37 million was disbursed. The project also received a Trust Fund with an
   appraisal estimate of US$39.11 million, which was fully disbursed. Also, during project implementation the
   project received funding from the Australian Government in the amount of approximately US$8.4 million,
   which was disbursed in tranches. The project used results-based financing, and the disbursements were
   made against selected eligible expenditure programs. The actual credit disbursements were based on five
   disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) that were identified in alignment with the themes of the
   government’s national Education Sector Development Framework and Program overall ESDFP (2012-
   2016).

   Borrower Contribution: No Borrower contribution was planned or made.

   Dates: On June 6, 2017 the project was restructured to: i) Extend the closing date from June 30,2017 to
   June 30, 2018 to support the use of SDR 6 million in unused funds for the preparation and
   commencement of a new general education sector development program. These funds were unused due
   to a six-month delay in project effectiveness and cost savings due to the provision of an additional grant
   from the Australian Government in the amount of approximately US$8.4 million; and ii) Revise the Results
   Framework. There were two changes in the results framework, neither of which impacted the project’s
   objective or outcome targets: (a) additional targets were added for one intermediate outcome indicator
   (“the education sector plan,” which was also to be a DLI for release of funds in the amount of
   approximately XDR 6 million during the extended period); and (b) two new intermediate outcome
   indicators, “the development of a framework for a School Inspectorate System” and “the development of
   an enhanced model of School-Based Management,” were added.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            LK: Transforming School Education (P113488)



       According to the PAD (p. 1), Sri Lanka’s general education system had made important gains over the
       recent past, especially in basic education. For example, at appraisal the net primary education enrollment
       rate was 99 percent, and the primary education completion rate was over 95 percent. Also, gender parity
       was high in the education system, and learning outcomes in primary education in the first Language
       (Sinhala and Tamil), mathematics, and English had increased significantly between 2003- 2008. Over that
       time period, the proportion of students scoring over 50 percent in First Language rose from 69 percent to 81
       percent, in mathematics from 65 percent to 80 percent, and in English from 31 percent to 49 percent.
       However, the education sector faced several ongoing challenges, including: i) insufficient focus in
       secondary education on developing the complex skills needed in the economy; ii) lack of mastery of various
       subjects for a large number of children at the primary level; iii) regional disparities in access and quality of
       education across provinces; iv) inadequate school infrastructure; and v) a need for the education system to
       inculcate and foster a favorable environment for a multi-ethnic, multi-religious, and multi-cultural society.

       The objectives of the project were in line with the government’s national ESDFP at appraisal (2012-2016),
       which stressed the importance of promoting a high-quality general education system. The objectives of the
       project also supported the government’s most recent ESDFP (2018-2025), which aims to improve the
       quality and governance of the education sector in order to provide students with the knowledge, skills,
       behaviors, and attitudes necessary to be successful in the 21st century economy. The objectives of the
       project were also in line with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework (FY17-FY20), which
       identifies the strengthening of the education and training systems as a key pillar and stresses the promotion
       of equitable access and quality at the primary and secondary education levels.



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     Enhance access to primary and secondary education

    Rationale

    The project’s theory of change linked supply-side measures such as flagship programs (to ensure that good
    quality primary school is available within easy reach of all primary school aged children, and that a good
    quality secondary school offering science, arts and management curriculum streams are available within
    reasonable travelling distance for all students) and non-formal and special education programs with
    enhancing access to primary and secondary education. Also, the project’s theory of change linked demand-
    side measures such as tuition waivers, free textbooks, the appointment of school attendance committees in
    each local school community to promote school enrolment and attendance, school health and nutrition

                                                                                                           Page 4 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LK: Transforming School Education (P113488)



programs (including meals for children from poor communities and sanitation facilities to promote
attendance, especially among girls) with enhancing access to primary and secondary education.

Outputs


  • The Education Sector Rolling Plan for FY17 was completed and is being implemented. The plan for
  FY18 has been drafted by the MoE and the Provincial Councils, achieving the target of the Education
  Sector Rolling Plan for FY17 being updated by the MoE and provinces.
  • The flagship primary and secondary school learning environment improvement program was
  implemented in 5,000 primary schools and 1,000 secondary schools. The improvements to the learning
  environment of primary schools included providing adequate facilities for child-centered learning. The
  improvements to the learning environment of secondary schools included the provision of higher-order
  assets and spaces such as libraries, science laboratories, information technology centers, language
  laboratories, activity rooms, and multi-purpose rooms.
  • Special education was upgraded, and non-formal education programs for children with special needs
  were continued. Over the entire project period, around 400 teachers and 900 principals received training
  in inclusive education, and a total of 164 training programs were delivered. The education programs
  included courses to obtain a diploma in special education and a diploma in sign language. According to
  data from the MoE, a total of 8,526 children with special learning needs were enrolled in special education
  programs that were implemented in all nine provinces. About 360 education instructors were trained in
  developing literacy skills, and 363 literacy programs were delivered to 12,051 youth.
  • All schools were transformed into Health Promoting Schools, providing sanitation facilities and meals to
  children from poor communities to promote attendance, especially among girls, achieving the target.
  • According to the ICR (p. 11), by 2016, School Management Committees (SMCs) were established and
  trained to promote student participation in 10,184 schools in 98 zones. SMCs implemented several actions
  to increase participation of students, such as monitoring attendance of students and following up with
  families whose children dropped out to bring them back to school. Also, the SMCs supported the
  preparation of mid-morning meals to promote participation in poor communities.


Outcomes


  • The survival rate of students up to Grade 11 improved from 82 percent in 2011 to 88 percent in 2017,
  achieving the target of 88 percent.
  • According to UNESCO data, between 2009 and 2016 the gross enrollment rate (GER) at the primary
  school level increased from 95.08 percent to 101.9 percent. The net enrollment rate (NER) at the primary
  school level increased, during the same time period, from 93.25 percent to 98.92 percent. The NER at the
  secondary school level increased from 84.09 percent in 2010 to 88.83 percent in 2017. The effective
  transition rate from primary to lower secondary general education increased from 98.5 percent in 2011 to

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            LK: Transforming School Education (P113488)



        99.7 percent in 2015. These indicators were not part of the project's formal Results Framework, and
        therefore no targets were established.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     Enhance the quality of primary and secondary education to provide a foundation for the knowledge-based
     economic and social development of the country

    Rationale

    The project’s theory of change linked the revision and improvement of the primary education curriculum, the
    diversification and rationalization of the mathematics and science curricula for secondary education, the
    revision of textbooks with agreement on the quality of content and promotion of social cohesion, and the
    modernization and expansion of quality assurance mechanisms, with enhancing the quality of primary and
    secondary education.

    Outputs


        • A national assessment system to measure learning outcomes and improvements in test scores between
        comparable cycles was established, achieving the target. Findings of the national assessments were
        used by the MoE and the provinces to strengthen their activities, achieving the target. The National
        Education Research and Evaluation Center (NEREC) conducted the following assessments: i) grade 8
        assessments (mathematics, science, and English) in 2012-2013, 2014-2015, and 2016-2017; and ii) grade
        4 assessments (first language, English, and mathematics) in 2013-2014 and 2015-2016.
        • School-based teacher development (SBTD) programs were implemented in all schools. In 2017,
        approximately 156,000 teachers (about 65 percent of the entire teaching workforce) were engaged in
        SBTD. According to Edu Stat, which is managed by the Data Management Branch of the MoE, in 2017 98
        percent of 240,000 governmental school teachers across the entire country were professionally
        trained. According to MoE data, by the time of project closing 88 percent of 4,027 science teachers and
        87 percent of 3,765 mathematics teachers across 1,005 secondary schools were professionally qualified.
        • The primary education curriculum was revised and improved. For the secondary education level (grades
        6 to 11), new mathematics and science curricula were introduced.




                                                                                                      Page 6 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LK: Transforming School Education (P113488)



 • All schools in all zones completed the program for school improvement (PSI) annual cycle, achieving the
 target. The ICR (p. 13) stated that these committees conducted awareness programs for school
 communities to promote participation and retention in primary and secondary education in all zones.
 • A quality assurance program was developed and aligned with the PSI. It was evaluated in 2014, and an
 upgraded program was implemented in all schools across all nine provinces in January 2015. In addition,
 quality assurance guidelines were published.
 • A framework for a school inspectorate system was developed, achieving the target.
 • An enhanced model of school-based management was developed, achieving the target.
 • Education sector audits were completed in a timely manner by the auditor’s general department for both
 the center and provinces.
 • All schools (approximately 10,100) implemented social cohesion programs through multiethnic student
 and teacher interactions. Textbooks were reviewed, and the quality of content and promotion of social
 cohesion was agreed on.
 • A career guidance program was developed. This was a systematic program for career education (world
 of work) in grades 7 to 9 and the inclusion of career education modules as an integral part of the civic
 education syllabi in grades 7 to 9, achieving the target of this DLI. Over 2,300 teachers and 142 students
 received training in career guidance.
 • Bilingual education to improve proficiency in an international language (English) was implemented. The
 Content and Language Integrated Learning (CLIL) approach (the teacher uses the second language as
 much as possible but the mother tongue when necessary) was introduced in 750 secondary schools and
 senior secondary (advanced level). 78,000 students and 7,000 teachers engaged in this method. The ICR
 (p. 16) stated that independent third-party evaluations verified that the DLI targets on CLIL implementation
 and teacher training were met each year.


Outcomes


 •  Between 2013 and 2015, the proportion of students achieving higher than 50 percent in grade 4
 increased in mathematics from 70.2 percent to 73.4 percent, and in English from 47.2 percent to 55.5
 percent. For grade 8 students, there are no significant changes in mathematics (49.5 percent in 2013 and
 50.5 percent in 2015) or science (34.1 percent in 2013 and 34.2 percent in 2015), and a decline in English
 (from 29.6 percent to 21.3 percent).
 • Although, the project lacked an indicator to measure that part of the objective (i.e. provide a foundation
 for the knowledge economy and social development of the country), it can be plausibly argued that the
 quality interventions will move the country closer to a knowledge economy and a more socially cohesive
 country.



Rating

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 15
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  LK: Transforming School Education (P113488)



      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

The project's activities were logically and plausibly connected to achievement in improving access to, and quality
of, primary and secondary education, and its efforts in career guidance, social cohesion, and bilingual education
were likely to have contributed to knowledge-based social and economic development of the country. The overall
efficacy is rated Substantial.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

     5. Efficiency


            Economic Efficiency

            The PAD (p. 15) conducted a cost-benefit analysis which assumed that the project’s investments would result
            in improvement in employment rates and earnings due to education quality improvement. A discount rate of
            12 percent was used. The analysis estimated a Net Present Value (NPV) ranging from US$359 million (low
            case scenario) to US$429 million (middle case scenario) to US$500 million (high case scenario). The
            project’s Internal Rate of Return (IRR) ranged from 29 percent (low case scenario) to 33 percent (middle case
            scenario) to 38 percent (high case scenario). These results indicate that the project’s investments were likely
            to achieve positive benefits.

            The ICR (p. 41) conducted a cost-benefit analysis with similar assumptions as the PAD. The analysis
            estimated a NPV ranging from US$357 million (low case scenario) to US$469 million (high case scenario).
            The IRR ranged between 23.7 percent (low case scenario) to 30.4 percent (high case scenario). Even though
            the estimates in the ICR were lower than in the PAD, they still indicate that the project was a worthwhile
            investment.

            Operational Efficiency

            The ICR (p. 22) stated that the Bank’s engagement, proactive follow-up on issues, and continuous
            supervision and support for the provinces had a positive impact on project implementation. However, the
            project’s effectiveness was delayed by several months, resulting in the extension of the closing date by twelve
            months. According to the ICR (p. 22), the delay in project signing and effectiveness hampered implementation
            in the MoE and provinces, and initial project funds only reached the provinces in the fourth quarter of 2012.
            Also, the Mid-Term Review, which was conducted in September 2014, noted that the project's implementation

                                                                                                               Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LK: Transforming School Education (P113488)



of the PSI program varied considerably across schools. Furthermore, the project lacked a communication
strategy, and at the beginning of implementation coordination between departments in the MoE and between
the MoE and provinces was weak. Coordination improved mainly because the directors of the relevant MoE
branches made an effort to do so.

These implementation shortcomings are considered to be moderate, and the project’s overall efficiency is
rated Substantial.



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate
                                                         Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                   Available?
                                                                                  0
Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                  Not Applicable
                                                                                  0
ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                  Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


Relevance of the project's objectives is rated High, given alignment with country conditions, government
strategy, and the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework. Both objectives were rated
Substantial. Efficiency was Substantial. These ratings are consistent with minor shortcomings in the project's
preparation and implementation. Outcome is therefore rated Satisfactory.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


According to the ICR (p. 26), the government continues to be committed to the objectives of the project. This
project is being followed by a new Bank operation (General Education Modernization Project, $100 million,

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LK: Transforming School Education (P113488)



2018-2024) that builds on its achieved outcomes, making their sustainability more likely. While institutional
development mechanisms are in place to ensure the program’s sustainability beyond Bank engagement,
capacity is not the same across all zones and needs to continue to be strengthened in weaker zones. Also,
even though the number of out-of-school children has significantly decreased, further efforts need to be made to
attract the remaining out-of-school children.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  According to the ICR (p. 25), the project was built on the Bank’s experience with education projects in Sri
  Lanka and other countries. International best practices such as school autonomy, community-led
  accountability, and SBTD were taken into account, as were the findings of the Bank’s 2011 analytic work
  Transforming School Education in Sri Lanka: From Cut Stones to Polished Jewels.

  The Bank team conducted extensive consultations during project preparation with various stakeholders at
  all levels. In addition, the project was aligned with the government’s development priorities in the
  education sector as well as those of other partners. Identified risk factors included insufficient capacity in
  some of the provinces, the complexity of the organizational structure with a decentralized system of service
  delivery and separate channels of financing and implementation, and the possibility of opposition
  to initiatives intended to promote social cohesion through increased interactions between students and staff
  from different ethnic and religious groups. Mitigation efforts included organizational strengthening through
  capacity building, and empowering policy makers to highlight the importance of social inclusion. The ICR
  (p. 26) stated that mitigation measures were adequate.

  According to the ICR (p. 22), the project’s effectiveness was delayed by several months due to lack of
  awareness of the Bank’s conditions among some legal officials.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  According to the ICR (p. 26), the project benefited from the continuity of having the same Task Team
  Leader throughout project preparation and implementation. Also, the Bank team included the appropriate
  skill mix and conducted a total of ten supervision support missions, including visits to all the project
  provinces in addition to bi-monthly review visits with the Operations and Monitoring Support Unit (OMSU)
  and Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) to selected schools, divisions, and zones.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LK: Transforming School Education (P113488)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The theory of change was sound, as were the linkages between key project activities and intended outcomes
  was sound. The project's objectives were clearly specified. Most indicators had a baseline and target. In
  addition to the indicators included in the Results Framework, the project included five DLIs. However, it was an
  important shortcoming that the Results Framework did not include PDO- and intermediate-level results
  indicators to measure all aspects of the PDO statement. For example, the Results Framework did not include
  any indicators to measure the last part of the PDO “to provide a foundation for the knowledge-based social and
  economic development of the country." Also, the PDO indicator to measure enhanced access -- survival
  through grade 11 -- was incomplete to measure access to both primary and secondary education. The ICR
  provided some additional measures outside the results framework (for instance, the number out of school
  children) to remedy this shortcoming.

  The OMSU was established at the Ministry of Local Government and Provincial Councils (MLGPC) and was
  responsible for the project’s M&E in cooperation with the MoE, provincial councils, and National Institute for
  Education. A M&E specialist within OMSU was to be responsible for consolidating quarterly monitoring reports
  on key performance indicators. However, the ICR (p. 23) stated that this position was not always filled.



b. M&E Implementation

  According to the ICR (p. 23), data were collected through various sources such as project monitoring
  checklists, annual school census, public examinations, and national assessments of learning outcomes.
  Project monitoring was conducted at the national level by the MoE and the Bank and at the provincial level by
  the MLGPC and provincial education authorities. In addition, the Bank conducted bi-monthly progress review
  visits with the OMSU and the Australian DFAT to selected schools, divisions, and zones.

  During the project restructuring in June 2017, the Results Framework was revised to add two additional
  intermediate results indicators, and additional targets were added for one intermediate outcome
  indicator. However, these revisions did not add sufficient indicators for complete measurement of all three
  objectives. The ICR team had to bring in additional data at the ICR stage in order to assess achievement
  fully.



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LK: Transforming School Education (P113488)



  The ICR (p. 23) stated that evaluation activities were also contracted out to the National Education Research
  and Evaluation Center, an independent research agency. Some third-party evaluations were conducted by
  the Sri Lanka Association for the Advancement of Education Development, and these results were regularly
  communicated to relevant officials. According to the Bank team (February 25, 2019), the third-party
  verifications found the M&E data to be reliable and of good quality. The project's M&E functions and
  processes are being used for a Bank-financed follow-on project (General Education Modernization Project,
  $100 million, 2018-2024).



c. M&E Utilization

  The ICR (p. 23) stated that M&E data from various entities was shared and used at the provincial and central
  level to inform decision making and strengthen the implementation of project activities.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was classified as environmental assessment category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard
  policy OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment). According to the ICR (p. 24), the project did not cause any
  significant and/or irreversible environmental impacts. The Bank team stated (February 25, 2019) that the
  project complied with the Bank’s safeguard policies. New construction was not permitted in environmentally
  sensitive areas such as wetlands, marshes, or forests. Also, the government decided to progressively move
  away from using asbestos-cement for construction purposes due to its toxicity. Original construction plans
  were modified to accommodate this decision, and the Bank and OMSU consultants monitored compliance
  during their bi-monthly provincial visits. The project did not trigger any social safeguard policies. The ICR
  (p. 24) stated that a social audit was conducted in May 2016 and did not find any major compliance issues,
  but it recommended strengthening community participation in the project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial Management




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LK: Transforming School Education (P113488)



  According to the ICR (p. 25), the OMSU and MoE collected financial information from spending units and
  provinces on a monthly basis. Bi-annual interim unaudited financial reports were issued in accordance with the
  Project Operations Manual. In addition, annual consolidated financial statements were prepared based on the
  annual appropriation accounts of the MoE, the nine provincial education ministries, and nine provincial
  education departments. These statements were submitted to the Auditor General for external audit.

  The ICR (p. 25) stated that from 2012 to 2016 audits were conducted by the Auditor General, and audit reports
  were submitted with occasional delays. Issues that were identified in these audits were addressed by the
  government, resulting in favorable opinions by the Auditor General. The project’s audit report for 2016 was
  delivered in June 2017 and had a favorable opinion. According to the Bank team (February 25, 2019), the four
  most recent audit reports (i.e. for FY 17, FY 16, FY 15 & FY 14) received for both MoE & MPCLG had
  unqualified opinions. There were instances of qualified opinions for some of the project's initial years, but these
  did not reflect any serious observations or accountability issues on financial management aspects pertaining to
  the project.

  Procurement

  According to the Bank team (February 25, 2019), the project followed the Bank’s procurement guidelines, and
  the project did not encounter any major procurement issues. Early in the project, there were capacity
  constraints in some provinces. The Bank and the procurement specialist in the MPCLG conducted regular
  training sessions for provincial-level procurement staff. The MPCLG procurement specialist also regularly
  visited the provinces to provide support when needed.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                       IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory             Satisfactory               ---
Bank Performance               Satisfactory             Satisfactory               ---
                                                                                   The project's outcome
                                                                                   indicators were insufficient for
Quality of M&E                 Substantial              Modest
                                                                                   complete measurement of all
                                                                                   three objectives. The project

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LK: Transforming School Education (P113488)



                                                                                  team had to bring in additional
                                                                                  data at the ICR stage to
                                                                                  assess achievement fully.
Quality of ICR                                          Substantial               ---

12. Lessons


The ICR (p. 27) provided useful lessons, some of which are adapted here by IEG:

  • Implementing a communication strategy that clearly describes objectives, roles, and
  responsibilities is critical for ensuring the success of a large reform program. This project did not have
  a communication strategy, and at the beginning of implementation coordination between departments in the
  MoE and partnerships between the MoE and provinces were weak. Coordination improved mainly because
  the directors of the relevant MoE branches made an effort to do so.
  • Building capacity at all implementation levels is critical to successful project implementation. In this
  project, capacity was continuously built at the central ministry and the provincial level. However, inadequate
  staffing and capacity constraints, especially at the provincial, zonal, and school levels, led to implementation
  challenges such as those noted in the Mid-Term Review (see Section 5 for more details). Continuous
  capacity building efforts at lower implementation levels would have been beneficial.
  • Project designs that are flexible to adapt to changing circumstances can be beneficial. The project
  was embedded in the government’s five-year national education sector strategy which was updated on a
  yearly basis based on changing circumstances. The Bank team stated that the updated strategy was useful in
  providing a coherent overarching framework for implementation.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR provided a solid and candid overview of project preparation and implementation. It was outcome
driven and provided useful lessons learned. It compensated for the lack of adequate outcome indicators in the
project's Results Framework by bringing in additional relevant outcome data. However, the ICR did not
distinguish between DLIs and intermediate outcome indicators included in the Results Framework and often
referred to both as outcome indicators. Also, it did not consistently state whether DLIs were achieved. Many of
the planned outputs noted in the PAD were not addressed in the ICR, such as support for tuition, textbooks,
uniforms, meals, transportation subsidies, sanitation facilities, measures to ensure that all students had


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LK: Transforming School Education (P113488)



schools within reasonable distances of their homes. Furthermore, the ICR did not provide information on
procurement even though the procurement risk was rated High at appraisal. The ICR is rated Substantial, but
only marginally so.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                Page 15 of 15
