     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



                                                                                   Report Number : ICRR0021644

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P107598                                     MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Mozambique                                  Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-49160,TF-10214                          30-Jun-2017                                          69,345,927.49

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Mar-2011                                 28-Sep-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             70,000,000.00                                    14,250,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              74,233,893.76                                    14,250,000.00

 Actual                                          69,345,927.49                                    14,250,000.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero        Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to increase agriculture production marketed and raise farm
   productivity in new or improved irrigation schemes in the following Recipient's provinces: Sofala, Manica, and
   Zambezia". (Financing Agreement (FA, p.4). The formulation was identical in the co-financing Grant
   Agreement (GA, p.5), and in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, Section 2, paragraph 17).

   This review will assess the following objectives of the project:


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)




     • to increase agriculture production marketed from the provinces of Sofala, Manica, and Zambezia, and
     • to raise farm productivity in new or improved irrigation schemes in the provinces: Sofala, Manica, and
     Zambezia.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

                                                          PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components

   The project had four (4) components:

   1. Institutional Capacity Development and Participatory Irrigation Management (Appraisal: US$17.1
   million from IDA, and an additional grant of US$5 million from PHRD; Actual: US$9.51 million in IDA and
   US$3.2 million in PHRD grant). A first sub-component was to enhance the enabling environment for
   irrigation and the irrigation capacity of the Direcção Nacional dos Serviços Agrários (National Directorate of
   Agrarian Services of the Ministry of Agriculture or MINAG/DNSA) to deliver on policy, planning and
   development of the irrigation regulatory framework as defined in the Government's Irrigation Strategy (EI).
   This subcomponent was to finance the development and implementation of the National Irrigation Program
   (PNI); establish a dedicated national irrigation agency, prepare legislation and regulatory framework for
   water user associations (WUAs) and transfer the Operating and Maintenance (O&M) schemes of irrigation
   sites from the Government to the water users associations; develop a portfolio of irrigation investment
   operations; strengthen public and private extension services; and implement the national Fruit Fly
   Surveillance Plan (FFSP). A second sub-component was to finance the creation and strengthen Irrigation
   Organizations (IOs) and establish Producer Associations (PAs), facilitate expanded access to improved
   production and post-harvest technologies, develop savings and loans, and build capacity of PAs and IOs in
   financial literacy and business management.

   2. Investment in Irrigation Systems and Support Infrastructure (Appraisal: US$41.0 million in IDA
   credit, an additional grant of US$7.6 million from PHRD, and US$6.7 million from beneficiaries; Actual:
   US$35.7 million in IDA credit, US$9.4 million from PHRD grant, and none reported from beneficiaries).
   This component was to finance the costs of rehabilitation/construction of eligible schemes, and the
   construction of immovable irrigation and drainage infrastructure (e.g., weir construction, main and
   secondary canal construction, scheme buildings, etc.). Also to be financed were supporting infrastructure



                                                                                                              Page 2 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



  such as flood protection dykes, earth embankments, road connectors, and electricity as well as costs
  associated with the implementation of the safeguard instruments.

  3. Cost Sharing Grant for Market-led Production and Value Chain Development (Appraisal: US$4.8
  million in IDA credit, US$1.65 million in PHRD grant and US$1.2 million from beneficiaries; Actual:
  US$2.76 million in IDA, US$1.65 million in PHRD, and US$1.2 million from beneficiaries). This component
  was to finance a two-window grant program for small holder farmers, micro and small entrepreneurs (value
  chain actors) to adopt agricultural inputs and productive assets. Demand-driven grants were to finance
  working capital under Window 1 to support production such as improved seeds and fertilizer start-up kits.
  Window 2 was to finance value chain development such as post-harvest value addition activities (e.g.,
  equipment such as farm machinery, greenhouses and value chain development such as product
  processing, storage, marketing, and transportation).

  4. Project Management and Coordination (Appraisal: US$4.3 million in IDA credit; Actual: US$7.12
  million actual). This component was to finance the activities of the Project Coordination Team (PCT) in
  DNSA/MINAG in (i) project coordination and management; (ii) overall project planning, quality oversight,
  procurement, and financial management; (iii) conduct of independent financial and technical audits; and
  (iv) project monitoring and impact evaluation.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  Project Cost: The total project cost was estimated at US$92.15 million at appraisal and the actual total
  project cost was US$70.55 million. US$10.0 million was cancelled during the second restructuring (see
  below), beneficiary contributions fell short by US$6.7 million (see below), and the balance was due to
  SDR depreciation (ICR, paragraph 40).

  Financing: This Investment Project Financing (IPF) project was financed by a credit from the International
  Development Association (IDA) and co-financed by a grant from the Government of Japan's Policy and
  Human Resources Development (PHRD) Technical Assistance Grants Program administered by IDA.

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower committed to co-finance the project with US$7.9 million but
  disbursed only US$1.2 million. The project team clarified in an April 25, 2019 email from the Task Team
  Leader that US$6.7 million was the value of the Borrower's in-kind contribution. The Borrower provided
  labor for clearing up the sites, collecting and assembling construction material, and preparing small
  drainage and tertiary canals.

  Dates: The IDA Board approved this project on March 17, 2011. The project became effective on
  December 10, 2011. A Mid Term Review (MTR) was conducted on November 17, 2014. The project
  closed on September 28, 2018, 15 months after the original closing date of June 30, 2017. There were
  four level 2 restructurings:



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



     • On August 29, 2012 to amend the financing plan to include the PHRD co-financing grant.
     • On April 21, 2016 to cancel US$10.0 million in IDA financing. This cancellation paved the way for an
     IDA credit to finance the Emergency Resilient Recovery Project (ERRP) following the January to March
     2015 floods. In addition, resources were reallocated, disbursement estimates revised due to the
     cancellation of funds and implementation delays. The target indicators in the Results Framework were
     amended. The Department of Hydraulics of DNSA/MINAG was transferred to the newly created
     National Irrigation Institute (Instituto Nacional de Irrigação or INIR). INIR replaced DNSA/MINAG in the
     project's National Steering and Technical Committees until project closing. The Project Coordination
     Team (PCT) was also hosted by INIR after the restructuring.
     • On January 19, 2017 to extend the original closing date by 12 months, from June 30, 2017 to June
     29, 2018 to complete the construction of irrigation schemes, hand these over to the beneficiaries, and
     provide Operations and Maintenance (O&M) training on its use.
     • On June 28, 2018 to extend the closing date by another 3 months to September 28, 2018 to complete
     the construction of remaining irrigation schemes and complete the implementation of remedial actions
     identified under the Environment and Social Management Plans (ESMPs).




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  The PDO was relevant to the Five-Year Plan of the Government for 2015–2019 (Programa Quinquenal do
  Governo 2015–2019, or PQG), which Parliament approved in April 2015. The PDO contributed to the
  PQG's priorities: (i) consolidate national unity, peace, and sovereignty; (ii) develop human and social
  capital; (iii) promote employment and improve productivity and competitiveness; (iv) develop economic and
  social infrastructure; and (v) manage natural and environmental resources in a sustainable and transparent
  manner. The PDO was relevant to the Government's approach of integrating cross-cutting issues within its
  priority areas. Small holder producers were encouraged to increase their agricultural productivity and
  access markets by rehabilitating irrigation infrastructure that were identified using a participatory approach.
  The project provided access to inputs and technologies such as improved seed, fertilizers and
  agrochemicals, machinery, and extension services to reduce dependency on food imports as envisioned in
  the country’s Food Production Action Plan (Plano de Acção para Produção de Alimento or PAPA). In
  addition, the PDO also integrated production with market access and services by offering matching grants
  to support value chain links (ICR, paragraph 4).

  The PDO remained relevant to the World Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY17-21, which
  supported inclusive growth through 11 objectives that promoted employment, improved productivity, and
  competitiveness in a sustainable manner through 11 objectives (CPF, paragraph 57). The PDO was
  relevant to the CPF's second objective of raising agricultural growth through crop diversification and
  enhanced productivity (CPF, Table 2, paragraphs 58, 63, and 70). Under its Results Matrix (CPF, Annex 2),


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 23
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



       this project contributed to achieving indicator 4 - increase in the number of households marketing part of
       their production in Zambezia and Nampula under Objective 2 - Increasing Agriculture Growth.

       However, while there is a clear alignment between the PDOs and the country and World Bank strategies,
       the relevance of objectives is pitched at a level that does not adequately reflect a potential solution to a
       development problem. A moderate shortcoming here was that the objective was not defined such that its
       achievements would be plausibly traceable to improvements envisioned to arise from an increase in
       marketed agricultural production and increased farm productivity, whether those improvements were
       increased farm income and/or increased food security. These may be longer term targets but tracking them
       and identifying them is an important aspect of a successful development operation.



       Rating
       Substantial

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     • to increase agriculture production marketed from the provinces of Sofala, Manica, and Zambezia

    Rationale

    Theory of Change: The following were the project inputs (activities): prepare a national irrigation plan and
    national fruit fly surveillance plan; establish a national irrigation agency, establish the legal and regulatory
    framework for water users associations, producer associations, and irrigation organizations; strengthen the
    public and private providers of extension service; develop irrigation investments in a participatory manner;
    and offer matching grants to build value chain links. These activities led to the following outputs: increase in
    capacity of government institutions, extension service providers, farmers from the participant provinces to
    adopt a participatory manner in planning, developing and managing irrigation schemes. The inputs were
    numerous and could have been streamlined (for example, the fruit fly surveillance plan, or reforms that could
    have been undertaken with budget support) to complement the simple design and were not all needed to
    lead to the outputs. The outputs led to outcomes measures in terms of average crop yield (in metric
    tons/hectare) and cropping intensity (number of harvests per year). The outputs were necessary but not
    sufficient to attribute to an increase in the proportion of agricultural products from the participant provinces
    that reached the markets.

    OUTPUTS:


        •   Farmers sold 57 percent of the rice produced (original target 100 percent, target not achieved)


                                                                                                         Page 5 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



 •  Farmers sold 80 percent of the vegetables produced (original target 75 percent, target exceeded)
 •  The National Irrigation Plan (Programa Nacional de Irrigação or PNI) that set priorities for developing
 irrigation in the country for the next 25 years was approved by the Council of Ministers in December 2016,
 as targeted.
 • Nine (9) Memoranda of Understanding were signed with Instituto Superior Politécnico de Manica;
 Universidade Católica de Moçambique; UEM- Faculdade de Agronomia; UNIZAMBEZE- Faculdade de
 Agronomia; Instituto agrário de Boane; Instituto Agrário de Ribaue; Escola Profissional de Caia; Instituto
 Politécnico Armando Guebuza; and Instituto Agrário de Mocuba.(baseline 0, original target 5, target
 exceeded).
 • 10,065 client days of training (baseline 0, original target 19,660, target not achieved) were conducted
 on topics such as irrigation planning, irrigation farming, value chain improvement, participatory planning,
 irrigation, and water management, construction and supervision of irrigation investments, marketing and
 standards, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).
 • 52% of the clients who benefited from the training were women (original target 33 percent, target
 exceeded).
 • 100 percent of the targeted producers were members of an association (baseline 30 percent, original
 target 70 percent, target exceeded)
 • 80 percent of the producers (original target 30 percent, target exceeded) sold their produce as a group
 • 55 percent of the producers who sold their products as a group were women (baseline 30 percent,
 original target 70 percent, target not achieved)


OUTCOMES:


 • The project benefited 6,779 farmers (no baseline provided, original target 16,000, target not achieved)
 • 52 percent of the project beneficiaries were female (baseline, not provided, original target 33 percent,
 target exceeded).
 • There were 28,126 indirect beneficiaries (no baseline provided, original target 80,000, target not
 achieved). The number of indirect beneficiaries was determined as the number of dependents of the
 beneficiary farmers (estimated at 4.2 dependents/farmer household) plus staff that benefited from training.
 • There were 5,664 direct beneficiaries of the approved subprojects (original target 8,000, target not
 achieved)
 • The level of commercialization was higher for horticulture than rice because horticulture was produced
 for the market and supported by out-grower contracts. The increased level of commercialization promoted
 collective action and increased vertical coordination, reduced transaction costs. Vertical coordination was
 obtained by an increased access to market information (by virtue of increase in extension services
 delivered and attractiveness of farmer groups as out-growers) and improved economies of scale for
 beneficiaries who were members of an association who practiced group marketing (100 percent of the
 targeted producers were members of Producers Associations (PAs) and 80% practiced group marketing


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 23
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



against a target of 75, exceeded). There were no additional figures provided, however, to support the
claim in economies of scale achieved, such as the actual transactions costs that were lowered, or
monetary value of the benefits to the producers.
• In the 2018–2019 agricultural season, there were 2,548 hectares of rehabilitated irrigation schemes
(original target 5,000 hectares, target not achieved) and 1,137 hectares or 44 percent was used by a rice-
based system (original target 3,000 hectares or 60 percent, target not achieved). 887 hectares or 35
percent to vegetables (original target 800 hectares, or 16 percent, target exceeded); and 524 hectares or
21 percent to out-growers (original target 1,200 hectares or 24 percent, target almost achieved).
• The Project’s support to building market links through buyer’s conferences and out-growers helped
match farmers’ production with buyers’ need and contributed to increased proportion of produce sold.
Vegetable producers achieved an increase from a baseline of 20 percent to 80 percent (original target was
75 percent, target exceeded) and those for rice producers reached 57 percent from a baseline of 20
percent (original target was 100 percent, target not achieved).
• The institutional reforms - creating INIR, legislating the framework for WUAs, developing a PNI - laid the
foundation for improved access to water according to beneficiaries surveyed after project closing (ICR,
Annex 6). This access to water plus the technical support from extension enabled crop intensification as
evidenced by the increase in the number of harvests per year. Using a baseline of 1 harvest per year for
both rice and horticultural products - the original target of 1.5 harvests per year for rice was not achieved;
the original target of 2 harvests per year for vegetables was achieved.
• Similarly, improved access to water and extension services also led to improved yields (measured in
metric tons/hectare). The original target of 4 metric tons/hectare for rice was not achieved. The 25 metric
tons/hectare for tomato exceeded the original target of 20 tons/hectare; the 30 tons/hectare fo potato
exceeded the original target of 25 metric tons/hectare; the 32 metric tons/hectare for cabbage exceeded
the original target of 18 metric tons/hectare; and the 20 metric tons/hectare for onion exceeded the original
target of 15 metric tons/hectare. Higher crop intensity and improved yields for vegetables contributed to
marketable surplus. Gross margin (in US$/hectare, at market price, per production cycle) for rice was
estimated at closing to be US$200 per hectare per production cycle (compared to a baseline of US$148
baseline, no target provided) while those for horticultural products ranged from US$62 per hectare per
production cycle for maize(from a bseline of US$19) to US$1,649 per hectare per production cycle for
cabbage (from a baseline of US$1,279) (ICR, Annex 4, Table A4.3).
• At project closing, beneficiary assessments claimed benefits from this surplus led to increased incomes
to pay for school fees, purchase motorcycles, association-owned tractor; build new or renovate houses;
and acquire new land for expanded cultivation.
• Strengthened capacity of district extension officers is likely to have mproved market access (no
breakdown in figures provided) by helping beneficiaries obtain market information, adopt better agronomic
practices, and receive advisory services. A 2017 Development Impact Evaluation (DIME) report noted that
extension staff visited project-supported associations more often, beneficiaries expressed a 90 percent
(original target 70 percent, target exceeded) level of satisfaction with extension services. However, post
completion, only 53 percent (original target 70 percent, target not achieved) of the farmers surveyed
expressed satisfaction under this project.



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



   •  Market access improved as reflected in the 57 percent increase in the share of rice sales (baseline of 20
   percent, original target 100 percent, target not achieved) and 80 percent in horticultural products reaching
   the market (baseline of 20 percent, original target 75 percent, target exceeded) because 90 percent of the
   participating producers adopted at least one post-harvest technology, as targeted, that reduced post-
   harvest losses (there was no data presented as to how much these losses were) and improved product
   quality.
   • Project interventions strengthened vertical coordination and social network/capital among beneficiaries
   contributed to improving the level of integration to the market. Anecdotal evidence was cited in the
   beneficiary surveys conducted post completion (ICR, Annex 6). No hard evidence was provided but it is
   plausible that marketable surplus was generated due to the available equitable access to water for
   irrigation and that the improved marketable surpluses and better prices resulted from improved quality of
   the produce and improved farm-level productivity.



 Rating
 Modest
PHREVDELTBL
 PHINNERREVISEDTBL
 Objective 1 Revision 1
 Revised Objective

 This objective was not revised but the targets were. The project's achievement assessed against the revised
 Outputs and Outcomes are presented below.

 Revised Rationale

 The Theory of Change was not revised.

 OUTPUTS:


   • Farmers sold 57 percent of the rice produced (revised target 75 percent, target not achieved)
   • Nine (9) Memoranda of Understanding were signed with Instituto Superior Politécnico de Manica;
   Universidade Católica de Moçambique; UEM- Faculdade de Agronomia; UNIZAMBEZE- Faculdade de
   Agronomia; Instituto agrário de Boane; Instituto Agrário de Ribaue; Escola Profissional de Caia; Instituto
   Politécnico Armando Guebuza; and Instituto Agrário de Mocuba.( (revised target 9, target achieved)
   • 10,065 days of client days training (revised target 7,400 days, target exceeded)
   • 100 percent of the targeted producers were members of an association (revised target 90 percent, target
   exceeded)
   • 80 percent of the producers (revised target 50 percent, target exceeded) sold their produce as a group
   • 55 percent of these producers (revised target 50 percent, target exceeded were women




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 23
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)




    OUTCOMES: The outcomes achieved under Objective 1 were also relevant to this objective. Outcomes
    attributed to revised targets appear below:


        •   The project benefited 6,779 farmers (no baseline provided, revised target 6,000, target exceeded)
        •   52 percent were female (baseline not provided, revised target 52 percent, target achieved)
        •   There were 5,664 direct beneficiaries of approved subprojects (revised 5,000, target achieved)
        •   52 percent were women (baseline not provided, revised target 52 percent, target achieved)



    Revised Rating
    Substantial
PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     • to raise farm productivity in new or improved irrigation schemes in the provinces of Sofala, Manica, and
     Zambezia

    Rationale

    Theory of Change: The inputs under this objective focused on rice and vegetables (potato, cabbage, corn,
    onion, and tomato) and included the rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure and the implementation of
    safeguard instruments. A participatory approach using the National Irrigation Institute (Instituto Nacional de
    Irrigação, or INIR) and water user associations (WUAs) would identify the Irrigation infrastructure to be
    rehabilitated to enjoin ownership. Inputs also included the establishment of a catalytic funding mechanism for
    beneficiaries to support production and post production activities. These inputs led to the rehabilitation,
    construction, and operationalization of irrigation schemes, expanded the irrigated area, and fostered value
    chain development. These outputs led to an increase in the yields of certain agricultural products and
    increased cropping intensity for both rice-based and vegetable-based irrigation schemes. The outcomes
    contributed to raising farm productivity, The inputs were necessary and sufficient to achieve the outputs
    (improved irrigation infrastructure, build value chain links) and outcomes (increase irrigated area, adoption of
    production and post production technologies to increase the productivity and profitability of irrigated small
    holder agriculture. By relying on irrigation to increasing their productivity, the uncertainties from rainfed
    agriculture would be reduced.

    OUTPUTS:


        • The target yields for horticultural crops (tomato, potato, onion, and cabbage) was mostly achieved or
        exceeded. Achieved average crop yields:


                                                                                                         Page 9 of 23
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



   •    for rice of 3 tons per hectare (baseline 1 ton/ha, original target 4 tons/ha, not achieved)
   •    for tomato of 25 tons/ha (baseline 10 tons/ha, original target 20 tons/ha, exceeded)
     • for potato of 30 tons/ha (baseline 15 tons/ha, original target 25 tons/ha, exceeded)
     • for onion of 20 tons/h (baseline 10 tons/ha, original target 15 tons/ha, exceeded)
     • for cabbage of 32 tons/ha (baseline 12 tons/ha, original target 18 tons/ha, exceeded)
• Achieved crop intensity (expressed as the number of harvests per year)
     • for rice based systems, 1 harvest per year (baseline 1 per year, original target 1.5 per year, not
     achieved). The first rice schemes were completed only by August 2016. This did not allow time for
     strategic partners such as the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) and service providers to
     introduce new and improved technologies and practices.
     • for horticulture based systems, 2 harvests per year (baseline 1 per year, original target 2 per year,
     achieved). The first irrigation schemes rehabilitated under the project were completed by April 2014,
     allowing time to provide support services to beneficiaries. In addition, there was a 34 percent use of
     irrigated areas for horticulture crops (original target 24 percent, target exceeded).
• 6,619 producers with irrigation and drainage services (original target 6,000, target exceeded) of these,
2,374 were rice producers (original target 6,000, not achieved), 1,845 were horticulture producers (original
target 6,500, not achieved) and 2,400 were outgrowth producers (baseline 1, original target 3,300, not
achieved). In irrigation schemes where farmers were linked to vegetable buyers through outgrowing
contracts, farmers harvested baby corn up to three times per year (baseline, not provided, original target,
3 target achieved) and the average use of irrigated areas was 72 percent (baseline 0, original target 78
percent (of 5,500 hectares), target, almost achieved).
• 14 complementary productivity-enhancing technologies, (baseline 0, original target 5, revised target 9,
exceeded) were demonstrated to increase yield through intensification and included: technological
package for rice, land preparation, new varieties, plant density, post harvesting conservation; use of power
tillers for rice cultivation; use of gravity system for rice cultivation; new tomato varieties; improved cabbage
seeds; baby corn production; chili production; springers for horticulture; gravity systems for vegetables;
sugar cane production package; animal traction technologies (plowing); new varieties of onion, potato;
crop rotation between rice and horticulture.
• 29 Irrigation Organizations (IOs) were strengthened (original target 220, target not achieved) with 90
percent of their Operations and Maintenance (O&M) costs recovered although the ICR (Annex 1, p. 34)
noted that the exact O&M costs were still to be determined. 24 schemes were reported surveyed with
each beneficiary contributing 340 meticals per year toward the O&M costs.
• These 29 IOs were operating with women in the management committees (baseline 0, original target
220, target not achieved). The target was revised to reflect the reduced scope to cover only 32 irrigation
schemes.
• 2,588 hectares (baseline 0, original target 5,500 hectares, target not achieved) were developed and
operational with irrigation and drainage infrastructure. Of these, 1,175 hectares (original target 3,000
hectares, target not achieved) were dedicated to the rice business line while 887 hectares (original target
1,300 hectares, target not achieved ) were dedicated to the horticulture business line.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



  • In a survey by the project, 90 percent of farmers in targeted irrigation schemes adopted at least one
  technology, achieving the 90 percent target
      • only 53 percent (original target 70 percent, target not achieved) expressed satisfaction with extension
      services.
      • 14 technologies demonstrated (original target 4, target exceeded)
  • The Water Users Association (WUA) legislation was adopted, as targeted.
  • The national irrigation program was implemented as targeted, which fostered the enabling environment
  (policy and institution) for participatory management of water and irrigation infrastructure


 OUTCOMES:


  • The average yield increases for rice and horticulture (tomatoes, onion, and cabbage) expressed
  in ton/hectare was mostly achieved or exceeded as noted above.
  • The average increase in cropping intensity (expressed in the number of harvest/year) was not achieved
  for rice (original target 1.5 harvests per year) but achieved for horticulture (original target 2 harvests per
  year).
  • According to the beneficiary survey, the improved farm-level productivity achieved was facilitated by the
  increased use of agricultural technologies promoted by the project.
  • The improved access to irrigation water (expressed in terms of 2,588 hectares of irrigated lands from a
  baseline of 0, original target 5,500 hectares, target not achieved) and other complementary inputs (for
  example, fertilizers) and extension services contributed to improved farm-level yield.
  • Irrigation improved cropping intensity and stabilized the output and reduced risk of crop failure because
  of extreme weather events.
  • The institutional support (implementation of the national irrigation plan) resulted in:
      • expanded irrigation infrastructure managed by 29 WUAs (baseline 0, original target 220, target not
      achieved);
      • improved water distribution to WUAs by making this available on a regular basis;
      • improved cost recovery and better service delivery for the schemes. The exact costs of O&M have
      yet to be determined as of project closing. A survey of 24 of the 29 completed irrigation schemes found
      that, on average, 340 meticais per year was contributed toward recovering O&M costs. Better service
      delivery was not quantified beyond the anecdotal reference in the beneficiary assessment.
  • Access to mechanization and post-harvest technologies through the catalytic fund (window 2 of the
  matching grant that relaxed credit constraints) helped improve land productivity and facilitated access to
  services.



 Rating
 Modest
PHREVDELTBL


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 23
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



             PHINNERREVISEDTBL
             Objective 2 Revision 1
             Revised Objective

             This objective was not revised but the targets were. The project's achievement assessed against the revised
             Outputs and Outcomes are presented below.

             Revised Rationale

             The Theory of Change was not revised.

             OUTPUTS:


                  •  6,619 producers were provided irrigation and drainage services (revised target 5,000, target exceeded)
                  •  29 Irrigation Organizations (IOs) were strengthened (revised target 33, target almost achieved)
                  • 90 percent of their O&M costs recovered, although the ICR indicated (Annex 1, p.34) that the exact O&M
                  costs were still to be determined at project closing.
                  • 29 IOs included women in their management committees (revised target 32, target almost achieved)
                  • 2,588 hectares (revised target 3,000 hectares, target not achieved) were developed and operational with
                  irrigation and drainage infrastructure
                  • 1,175 hectares (revised target 1,700 hectares, target not achieved) were dedicated to rice
                  • 887 hectares (revised target 800 hectares, target exceeded) were dedicated to horticulture




             OUTCOMES: The Outcomes under Objective 2 above were also relevant to this Objective. The Outcomes
             based on the revised targets are below:


                  • The improved access to irrigation water (expressed in terms of 2,588 hectares of irrigated lands
                  (baseline 0, revised target 3,000 hectares, target not achieved) and other complementary inputs (e.g.,
                  fertilizers) and extension services contributed to improved farm-level yields.
                  • The institutional support (implementation of the national irrigation plan) resulted in expanded irrigation
                  infrastrucrure managed by 29 WUAs (baseline 0, revised target 32, target almost achieved).


             With outcomes almost achieved, efficacy of this objective, with revised targets, was rated modest.


             Revised Rating
             Modest

PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

                                                                                                                    Page 12 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)




The objectives were not revised, but the key outcome targets were significantly reduced and a split evaluation is
therefore warranted. US$10 million was cancelled in 2016, and exchange rate losses reached about US$5 million,
the scope of activities was significantly reduced (area under irrigation, number of project beneficiaries, number of
producers with irrigation and drainage services, number of IOs strengthened. The efficacy of Objective 1 was
modest, the revised Objective 1 was substantial; Objective 2 was modest and the revised one was modest as
well. The overall efficacy rating was modest.




Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary reason
Modest                                                     Low achievement

5. Efficiency


 Economic and financial efficiency. At appraisal, the economic and financial analysis (EFA) conducted
 established an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 16.8 percent and an economic net present value
 (ENPV) of US$12.30 million.The discount rate used at appraisal was 12% (explained in the PAD as the
 opportunity cost of capital, PAD, paragraph 79). A sensitivity analysis showed that the ENPV turned negative
 if the same yields, same utilization rate of irrigation schemes, and number of production cycles observed in
 the last agricultural season was replicated over the rest of the time horizon. The ENPV also turned negative if
 the number of production cycles per year remained unchanged or if a 20-year time horizon was used.

 At completion, the EIRR was estimated at 8.1 percent with an ENPV of US$13.70 million. The same
 methodology was used at appraisal. The discount rate used was 5.5%. Following the World Bank's 2016
 guidance note, this discount rate was obtained by multiplying the forecasted real per capital GDP growth rate
 at project closing of 3% by an elasticity of the marginal utility of consumption of two (ICR, paragraph 38 and
 footnote 15).

 Operational efficiency. The project completed most of the planned activities except for three irrigation
 schemes in Mziva, Acaboco, and Chiverano, because of cost overruns. These irrigation schemes
 equivalent to 574 hectares were instead to be completed under the follow-on Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture
 and Market Access Project (Projecto de Desenvolvimento de Irrigação de Pequena Escala e Acesso ao
 Mercado or IRRIGA). Other challenges that affected operational efficiency included the depreciation of the
 SDR resulting in a loss of US$5 million, and the cancellation of US$10 million to leverage additional
 resources for an emergency project in response to the floods. There were implementation delays beginning
 with a delay in loan effectiveness, an additional 18-month delay in recruiting service providers of project
 implementation; a one year delay in implementation because the 2015 floods made sites inaccessible (ICR,
 paragraph 52); delays in implementing the rice business line due to staff turnover; and delayed completion
 of the operations and maintenance (O&M) manual for the WUAs.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



Delayed completion and handover of rice irrigation schemes contributed to the lower than expected
performance of the rice based system. Rehabilitation of rice irrigation schemes took longer than the other two
production systems and the first rice scheme was completed in August 2016, a year later than the time
envisaged at appraisal. The horticulture irrigation schemes were completed two years (in April 2014) before
the rice schemes were completed. There was a two-year completion lag for the horticulture irrigation schemes
compared to the appraisal estimate. The low performance of the rice irrigation schemes was due to:


   • technical problems with the pumping system in two of the eight rice schemes;
   • inadequate fertilizer usage. Farmers in the rice-based production system did not support the purchase of
   fertilizers because Window 1 grant was concluded before the completion of the rice schemes. Overall, the
   yield of the rice improved relative to the baseline because the beneficaires were getting inputs from out-
   growers or other means.
   • late completion of the schemes, which translated to low rate of utilization of available irrigated areas.




There were also significant contract management issues such as administrative delays in approving contracts
over US$1 million; absentee contractors; abandoned contracts that needed to be re-bid; and cancelled
contracts (see Item 10 (b) below). At closing, the Project Management and Coordination component had
overspent the original allocation of US$4.3 million by 75% due to cost overruns and to fund the preparatory
work for the follow-on IRRIGA project. The latter was not identified for funding at appraisal.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                     Rate
                                                          Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                     Available?
                                                                                   60.00
Appraisal                                                16.80
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                   63.90
ICR Estimate                                             8.10
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


The relevance of objectives was rated substantial. Efficacy of objective 1 was rated modest and that of objective
2 was rated substantial. The overall rating of efficacy was rated modest because of low achievement of target

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 23
          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



outcomes. Efficiency was rated modest. With modest shortcomings in achieving its objective, the outcome is
rated MU.

The ICR presented a split rating because there was a significant reduction in the amount of resources made
available to the project. During the second restructuring, when 62% of the funds were disbursed, US$10 million
of the IDA credit was cancelled. In addition, there was an unfavorable SDR exchange rate loss of about US$5
million. These factors resulted in a restructuring that called for reallocating resources among three of the four
project components and amending the corresponding outcome targets.


            Rating Dimension              Original Objective   Revised Objective
     Relevance of Objective                   Substantial         Substantial
     Efficacy
     Objective 1 Market Integration           Modest              Substantial
     Objective 2 Productivity                 Modest               Modest
     Overall Efficacy                         Modest              Substantial
     Efficiency                               Modest               Modest
     Outcome Rating                             MU                   MS
     Outcome Rating Value                         3                    4
     Amount Disbursed (US$ million)        US$43.06 million     US$28.28 million
     Disbursement (%)                          62.10                37.90
     Weight Value                               1.86                 1.52
     Total Weight                                                    3.38
     Overall Outcome Rating                                          MU




a.       Outcome Rating
         Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


The following posed substantial threats to development outcomes:


     •Technical and Financial Risks: The MTR noted that there was a need to protect the canal
     embankment/banks, particularly when the canal is high in relation to the fields. Parts of the canal
     embankment were being eroded, deteriorated by cattle trampling, cultivation of fields too close to the canals,
     and crossing of the canals by people and cattle. There was also a question whether or not O&M costs could


                                                                                                      Page 15 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



  be recovered from operating the irrigation schemes. Mitigation measures included a phased approach in
  implementing the various interventions so as to adopt corrective measures in subsequent activities. In
  addition, the legal framework adopted for WUAs outlined cost recovery features to support meeting the O&M
  requirements of irrigation schemes. The follow-on project to PROIRRI was anticipated to mitigate these risks
  by continuing to provide financial, technical, and institutional support to the WUAs and INIR.
  • Environmental Risks and Exposure to Natural Disasters: The macroeconomic and weather risks
  remained as threats to the sustainability of project outcomes. Although access to irrigation demonstrated
  resilience in the face of adverse macroeconomic and weather shocks, the risk of flooding could prevent
  access to the schemes or cause destruction to the embankments. Mitigation measures included remedial
  measures such as the hiring of an Environmental Safeguard specialist to support the PCT in areas of soil
  erosion control, rehabilitation of access roads and desilting canals. An independent environmental audit was
  also recommended to evaluate the implementation of remedial measures and the Environmental and Social
  Management Plans (ESMPs). A Terms of Reference for the audit had been completed at project closing for
  implementation under the follow-up project to PROIRRI to mitigate these risks.
  • Governance and Institutional Risks: Sustaining the capacity of INIR to provide overall governance and
  equal distribution of water to farmers’ fields posed a risk to the project outcome. For example, the operation
  manual was delivered late resulting in delays in extension services to the farmer groups. To mitigate these
  risks, the Government has developed a National Irrigation Plan (2017-2042), which sets out irrigation
  priorities and assumes continued support for strengthening INIR. Strengthening the INIR was also included in
  the follow-on project.
  • Social and Stakeholder Ownership Risk: Major risks to development outcome are related to the
  beneficiary’s capacity to maintain the irrigation systems. However, support to WUAs envisaged under the
  IRRIGA project could contribute to the sustainability of outcomes after project closing, namely: (a)
  strengthened institutional capacity in the agricultural sector and within INIR for governance of irrigation
  infrastructure, (b) strengthened technical and managerial skills of producers and producer organizations in
  the use of improved inputs and production practices including O&M for the irrigation infrastructure, (c)
  improved access to productive infrastructure and other complementary inputs such as access to finance and
  supply chain logistics; and (d) increased collaboration among public and private sector actors.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  The project was aligned with both the Government's and the World Bank's development priorities. Lessons
  learned from prior similar operations (PAD, paragraphs 43-45) informed project design. These included
  broad-based stakeholder consultation, demand-driven and commitment-based support from beneficiaries,
  and an implementation approach that followed an Irrigation Site Development Path adapted to the needs of
  particular business lines such as those of rice, horticulture, and outgrower schemes. Project components
  were designed to achieve the PDO. Beneficiary contributions and local financing were available. The
  project's Theory of Change was based on assisting small holder producers from the three provinces of

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



  Sofala, Manica, and Zambezia to increase their agricultural productivity and improve their access to
  markets (by rehabilitating irrigation infrastructure) and to provide access to complementary inputs and
  technologies (improved seed, fertilizers, machinery, and extension services). Small holders would be
  integrated to markets and would have access to services by strengthening their vertical (out-grower
  schemes) and horizontal (farmers organization) coordination. Matching grants would build value chain links
  (ICR paragraph 4). Individual farmers and collective action were expected to achieve income gains. Rural
  poverty was expected to be reduced.

  Working through the WUAs to manage new or rehabilitated irrigation infrastructure followed the new
  approach to irrigation management. The participatory approach was used to identify, plan, and rehabilitate
  irrigation infrastructure to promote ownership and sustainability. Design included efforts to target women
  and address inequality in access to productive asset, decision making, and participation in economic
  activities that were prevalent in Mozambique. Relevant risks were identified but not all were adequately
  addressed. For example, (i) the lack of capacity of farmers, private sector service providers, WUAs, and
  INIR to deliver the project; (ii) the lack of capacity of WUAs to operate and intensify their plots using pump
  irrigation systems; (iii) the lack of a safeguard specialist in the PCT given the safeguard risks identified as
  well as a lack of an irrigation engineer. The ICR also indicated that the risks associated with cost overruns
  and cost escalation were unforeseen (ICR, paragraph 51).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  The World Bank task teams carried out implementation support missions at least twice a year, which
  included key technical, fiduciary, and safeguards specialists from World Bank staff as well as external
  consultants. The World Bank supervision focused on development impact that led the task team to
  restructure the project toward the end of the project period and recommend the cancellation of contracts
  that were not likely to be completed by project closing. The project team clarified in an April 25, 2019 email
  that there were also lack of resources by then to complete the contracts. The team was generally candid
  and reported issues faced by the project. In one instance, when the project was experiencing
  implementation delays due to slow PCT staffing, the team worked with the PCT to hire consultants to
  mobilize farmers, identify irrigation schemes, and initiate technical designs (ICR, paragraph 53). After the
  2015 floods, which limited access to the project sites, it became apparent that the Task Team had
  overestimated the capacity of the private sector providers to help implement the project activities. The ICR
  also noted that the farmers were not sensitized to their roles in the operations and maintenance (O&M)
  needs of the irrigation schemes. The task team belatedly addressed compliance with environmental and
  safeguard issues, which the team rated Moderately Unsatisfactory at closing. These were significant
  shortcomings in proactively identifying opportunities to resolve threats in meeting the PDO that were within
  the control of the Bank team, the Government, and the implementing entity. However,adequate transition
  arrangements were evident in the use of project funds to prepare the follow-on project.




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



  The overall rating of the World Bank Performance is Moderately Unsatisfactory. There were minor
  shortcomings in the quality at entry and significant shortcomings in the quality of supervision. These
  shortcomings included inadequate mitigating measures to respond to the high risk of delivering the project,
  such as the overly optimistic assumptions of the capacity of beneficiaries and of the implementation agency,
  e.g., irrigation engineering capacity, safeguard compliance capacity, and responding to implementation
  challenges through the use of just-in-time technical assistance interventions, duly acknowledged among the
  lessons learned from this operation.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The Theory of Change was sound. Key activities led to outputs that led to outcomes although not all activities
  were needed to produce the expected outcomes (e.g., implementation of the national fruit fly surveillance plan).
  The PDO itself was specific, and the PDO indicators were clear, measurable, and directly linked to the
  two objectives (market integration and productivity). The project design included baseline data. The Results
  Framework design was adequate, and outlined the frequency, type of instrument, and responsibility for the data
  collection. The disaggregation of some indicators such as those based on gender was useful to assess project
  impact on female participation in the project. The Results Framework captured the expected project outputs
  and outcomes. Some indicators could have been better defined. For example, lumping the matching grant
  indicator with the production and value chain risks did not allow for distinguishing possible overlaps. In the case
  of the intermediate indicator that measured recovery of O&M, the end-of-project target proved to be ambitious
  even though farmers were now more aware of their role in O&M. M&E design remained project specific and did
  not reflect that this was institutionally embedded in INIR, the implementing agency's management information
  system (MIS).



b. M&E Implementation

  Data from project activities, outputs, and outcomes were collected regularly. These were captured in progress
  reports and updated both the Results Framework and the World Bank's Implementation Status and Results
  Reports (ISRs). Occasional delays in communicating data between service providers and M&E staff were
  reported. Poor performance of the M&E service provider in data collection during the initial stage of the
  project was noted. Over time, M&E adjustments were made to correct weaknesses in the monitoring of
  project activities such as in ensuring the timeliness of reporting and quality control, and in counting farmers as

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



  direct beneficiaries and their households as indirect beneficiaries. The Project implemented a baseline survey
  and an end line survey. The project design included a Management Information System (MIS) platform, and
  in its April 25, 2019 email, the project team confirmed that the project MIS was not completed as envisaged.



c. M&E Utilization

  The PCT, the World Bank task team, INIR, and the Government monitored the status of subprojects, tracked
  progress of the project, and provided evidence of project outcomes using information from the project’s M&E
  system,. This data was used to inform adjustments made to the Results Framework in the 2016 restructuring.
  For example, the project reported that 14 technologies were in use prior to the restructuring and
  the information from the use of these technologies were used to revise the targets during that restructuring.
  The yield of horticulture guided the revision made to the indicators measuring their productivity and cropping
  intensity. M&E Information regarding cropping intensity data were used to assess the productivity
  improvement effect of the reforms implemented providing evidence that the Agriculture Development Policy
  Operation (AGDPO) objectives were achieved. The M&E data informed the design of the follow-on work.

  With moderate weaknesses in design, M&E implementation, and its use were nevertheless sufficient to
  assess that the objectives were achieved and links to the results chain were sufficiently established.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  Environmental safeguards. The project was classified as Category B and triggered the following
  Operational Safeguard policies: an Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP
  4.04), and Pest Management (OD/BP 4.09). The Government prepared an Environmental and Social
  Management Framework (ESMF), an Integrated Pest Management Plan, and a Strategic Environmental
  and Social Assessment (SESA) with standard methods and procedures for site-specific Environmental and
  Social Management Plans, (ESMPs). The documents included the institutional arrangements required for
  screening, implementing, and monitoring and evaluation of all selected irrigation sites, feeder roads and
  beneficiaries’ sub-projects and their locations. Provincial Environmental Directorates with a dedicated
  environmental focal person implemented these safeguard policies. In addition, the project developed and
  implemented detailed safeguard training and capacity building program for the WUAs, and other key actors.
  However, the PCT did not have a safeguard staff early on. The subproject’s screening and subsequent site-
  specific instruments (ESMPs) were not adequately implemented in schemes under constructions. Some
  remedial measures were implemented but not all were completed before the project closing date. These


                                                                                                  Page 19 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



  remedial actions included: (i) recruitment of an environmental safeguard specialist to support the PCT; (ii)
  capacity building on water management to beneficiaries and other stakeholders; (iii) soil erosion control; (iv)
  rehabilitation of access roads; and (v) desilting of the canal. The PCT partnered with GIZ to train
  counterparts on the implementation of ESMPs in project irrigation areas from July to September 2018. The
  Bank team recommended an independent environmental audit to evaluate the implementation of these
  remedial measures as well as the project specific ESMPs. At closing, a TOR for the audit was prepared.
  The audit was implemented by the follow-on Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access (Projecto
  de Desenvolvimento de Irrigação de Pequena Escala e Acesso ao Mercado or IRRIGA) Project.

  Social safeguards. The project triggered the following Operational Safeguard policies: Physical Cultural
  Resources (OP/BP 4.36), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP4.12). The project prepared the ESM, a
  Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs). A social safeguard
  specialist at the provincial level was designated to support the PCT towards the end of the project.
  Compliance with social safeguards policies was rated ‘Moderately Unsatisfactory’ at closing because
  of issues related to inadequate observance of basic health and safety requirements in civil works, although
  no injury was reported. The ICR noted that there was no Grievance Resource Mechanism (GRM) in
  place but informal conflict practices were observed during supervision mission. The grievance system
  worked through the associations and local agriculture offices but was not registered or communicated to the
  PCT. The works in Acaboco were not completed before the project closed because of a delayed start. The
  600 Acaboco beneficiaries were temporarily relocated 4.5 km away from the Acaboco site. An audit was
  recommended to assess the compliance with OP 4.12. Compliance was assured under the follow on
  IRRIGA project (ICR, paragraph 62).

  Other safeguards. The project also triggered the following Operational Safeguard policies: Safety of Dams
  (OP/BP 4.37), and Projects on International Waters (OP/BP 7.50) . The construction or rehabilitation of any
  small dam, earth reservoir, or weir were in accordance with the Small Dams Guidelines, which included the
  provisions in the Regulamento de Pequenas Barragems (Decree #47/2009: Regulamento de Pequenas
  Barragems, approved by the Council of Ministers and published in the Official Journal I/40, October 7,
  2009). Also included were the generic guidelines in the United Nations' Food and Agriculture Office
  (FAO) 2010 Technical Guide for Small Earth Dams. The Government sent a Riparian Notification to the
  following countries - for the Pungoe and Buzi River basin: Zimbabwe; for the Zambezi River: Botswana,
  Malawi, Namibia, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. The Government did not receive any objection to the
  activities planned under the project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial Management. The overall FM rating for the project was rated Moderately Satisfactory in the ICR.
  The project submitted the quarterly unaudited interim financial reports (IFRs) on a regular basis. However, the
  gap between commitment and available funds noticed during the last implementation support mission of the
  project indicated some problems with budget monitoring and implementation. At closing, there were no overdue


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



  IFRs and in general audit opinions were unqualified, except for the 2011 audit, which had been satisfactorily
  resolved, according to the ICR (paragraph 66). Some compliance issues were identified, including:


    • Difference between the Interim Financial Report (IFR) and Client Connection regarding reported cumulative
    advances and cumulative expenditures which were discussed but were not completed under the project
    • Missing or incomplete documentation for some transactions such as receipts of goods and services, guias
    de marcha, delivery notes, and mission reports.
    • Late submission of audited financial statements for the period ending December 2017




  Procurement. A post-procurement review for FY18 reported generally satisfactory findings. However, there
  were procurement issues related to contract management and late procurement of service providers, which
  delayed project implementation. Contract management issues included the lack of capacity by the PCT to
  review engineering design, contractors abandoning sites that then required a renewed bidding process,
  absentee contractors, and rebidding because of low competition. At least two contracts were cancelled
  because they could not be completed by project closing. Implementation delays could also be attributed to
  the processing time for the administrative court’s approval of contracts above US$1.0 million. Supervision
  missions and reports of the ex-post procurement reviews consistently led to the preparation of action plans
  designed to strengthen procurement functions. No fraud or corruption issues were detected during
  implementation.


c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                       IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                              Moderately                Moderately
Outcome                                                                           ---
                              Unsatisfactory            Unsatisfactory
                              Moderately                Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                  ---
                              Unsatisfactory            Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                Substantial               Substantial               ---
Quality of ICR                                          Substantial               ---

12. Lessons


                                                                                                   Page 21 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)




The ICR offered the following four lessons from the operations that may benefit future similar projects
(paragraph 72):

1. Forming fully functional and self-sustaining WUAs requires time. Project design with short time frames
for intervention are unlikely to result in effective institutions. For example, in India, IEG observed that continued
financial, technical, and institutional support for the WUAs over a period of three years would lead to an
acceptable level of self-sustainability to be followed by continuous support to WUAs. The INIR capacity has to
be strengthened to monitor, support, and train WUAs as needed. This lesson informed the design of the follow-
on IRRIGA project

2. The overall economic viability of investments in irrigation requires a suitable crop mix and
acceptable utilization rate of irrigated land. Irrigated lands with a mix of high-value and staple crops ensure
returns on investment in irrigation. High-value crops are more profitable than staples such as rice. The EIRRs at
project closing would depend on the diversity of the cropping pattern. The rate of use of arable areas with
irrigation and drainage services has a direct correlation with the profitability of irrigation infrastructure.

3. Technical Assistance (TA) for nascent organizations combined with adequate skill sets of staff are
critical for project delivery. For example, in the case of this project, strategic service providers came late. But
hands-on TA made a difference in improving the implementation capacity. The project also had initial delays
and cost escalations due to a lack of technical competence to review engineering design and compliance with
safeguard issues. Technical reviews and approval of engineering designs were not thoroughly done and
resulted in cost escalation for scheme construction.

4. Investments in market-driven irrigation could facilitate the commercialization of smallholder farmer
organizations. Investments in irrigation infrastructure need to recognize market driven opportunities. When the
market signaled that the high cropping intensity among horticulture and out-growers production systems led to
better integration of the producers with inputs and outputs markets compared to rice producers, small farmers
switched from growing rice to these horticultural products.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR was concise, followed OPCS guidelines, and was internally consistent. The ICR was results oriented
and provided candid assessments of shortcomings in design, supervision, and implementation. Numerous
studies were noted throughout the report and robust annexes supported the quality of the evidence and its


                                                                                                       Page 22 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Devt (P107598)



analysis. Evidence was cross referenced throughout the report, reflecting internal consistency. The four
lessons were derived from the evidence highlighted by project operations. These lessons were linked to the
narrative and the ratings. There was only a minor shortcoming in presenting a complete picture, particularly
with the difficulties faced in safeguard compliance and the delayed start.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 23 of 23
