     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Governance and Competitiveness DPO(P148099)



                                                                               Report Number : ICRR0021447

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P148099                                  Governance and Competitiveness DPO

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Kyrgyz Republic                          Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-58660,IDA-D1240                      01-Sep-2017                                       23,174,775.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Jul-2016                              01-Sep-2017

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          24,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           24,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       23,174,775.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judyth L. Twigg            Robert Mark Lacey           Malathi S. Jayawickrama       IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The Development Policy Operation's (DPO's) objectives, as stated in the Program Document (PD, p. i), were to
   support the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic in: (1) improving public sector governance through reforms
   aimed at enhancing public sector integrity, increasing the quality of public services, and enhancing energy
   sector governance; and (2) strengthening private sector competitiveness through measures to facilitate
   trade, improve the business environment, and promote greater connectivity.




                                                                                                Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Governance and Competitiveness DPO(P148099)




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   The DPO contained two pillars (PD, p. 12). The first pillar, Improving Public Sector Governance, was
   expected to address key sources of both grand and petty corruption, and to contribute to an
   environment more conducive to private sector investment and growth. It focused on the introduction of
   conflict of interest legislation to improve the integrity of government decisions, implementation of an earlier-
   passed law on public procurement to enhance public procurement practices, adoption of public service
   standards to increase the quality of public services, and a number of measures to increase the transparency,
   accountability, and rules-based governance of the energy sector.

   The second pillar, Strengthening Private Sector Competitiveness, was expected to enable Kyrgyz
   businesses to grow and create jobs by improving the business climate, enhancing connectivity, and boosting
   exports by capitalizing on the country's membership in the Eurasian Economic Union.




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   The DPO was supported by an IDA credit of US$ 13.2 million and an IDA grant of US$ 10.8 million, all of
   which disbursed in a single tranche. According to the ICR (p. 17), all the required Prior Actions were
   satisfied in a timely manner, and there were no delays in effectiveness or disbursement. The operation was
   approved on July 7, 2016, became effective on September 1, 2016, and closed as scheduled on September
   1, 2017. It was intended to be the first in a two-part series, but the second part (DPO2), anticipated for mid-
   2017, was cancelled as its indicative triggers were not satisfied (ICR, p. 12). The ICR does not state
   whether the indicative triggers were translated into prior actions for DPO2.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  At appraisal, weak governance and rule of law were perceived as the most binding constraints to growth and
  investment in the Kyrgyz Republic (PD, p. 2). Domestic political upheaval in 2010, followed by economic
  contraction in Russia and a slowdown in Kazakhstan (the two principal destinations for Kyrgyz exports), had
  adversely impacted the Kyrgyz economy. Remittance flows were also affected; the Kyrgyz economy is one of
  the most remittance-dependent in the world (remittances comprised over 35% of gross domestic product in
  2017), with Russia and Kazakhstan the primary sources of remittances. The share of the Kyrgyz population
  living below the poverty line had been largely stable since 2012 at around 35%, with the poor reportedly
  bearing a disproportionate share of the cost of corruption. Long-term growth and poverty reduction were seen
  as dependent on the country's ability to stimulate private sector investment and development, as well as the
  promotion of exports to the Eurasian Economic Union (EEU). The operation's objectives were highly
  relevant in this context.


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Governance and Competitiveness DPO(P148099)




  The objectives were also highly relevant to government and Bank strategy, both at appraisal and closing. The
  operation supported the two main themes of the country's National Sustainable Development Strategy (2013-
  17): sustainable governance and sustainable economic development. These themes continue in the
  successor document, the National Development Program 2018-22. The objectives were also responsive to
  the government's Public Sector Reform Roadmap (2014, updated in 2015), focused on measures to improve
  the integrity of government decisions, increase the quality of services provided to citizens and businesses,
  and reduce revenue losses caused by corruption in key sectors such as energy; and the national Private
  Sector Development Program (2015), which focused on taxation, business inspection, and information and
  communications technology.

  The objectives were fully aligned with the World Bank Group's Country Partnership Strategy at appraisal (FY
  2014-17), which focused on reducing poverty and building shared prosperity by supporting public
  administration and service delivery reforms, improving the business and investment climate, and
  strengthening stewardship of natural resources and physical infrastructure. The Country Partnership
  Framework for FY 2019-22 continues to emphasize private sector-led and export-oriented growth as well as
  public-sector efficiency and accountability, with a particular focus on corruption and rule of law, energy, and
  connectivity.



  Rating
  High

b. Relevance of Design
  The policy actions supported by the operation were mapped to achievement of the objectives, with, for the
  most part, the choice of specific actions on governance and competitiveness well chosen to achieve impact
  on those objectives. Actions such as the introduction of conflict of interest legislation, implementation of a
  Public Procurement Law, and the adoption of public service standards, as well as measures to increase the
  transparency and accountability of the energy sector, could be expected to address key sources of both
  grand and petty corruption, and therefore contribute to enhanced public sector governance and a more
  conducive environment for private sector investment and growth. Competitiveness reforms, with specific
  actions on promoting trade, streamlining the tax code, and improving connectivity were intended to facilitate
  business and job growth while capitalizing on the country's membership in the EEU to boost exports. The
  PD (pp. 26-27) explicitly outlined the analytic underpinnings for each prior action; for example, the second
  prior action, to establish an Independent Complaint Review Commission for public procurement, was based
  on the findings of a 2012 Country Fiduciary System Review Report and a 2014 Public Expenditure and
  Financial Accountability (PEFA) Assessment. The DPO was to be implemented in tandem with technical
  assistance (financed by several other concurrent World Bank projects) on public procurement,
  investment/competitiveness, tariff-setting methodologies, and public financial management capacity-
  building.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Governance and Competitiveness DPO(P148099)



       However, the causal link between prior actions and expected broad outcomes was not obvious for some of
       the planned business climate and energy sector reforms. For example, although energy tariff reform was
       clearly connected to financial viability of the sector, the linkages to sector governance are less
       apparent. Furthermore, it is not clear that amending the risk criteria for business inspections was adequate
       to produce significant impact. The prior action on simplifying the Tax Code introduced streamlined
       procedures for value-added tax (VAT) refunds for trustworthy taxpayers without adequately defining
       "trustworthy." Overall, the complexity of the operation far outweighed existing capacity, with the number of
       implementing institutions "unduly large and burdensome for coordination": the Ministry of Finance as the key
       counterpart, the cabinet of ministers, the Ministries of Economy, Energy, and Health, the State Personnel
       Service, the National Security Council, the Office of the Prosecutor-General, the Procurement Agency, the
       State Tax Authority, and the State Communications Agency (ICR, p. 22). This coordination burden
       exceeded both the technical capacity and political authority of the implementing agencies, particularly with
       regard to the conflict of interest and energy sector tariff reforms.

       The macroeconomic policy framework was deemed to be adequate for the operation (PD, p. 10). The
       November 2015 International Monetary Fund (IMF) Staff Report for the 2015 Article IV Consultation was, on
       balance, favorable, albeit with some reservations. A satisfactory performance in the first half of 2015 under
       the Kyrgyz Extended Credit Facility (ECF) arrangement was followed by fiscal slippages in the run-up to the
       October elections and a delay in adopting the Banking Code, a key measure to strengthen central bank
       independence and the bank resolution framework. The combined impact of a large public investment
       program and currency depreciation raised the public debt ratio markedly. Depreciation posed risks for the
       otherwise well capitalized financial sector, though high dollarization lessened these risks. The business
       environment was weak. However, the ECF-supported program remained broadly on track, and according to
       the PD (p. 10), the Authorities were committed to consolidation in 2016 to offset the 2015 fiscal slippages
       and to keep debt on a sustainable path. They had also agreed to introduce compulsory measures to ensure
       financial sector stability until the Banking Code became operational.



       Rating
       Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     Improve public sector governance

    Rationale
    The results chain for this objective reasonably held that actions on public integrity and public service quality
    were key to improving overall public sector governance; these reforms addressed the key drivers of poor


                                                                                                          Page 4 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Governance and Competitiveness DPO(P148099)



governance in the country. Given the centrality of corruption, these focal areas were logically positioned to
reduce conflict of interest. Reducing wasteful energy subsidies and increasing the transparency of the
energy price-setting process were intended to ensure cost recovery and improve the financial viability of the
sector. The linkages specifically between energy subsidies and governance (transparency, accountability,
and rules-based decision processes), however, were not clear, and the results indicators for improved sector
governance were instead focused on financial viability.

The government submitted a new Law on Conflict of Interest (prior action) to increase transparency with
respect to the private interests of public officials and establish incentives to prevent conflict of interest. The
law required public officials to declare personal interests together with asset and income declarations, as
well as the creation of Commissions on Ethics in various ministries, departments, and agencies, and
advisory mechanisms to support public officials to help prevent conflicts of interest from
arising. However, the law was not approved by the Legislature until December 2017 and did not enter into
force until June of 2018. A key set of secondary legislation has not yet been issued, with the exception of a
law pertaining to receipt of gifts. There have been no institutional changes requiring comprehensive
submission of declarations or systematic verification of declarations, with the Ministry of Economy, State
Personnel Service, and Office of the Prosecutor General still discussing the details of a verification
system. As a result, the percentage of declarations of personal interests of public officials that were verified
by Commissions on Ethics to identify potential conflicts of interests remained at zero, not reaching the
outcome target of 15% of all filed declarations (focusing on high-level officials and high-risk positions).

The government enacted implementation measures for the landmark 2015 Public Procurement Law,
specifically the establishment of an Independent Complaints Review Commission for public
procurement (prior action) and operationalization of the Public Procurement Department as an effective
regulatory body. More broadly, public service standards (time-frame for service delivery, locations where
services are delivered, standards of conduct for public officials) were introduced for at least 90 public
services, including in the key areas of public education, social security and employment, and identification,
passport, and registration services (prior action). As a result, the PEFA score for competition, value for
money, and controls in public procurement improved from B in 2014 to B+ in 2018, meeting the target of
B+. However, the last official PEFA exercise was conducted in 2014 and the next is slated for 2020, such
that the 2018 achievement was derived from a self-assessment commissioned by the Ministry of Finance
and undertaken by the Procurement Agency with support from Bank staff. The ICR does not provide details
on the methodology used for this self-assessment, and the timing draws into question the appropriateness of
using a PEFA score as a results indicator.

In addition, the Graft Index (number of reported bribes as a share of the number of reported
transactions) was 21% in 2015, and the outcome target was set at 10%. The ICR reports that this Index has
not been updated since 2015 but does not explain why; again, the appropriateness of the indicator is called
into question. The ICR instead reports on four other indicators to capture the corruption dimension of public
service quality: an index of the population's confidence in public services (increase from 22.0 in 2015 to 30.7
in 2017); an index of public views of corruption in executive government authorities and in local government
(increase from 10.8 in 2015 to 20.2 in 2017); an index evaluating state executive bodies and local authorities


                                                                                                        Page 5 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Governance and Competitiveness DPO(P148099)



 (increase from 23.5 in 2015 to 31.1 in 2017); and an index of personal trust of citizens in the state (increase
 from 31.6 in 2015 to 40.6 in 2017). However, the ICR does not provide information on how these indices
 were constructed or the reliability of the data that fed into them, and therefore it is not possible to interpret
 these results.

 There was partial revision of the tariff-setting methodology for heating companies as a first step toward
 transparent heating pricing, reflecting some cost factors (prior action). As a result, cash collections have
 improved. The amount of cash collected per kWh of power supplied to the domestic market rose from 0.61
 KGS/kWh in 2015 to 1.06 KGS/kWh, a 74% increase that surpassed the target of a 25% increase. The
 amount of cash collected per Gcal of heat generated by the Bishkek Central Heating Plans increased from
 394.5 KGS/Gcal in 2015 to 847.4 KGS/Gcal in 2017, an increase of 115% that surpassed the target of a
 48% increase. Improvements have been made in the allocation of cash within the sector according to a
 rules-based framework, but there was little movement on regulatory reforms to ensure increased
 accountability by power and heating companies, build consumer confidence, and encourage acceptance of
 reforms. A new case settlement mechanism between electricity generation, transmission, and distribution
 companies was adopted (prior action) to ensure that cash allocations were automatic and consistent with
 tariffs approved by the State Regulatory Agency of the Fuel and Energy Complex. However, there have
 been delays in the establishment of a medium-term tariff program that would be adequate to eventually
 achieve financial viability of the sector; according to the ICR (p. 17), this was the principal reason that the
 second PDO of the series was cancelled. The new government that took office in April 2018 announced an
 indefinite suspension of tariff increases, signaling weakened commitment to reform (ICR, p. 18).

 A performance reporting and monitoring framework (covering number of breakdowns, amount of heat
 generated in the districts, and number of complaints) was adopted for the heating sector (prior
 action). Bishkek Teposet, the largest heating company as measured by number of customers, adopted such
 a framework. The ICR reports that key performance indicators were disclosed quarterly, meeting the target,
 but it is not clear whether this achievement applies to the entire sector or just to Bishkek Teposet. The
 country's two other heating companies, which cover regions outside the capital, were expected to introduce
 the framework in 2018; it is not known whether this has taken place as planned.

 In summary, while there has been some progress on the complaints review mechanism for public
 procurement and service delivery standards, the implementation of the conflict of interest law has been slow,
 with uncertain ownership of reform and insufficient effort by the government to establish procedures and
 clarify responsibilities, and progress on energy sector reform has been fitful. Given the centrality of
 corruption concerns and the energy sector to public sector governance, achievement of this objective is
 rated Modest.



 Rating
 Modest
PHREVDELTBL



                                                                                                        Page 6 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Governance and Competitiveness DPO(P148099)


PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     Strengthen private sector competitiveness

    Rationale
    The results chain for this objective held that legislative and regulatory actions on export taxes, social security
    tax collection, food quality, and Internet connectivity would lead to gains in competitiveness. The PD (pp. 24-
    26) described weak information technology infrastructure and connectivity as important constraints to private
    sector activity, particularly in the services sector, which was seen as central to diversification efforts,
    increased value-added, and the creation of more productive jobs. Reducing the tax and inspection burdens
    on businesses was logically connected to improved business climate. For example, because of the
    requirement for entrepreneurs to make tax and social security (Social Fund) contribution payments
    separately, enterprises had been spending an average of 5.6 days per year making separate payments to
    the Social Fund. A pilot program for transfer of social security collections to the State Tax Service was
    intended to facilitate removal of this burden. Similarly, Enterprise Surveys indicated that the inspection
    process was unsystematic and opaque, resulting in needless additional transactions between firms and
    government officials and creating room for rent-seeking. The proposed reforms were intended to allow for
    less-frequent inspections for businesses with lower levels of risk. It is unlikely, however, that these changes
    in risk criteria would have been powerful enough to produce a meaningful boost in competitiveness,
    especially for the desired export markets, as it is unclear whether the new standards would provide sufficient
    meaningful information to purchasers and consumers to lower the transaction costs of purchasing Kyrgyz
    goods. Furthermore, 2013 Enterprise Surveys data showed that business owners and top managers were
    more concerned about political instability and the large number of firms choosing the informal sector than
    about any of the areas covered by the project
    (http://www.enterprisesurveys.org/data/exploreeconomies/2013/kyrgyz-republic).

    Actions to improve competitiveness for exporters through the abolition of sales taxes and improved technical
    and safety standards in food production were achieved. The tax code was amended to abolish the sales tax
    for exporters (prior action), reducing compliance burdens and double taxation (in both the Kyrgyz Republic
    and the destination country, as the sales tax, unlike the VAT, was not refunded). Improved safety standards
    were intended to boost competitiveness of the food industry, with an eye toward export to the EEU and
    beyond. The number of firms with certified Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points, part of a systematic
    preventive approach to food safety oriented toward biological, chemical, and physical hazards in production
    processes, increased from 9 in 2016 to 43 in 2018, more than doubling the target of 20. The number of firms
    included in the EEU register of Food Business Operators and allowed to export to the EEU increased from 9
    in 2016 to 43 in 2018, more than doubling the target of 20. The ICR does not say whether the same 9 (in
    2016) and 43 (in 2018) firms were specified by these two indicators, though it is plausible that achievement
    of the latter indicator was predicated on achievement of the former.

    Administration of the VAT was streamlined, specifically through measures to eliminate paper-based VAT
    invoicing and expedite VAT refund procedures through a "green channel" for trustworthy exporters (prior
    action). The PD (p. 23) specified only that "trustworthy taxpayers" would be "identified based on risk

                                                                                                          Page 7 of 15
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Governance and Competitiveness DPO(P148099)



    analysis," and the ICR offers no additional information on definition and measurement of
    "trustworthiness." Given the lack of specificity around this definition, significant fraud was uncovered in early
    2018, involving a group of businessmen found to have created false invoices to obtain refunds. The ICR
    states that these procedures have therefore come under additional review, causing some delay; and no
    additional information is provided on these procedures or plans for their strengthening. As a result, only
    20.7% of VAT refunds were processed through the green channel in 2018, not meeting the target of 25%.

    A further prior action involved reducing the burden of sanitary and radiology inspections by amending the
    resolution "On Setting Risk Criteria for Inspections" to allow for less-frequent inspections of entities with
    lower levels of risk. This planned re-classification of companies to lower risk levels was more complicated
    and time-consuming than anticipated, revealing shortcomings in the design of the prior action and its
    misalignment with other government priorities. In addition, new EEU standards required a higher number of
    firms to undergo inspections, resulting in an ambitious target. The percentage of firms inspected annually by
    the Sanitary Department decreased only modestly, from 50.1% in 2016 to 49.6% in 2018, not reaching the
    target of 20%. In spite of a country-wide awareness campaign, businesses have not taken advantage of the
    newly-created inspection feedback mechanism; the ICR does not explain why. Only 45 firms in 2017 and 13
    firms in 2018 received feedback on inspections, not reaching the target of 500.

    The pilot program for the transfer of social security collections to the State Tax Service underwent redesign
    (the ICR does not provide details). The resulting delay led to a shortfall in 2018. 6.4% of firms filed reports
    on social contributions to the State Tax Service in 2018, not reaching the target of 50%.

    New rules and procedures were adopted allowing authorized telecommunications companies to deploy
    cross-border cables, ensuring competition in the international connectivity market and creating time-bound
    and transparent procedures (prior action). The international internet bandwidth indicator used by the
    International Telecommunications Union increased from 5008 Mpbs in 2013 to 12,700 Mbps in 2015,
    exceeding the target of 6500 Mbps. The ICR (p. 10) states that the latest available figures for this indicator
    were for 2015, making both the target and result inapplicable to assessing achievement of this Operation
    (which was approved in 2016).

    Overall, there was achievement in the area of food safety, but most reforms to improve the business
    environment were not implemented as planned. The share of VAT refunds through the green channel fell
    short of targets, and progress was slow in improved reporting to the tax service and decreasing the burden
    of sanitary inspections. The ICR does not present results on improved connectivity that could plausibly be
    attributed to the DPO. Given that intended outcomes were barely achieved, this objective is rated Negligible.



    Rating
   Negligible
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




                                                                                                          Page 8 of 15
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Governance and Competitiveness DPO(P148099)




5. Outcome

The operation's objectives were highly relevant to country context and to government and Bank
strategy. Design was modestly relevant due to a level of complexity exceeding the technical capacity and
political authority of the implementing agencies, as well as a lack of consistency between some of the proposed
actions and intended outcomes. The objective to improve public sector governance was modestly
achieved: although there was progress in some areas, advances towards the core outcomes were limited. The
objective to strengthen private sector competitiveness was barely achieved and is rated negligible. These
ratings reflect significant shortcomings in both design and implementation, leading to an overall
outcome assessment of Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a.     Outcome Rating
       Moderately Unsatisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

The ICR (p. 31) states that institutional strengthening was significant, particularly in the energy sector and for
procurement, though there are still important risks around implementation capacity and quality. The
cancellation of DPO2 is likely to have had a negative impact on the overall reform agenda. Political risk
remains high, stemming from low levels of ownership and lack of firm commitment to reform of the energy
sector, public governance, and some aspects of the business environment. Coordination challenges spanning
the entire reform program remain an important concern. Economic risk is also high, stemming primarily from
reduced room of maneuver in fiscal policy in view of the external shocks of the recent past (trade and
remittances slowdowns in 2014-2015 due to weaknesses in the Russian and Kazakh economies) and attendant
stimulatory fiscal stance (ICR, p. 31). Though the public deficit has been reduced and the debt burden
stabilized across 2016-2018 -- an encouraging achievement in light of the shocks -- economic risk can be
countered only by a firm adjustment effort over the medium term. The fact that a successor arrangement to the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) Extended Credit Facility that expired in April 2018 was not requested has
added to economic risk. The ICR does not explain why this request was not forthcoming.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
       High

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     The operation was based on solid analytical foundations, most notably through a set of participatory and
     capacity-building technical assistance activities, while a trade and competitiveness advisory program, led


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Governance and Competitiveness DPO(P148099)



by the International Finance Corporation (IFC), provided the basis for the private sector
reforms. Preparation built on a previous programmatic DPO series that also aimed to enhance public
sector governance and improve the business environment, as well as a recent Energy Sector DPO that
supported governance and financial viability reforms in the sector. Lessons cited from previous DPO
series included the importance of: (i) concentrating on just a few policy areas that are fundamental to
addressing key challenges and that enjoy full government ownership; (ii) complementing DPOs with other
instruments of World Bank support, including investment project financing, technical assistance, and
economic and sector work; and (iii) following prior actions that include legislation with triggers that hinge
on the effective adoption of those legal acts, so that there are incentives for the first DPO in a series to
enact legislation in a timely manner. It is not clear, however, that these lessons were fully reflected in this
operation's design. Several of the prior actions did not take into account implementation capacity
constraints, other government priorities, and overall political realities; there were results indicators for
which no reliable data was available; and some targets did not reflect commitments under other
government initiatives (notably, membership in the EEU).

The operation was prepared in coordination with other development partners, including the United
Kingdom Department for International Development (supporting the World Bank's technical assistance
activities in public sector governance) and an energy sector donor working group (the Asian Development
Bank (ADB), European Union (EU), Japan International Cooperation Agency, Germany Development
Bank, and United States Agency for International Development). IMF-supported reforms covered short-
and medium-term macroeconomic stability.

Overall risk was assessed as High at the outset, with specific risks related to the political and governance
environment, as well as implementation and sustainability, stakeholder (policy and inter-agency
coordination), macroeconomic, and technical design risks (PD, pp. 34-36). Given the government's track
record of delivery failure on energy reforms, the assessment did not probe sufficiently into commitment risk
and explore adequate mitigation measures. For example, according to the ICR (p. 22), the public
consultation and stakeholder analysis did not discuss energy reforms. Capacity risk, particularly for
governance reforms, was also underestimated. Overall, there was inadequate assessment of the
feasibility of reforms, their pace, and existing implementation capacity.

The prior actions were largely in the form of submissions to parliament, executive decisions, instructions to
be issued, or resolutions to be adopted by the executive branch, rather than specific implementation-
oriented actions or triggers. As a result, there were no incentives embedded in the operation to carry out
the concrete measures necessary for achieving intended results (the ICR does not state whether
cancellation of DPO2 was also a negative incentive). In this important regard, as well as the issues of
ownership and concentration on a few key policy areas, the operation did not heed lessons from earlier
DPOs.


Quality-at-Entry Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Governance and Competitiveness DPO(P148099)



b. Quality of supervision
  The ICR (pp. 25, 33) describes a "strong and near-continuous" supervision process, led by the core Bank
  economic team with active participation of sector specialists and IFC specialists in taxation and business
  climate reforms (the ICR does not cite evidence, such as back-to-office reports or aide-memoires, on
  strong and consistent supervision). Dialogue was results-focused and supported by cooperation with
  other external partners providing budget support (the IMF, EU, and ADB, especially the latter's budget
  support for business environment and investment climate reforms). The ICR (p. 20) states that emerging
  implementation challenges were generally identified proactively, and candid, cooperative discussions were
  held with the authorities, though no specific examples or references to remedial actions are provided. The
  Bank team "could have been more energetic" in identifying weakness of ownership and fraying of political
  will on the energy sector reforms and in other areas, though the cancellation of the second operation
  should have "provided a strong signal to the authorities" (ICR, p. 20).


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  According to the PD (p. 28), during preparation, the government held extensive public hearings on "a
  number of" the prior actions and related reforms, including on conflict of interest, energy, food safety,
  and the budget code. The government consulted actively with civil society organizations during
  preparation, resulting in their engagement in the monitoring of the reforms and their results, as well as in
  the design of triggers for the next phase.

  However, there were major shortcomings. The political environment was fragile, with three Prime
  Ministers in office over the two-year period following the operation's approval. Priorities shifted, and a
  common strategic vision was not sustained (ICR, p. 20). The ICR (p. 10) indicates that public
  consultations during preparation did not cover the energy reforms and their design. The discontinuity in
  government negatively affected ownership of, and commitment to, difficult reforms, especially in the
  energy sector, and there was no clear champion for reform who could have provided a clear pathway
  forward for the operation (the Ministry of Finance had neither the authority nor the
  capacity). Furthermore, there was no government institution empowered to exercise surveillance over
  the overall reform process with authority to intervene with course corrections as
  required. Implementation capacity was weak, particularly in the area of technical legislative work, and
  therefore timely resolution of implementation challenges was lacking. A satisfactory overarching
  framework for M&E was not developed (see Section 9 below), hindering effective government-wide
  coordination and weakening accountability.



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Governance and Competitiveness DPO(P148099)




  Government Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  N/A


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The Ministry of Finance was responsible for overall monitoring and evaluation and for coordinating actions
  among other ministries and agencies (PD, p. 34). Data were to be collected by the state statistics agency,
  line ministries, and other relevant agencies.

  The results framework contained 14 outcome indicators. There was a clear "line of sight" between the prior
  actions and their associated results indicators (ICR, p. 24), though the indicators were not a complete
  measure of achievement, and there were several indicators for which no reliable data was available. For
  example, the Graft Index did not measure most of the elements originally noted for improvement in the
  quality of public service (timeliness, location) or their implementation within specific sectors (education,
  social security, employment, identification services). In addition, the target for international bandwidth
  appears to have been set below the baseline.



b. M&E Implementation
  Monitoring was carried out at the implementing agency/ministry level. According to the ICR (p. 10),
  annual reports on progress in governance reforms were prepared, though the ICR does not describe their
  findings. The Ministry of Energy updated monitoring data on its websites every six months. The Ministry of
  Finance produced periodic procurement reports to assess progress with implementation of the new
  procurement law and practices. The Office of the Cabinet of Ministers issued periodic updates on
  standards in the quality of public services.

  According to the ICR (p. 23), the results framework was developed not only to monitor progress under the
  DPO, but also as a "tool for internal review and reporting" by the principal ministries and agencies

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Governance and Competitiveness DPO(P148099)



  responsible for implementation. There was a missed opportunity, however, in that the operation was not
  used as a vehicle to put in place a unified framework to be used by the Ministry of Finance as an overall
  management and coordination tool. Data were not collated and studied across the matrix of reforms in the
  absence of a robust, operation-wide framework for M&E (ICR, p. 23).



c. M&E Utilization
  Monitoring and evaluation did not lead to feedback loops that resulted in corrections to implementation. The
  process of utilization of M&E was not formalized and integrated across ministries.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  The specific policies supported by the operation were not expected to have adverse effects on the
  environment and natural resources (PD, p. 31). No safeguards policies were triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
No issues with fiduciary compliance are reported in the ICR.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                      ICR                      IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                 Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Governance and Competitiveness DPO(P148099)



                              Moderately               Moderately
Outcome                                                                             ---
                              Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory
Risk to Development
                              High                     High                         ---
Outcome
                              Moderately               Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                    ---
                              Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory
                                                                                    Discontinuity in government
                                                                                    negatively impacted
                              Moderately                                            ownership of and commitment
Borrower Performance                                   Unsatisfactory
                              Unsatisfactory                                        to reform. Implementation
                                                                                    capacity and coordination was
                                                                                    weak.
Quality of ICR                                         Substantial                  ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 35-36) presented several insightful and valuable lessons, including:

When planning politically sensitive reforms, it is challenging to distinguish between genuine commitment by
relevant authorities and mere lip service. Realistic, in-depth political economy analysis can help identify the key
players and agencies likely to promote or resist reforms as well as potentially effective arguments and
incentives to bring them on board. In this case, there was no clear, empowered champion for the overall reform
process, leaving missed opportunities for forward movement in key sectors.

In a weak, uncertain reform context, success is likely to follow concentration of effort on a highly parsimonious
set of prior actions and follow-up triggers. In this case, priority was spread over too many areas, leading to
coordination challenges and lack of accountability in a weak-capacity environment.

Front-loading more politically sensitive reforms may help reduce stagnation and delay, flag areas where prompt
intervention is required, and mitigate risks of cancelling subsequent operations. In this case, the more difficult
reforms were framed in terms of submissions or instructions to be issued, putting off more specific
implementation-oriented actions and allowing resistance to set in.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Governance and Competitiveness DPO(P148099)




14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise and candid. It provides a lucid, results-oriented account of the operation's preparation and
implementation. Its explanations of the operation's shortcomings are clear and convincing. Its lessons, well
supported by the operation's experience, should prove useful to future projects in the region and elsewhere in
situations where commitment to politically sensitive reforms poses a challenge.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 15
