          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          Social Protection System Support(P151279)



                                                                                     Report Number : ICRR0021648

   1. Project Data



    Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
    Rwanda                                       Social Protection & Jobs


    Programmatic DPL
    Planned Operations:          0               Approved Operations:         0

    Operation ID                                 Operation Name
    P151279                                      Social Protection System Support


     L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
     IDA-55800                                  31-Mar-2016                                         66,240,910.00

     Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
     22-Jan-2015                                31-Mar-2016

                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                              70,000,000.00                                           0.00

     Revised Commitment                               70,000,000.00                                           0.00

     Actual                                           66,240,910.00                                           0.00




     Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
     Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                              Maldonado

PHPROJECTDATATBL




     Operation ID                                Operation Name
     P155024                                     RW-Second Social Protection Sys (SPS-2) ( P155024 )


                                                                                                      Page 1 of 12
          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          Social Protection System Support(P151279)




     L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
     IDA-55800,IDA-57460                       30-Sep-2016                                            93,962,861.00

     Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
     01-Dec-2015                               30-Sep-2016

                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                            Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                              95,000,000.00                                             0.00

     Revised Commitment                               95,000,000.00                                             0.00

     Actual                                           93,962,861.00                                             0.00


PHPROJECTDATATBL




     Operation ID                                Operation Name
     P158698                                     Third Social Protection System (SPS-3) ( P158698 )


     L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
     IDA-55800,IDA-57460,IDA-59100             31-Dec-2017                                            91,399,594.00

     Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
     31-Oct-2016                               31-Dec-2017

                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                            Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                              95,000,000.00                                             0.00

     Revised Commitment                               95,000,000.00                                             0.00

     Actual                                           91,399,594.00                                             0.00




   2. Program Objectives and Policy Areas

   a. Objectives



                                                                                                        Page 2 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Protection System Support(P151279)



   The Social Protection System operation (SPS) consisted of a series of three Development Policy Operations
   (DPO). The program development objective (PDO) for the series was set out in the Program Document (PD)
   of the first operation, SPS-1. It was to “support the Government of Rwanda to improve the efficiency,
   accountability and coverage of its social protection system.”

   Achievement of the PDO will be assessed on the basis of three objectives: (i) improved efficiency of the social
   protection system; (ii) improved accountability of the social protection system; and (iii) improved coverage of
   the social protection system.

   The PDO remained unchanged throughout the series.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas

   The series included three pillars:

   Pillar 1: efficiency of the social protection system to improve administrative efficiency of the SPS and
   help generate value for money by updating the database of poor and vulnerable households; improve the
   management information system (MIS), including a registry of beneficiaries; and increase harmonization
   across social protection programs.

   Pillar 2: accountability and transparency to improve transparency and accountability in SPS budget
   reporting, and strengthen citizen engagement.

   Pillar 3: coverage of the poor and vulnerable to increase social protection coverage of the poor and
   vulnerable population, and improve targeting.




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates

   Program cost and financing. The series consisted of three IDA credits of US$70 million, US$95 million, and
   US$95 million, respectively. The full amounts for each credit were disbursed.

   Borrower contribution. None.

   Dates. SPS-1 was approved on January 22, 2015 and closed on March 31, 2016; SPS-2 was approved on
   December 1, 2015 and closed on September 30, 2016; and SPS-3 was approved on October 31, 2016 and
   closed on December 31, 2017. There were no postponements of closing dates of any of the credits.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Protection System Support(P151279)




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives


  The SPS series’ objectives were fully aligned with country needs, the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy
  (CPS) FY2014-2018 in effect at series closing, and Rwanda’s National Social Protection Strategy. Despite
  impressive reductions in poverty, Rwanda remains one of the poorest countries in the world with high levels
  of vulnerability. The National Social Protection Strategy aims at continued improvement in the efficiency and
  effectiveness of the country’s social protection system, notably the safety net, and further reductions in
  poverty and inequity. Improving productivity and incomes of the poor is a central theme (Theme 2) of the
  CPS, which explicitly mentions social protection as a mechanism for doing so. The series was also consistent
  with the Bank’s broader social protection strategy for Africa aiming at eliminating extreme poverty and
  boosting shared prosperity.



  Rating
  High

b. Relevance of Design


  SPS design – a three-operation series – was relevant to its objectives. The PD provided a clear rationale for
  the choice of pillars/policy actions, and the theory of change as presented in the policy and results matrix
  linked prior actions and triggers to policy actions that were likely to achieve set series objectives. Key
  outcome indicators were defined, albeit with an output orientation, given the initially short project
  timeframe. The operation drew on the experience of two earlier DPO series, and implementation was
  supported by analytical work and hands-on technical assistance.

  Rwanda’s macro-fiscal framework was robust at the start of the operation and remained so throughout the
  series. At the time of project preparation, the International Monetary Fund had completed a second review
  under a three-year Policy Support Instrument and the Article IV Consultation. The short- to medium-term
  economic outlook was positive, with the economy expected to manifest strong growth, and the risk for debt
  distress to remain low. The level of financial support under the SPS series was considered consistent with
  the government’s financial commitment to social protection.



  Rating
  Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 12
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Social Protection System Support(P151279)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To improve the efficiency of the social protection system

    Rationale

    Rationale: The objective was to be achieved by: (i) strengthening the national poverty classification system
    and database (Ubuhede) to improve inter-operability across safety net and other poverty-targeted poverty
    program databases; (ii) improving the MIS, including a registry of social protection program beneficiaries;
    and (iii) harmonization across social protection programs to prevent duplication in benefit provision.

    To strengthen the poverty classification system,


        • The Ministry of Local Government (MINALOC, the main project implementing agency) adopted a road
        map for updating Ubuhede (SPS-1 prior action); signed a memorandum of understanding with the national
        ID agency, NIDA, on the technical interface between the two agencies (SPS-2 trigger), which became fully
        functional under SPS-3 (SPS-3 trigger). As a result, 90 percent of the population over 16 (those with a
        national ID) were matched to the Ubuhede database. The baseline was 25 percent and the target 60
        percent.


    To improve the MIS,


        • Social protection MIS objectives for the short-, medium- and long term were approved by a social
        protection MIS committee convened by MINALOC (SPS-1 prior action); MINALOC finalized, validated, and
        adopted MIS technical specifications (SPS-2 trigger); and MINALOC developed priority MIS modules and
        issued protocols for MIS use and maintenance (SPS-3 trigger)


    For harmonization,


        • MINALOC issued guidelines on benefit allocation when a household was eligible for more than one
        benefit (SPS-1 prior action); developed guidelines for harmonizing income-generating activities across two
        core social protection programs linked to the MIS, meeting the target (SPS-2 trigger); and implemented



                                                                                                       Page 5 of 12
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Social Protection System Support(P151279)



        the guidelines (SPS-3 trigger). To ensure correct implementation, all local government staff were trained
        in applying the guidelines, exceeding the target of 70 percent.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     To improve accountability of the social protection system

    Rationale

    Rationale: The objective was to be achieved by: (i) improving transparency and accountability in social
    protection budget reporting and discussion; and (ii) strengthening citizens’ engagement.

    For improved accountability and transparency, and to strengthen citizens’ engagement,


        • The Ministry of Economy and Finance (MINECONFIN) produced a consolidated social protection budget
        (SPS-1 prior action), accessible to the public through MINALOC’s website, through joint sector reviews
        and sector working groups, and district and sector level public accountability days (SPS-2 trigger). The
        latter – the accountability day events – served as a key indicator of transparency and accountability for the
        operation: against a target of such events taking place in 60 percent of districts in 2018, 85 events were
        recorded.
        • Staff was increased and trained in citizens’ engagement at district and local levels in promoting citizens’
        engagement at those levels (SPS-1 prior action, SPS-2 trigger).
        • An appeals and complaints system was implemented (SPS-3 trigger), is operational and used: numbers
        in the ICR (page 19) covering the period 2014-2018 indicate that 68-75 percent of appeals/complaints are
        settled in favor of the complainant. Here, the baseline was 80 percent and the end-target over 80 percent.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3

                                                                                                          Page 6 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Social Protection System Support(P151279)




Objective

To improve coverage of the social protection system

Rationale

Rationale: The objective was to be achieved by: (i) expanding coverage in line with Rwanda’s long term
strategy; and (ii) testing improved poverty targeting and introducing gender and child sensitive social
protection programs to promote child development.


For expanded coverage,


  •  MINALOC and MINECONFIN approved plans and budgets for FY15 (SPS-1 prior action), FY16 (SPS-2
  trigger), and FY17 (SPS-3 trigger).
  • MINALOC adopted procedures to enhance community participation in the Ubuhede household
  classification process and launched testing of poverty scorecards (SPS-1 prior action).




  • The program exceeded sector coverage in terms of both access to direct support and public works, with
  access to direct support increasing from 240 geographic sectors to all 416 sectors of the country (against
  a target of 395 sectors); and access to public works increasing from 150 to 240 sectors (equaling the
  target).


For gender and child sensitive programs,


  • MINALOC identified policy options for improving gender and child sensitivity of social protection
  programs (SPS-1 prior action); introduced a plan for introducing selected options (SPS-2); and
  incorporated the plan into the FY17 budget (SPS-3).
  • The program substantially achieved its targets for the number of households and female-headed
  households with access to direct support and public works. Direct support households increased from
  44,000 in FY2013/14 to 95,000 in FY2017/18, against a target of 96,000 households (which was achieved
  the previous year); 69 percent were female-headed, against a target of 66 percent. Coverage of public
  works increased from 89,000 households in FY2013/14 to 135,000 in FY2017/18, against a target of
  130,000; the share of female-headed households increased from 46 percent to 51 percent, against a
  target of 48 percent.




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 12
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Social Protection System Support(P151279)



    For better poverty targeting,


        • There are no indicators of changes in poverty targeting errors. However, elements of restructuring of the
        poverty classification system and its application to geographical targeting – notably a broadening of
        categories likely to reduce errors of exclusion, and prioritizing geographical sectors within the poorest
        districts - should plausibly have increased the poverty focus and reduced both errors of exclusion and
        inclusion.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome


  Relevance of objectives is rated high and relevance of design is rated substantial. The former is fully in line
  with Bank and government priorities in social protection, and address country needs. The latter is in line with
  objectives, but more consideration could have been given to more outcome-focused key indicators. Efficacy is
  rated substantial for all three objectives. These ratings indicate only minor shortcomings, producing an
  Outcome rating of Satisfactory.


  a.        Outcome Rating
            Satisfactory


  6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating


  The risk to development outcome is low. Over the years, the government has consistently pursued poverty
  reduction and a strong social protection system; this is reflected in policy documents setting out strategic
  priorities for poverty reduction. The policy actions under this operation are being further developed through
  technical assistance financed under an investment project (Strengthening Social Protection), and parallel
  technical assistance provided by other donors.


  a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
                                                                                                        Page 8 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Protection System Support(P151279)



    Negligible

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  The SPS series was prepared on the basis of a sustained commitment on the part of the Bank to help build
  up social protection. The team drew on the experience of earlier Bank development policy operations in
  Rwanda, and on related analytical studies as well as collaboration with other donors, in close interaction
  with the client. The choice of development policy lending appears appropriate in the presence of a strong
  sector strategy and a solid results framework. M&E design was adequate.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  According to the ICR and judging from the supervision budget, supervision was strong, results focused, and
  characterized by a joint Bank-client effort, including development partners, to move the agenda
  forward. Regular supervision was provided from the country office, which facilitated timely hands-on
  support in providing advisory services and technical assistance. All prior actions and triggers were met in a
  timely fashion, and each of the DPOs was delivered successfully.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance

  The government appears to have been fully committed to the SPS series and the improvements that
  were being put into place. MINALOC, the implementing agency, provided effective support in policy
  formulation and oversight of implementation and monitoring processes that allowed smooth and timely
  implementation.


  Government Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Protection System Support(P151279)



b. Implementing Agency Performance
  See Section 8a.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The policy matrix and results framework for SPS-1 provided a logical sequence of actions that were to lead to
  desired outcomes. They included prior actions and triggers for each of the three operations, as well as seven
  key outcome indicators. An impact evaluation and regular household surveys of living conditions were to be
  conducted every three years



b. M&E Implementation

  A sector working group provided an overall framework for monitoring performance on policy, outputs, and
  outcomes on a semi-annual basis, making recommendations for the following six months.




c. M&E Utilization

  Data from the household surveys and the impact evaluation was used to guide the design of each
  subsequent phase of the SPS and the government’s social protection program.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 12
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Social Protection System Support(P151279)




   No safeguard policies were triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

   Fiduciary issues were not discussed in the ICR.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

   None noted.



d. Other

   None recorded.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory           Satisfactory                ---
Risk to Development
                               Negligible             Negligible                  ---
Outcome
Bank Performance               Satisfactory           Satisfactory                ---
Borrower Performance           Satisfactory           Satisfactory                ---
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                 ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 12
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Social Protection System Support(P151279)



The lessons are drawn from the ICR.

National vision can be an overriding factor for success. Teams need to be alert to government
commitment in recommending reforms. In Rwanda, the government’s sustained policies and financial
commitment to social protection has facilitated dialogue with the Bank and development partners and created
government-led policies that have facilitated ambitious forward movement.

Early action on accountability and transparency can enhance the credibility of public
programs. Broad support is often necessary if a social protection initiative is to be successful. In Rwanda,
the introduction of an appeals and complaints mechanism, and subsequently broader accountability initiatives
(social accountability, citizens engagement tools) helped ensure that beneficiary and other stakeholder views
were mainstreamed into project planning and implementation.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR provided sufficient evidence-based information and analysis to adequately complete the ICRR. It
provided a reasonable balance between results-orientation and narrative. In some instances – especially the
discussion surrounding policy area 1 -- the ICR seemed to assume in-depth knowledge of Rwanda’s safety net
structures in order to easily follow the discussion. The document was internally consistent and written
according to guidelines. At 29 pages, it was fairly long.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                Page 12 of 12
