          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          Development Policy Operation(P143283)



                                                                                       Report Number : ICRR0021428

   1. Project Data



    Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
    Moldova                                       Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


    Programmatic DPL
    Planned Operations:          2                Approved Operations:          2

    Operation ID                                  Operation Name
    P143283                                       Development Policy Operation


     L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
     IBRD-83660,IDA-54390                         31-Oct-2014                                         30,230,753.00

     Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
     28-Mar-2014                                  31-Oct-2014

                                                  IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                             30,000,000.00                                              0.00

     Revised Commitment                              30,000,000.00                                              0.00

     Actual                                          30,230,753.00                                              0.00




     Prepared by                 Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
     Ranga Rajan                 Robert Mark Lacey              Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)
     Krishnamani

PHPROJECTDATATBL




     Operation ID                                 Operation Name
     P149555                                      Second Development Policy Operation ( P149555 )


                                                                                                        Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Policy Operation(P143283)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                     Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-83660,IBRD-86740,IDA-               30-Sep-2017                                            44,615,970.00
 54390,IDA-59280,IDA-59290

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Dec-2016                              30-Sep-2017

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            45,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             45,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         44,615,970.00                                               0.00




2. Program Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives

   This series consisted of two development policy operations (DPO1 and DPO2). The program development
   objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Program Documents for DPO 1 and 2 (summary page i).

   1. Strengthen the regulatory framework to improve predictability of the business environment, facilitate
   competition and reduce regulatory compliance costs.

   2. Strengthen financial sector stability, promote transparency of shareholding and ease conditions for access
   to finance.

   3. Improve the public investment management framework, make investment subsidies in agriculture more
   efficient and equitable, and improve the coverage of well-targeted social assistance programs.

   The PDOs were not revised. The PDOs are also the pillars (see below).




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   The series had three pillars as stated in Program Documents for DPO 1 and 2 (summary page i).

   Pillar A. Strengthen the regulatory framework to improve predictability of the business environment,
   facilitate competition and reduce regulatory compliance costs. This pillar aimed to: (i) reduce the cost of

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Policy Operation(P143283)



   complying with regulations through Risk-Based Inspection (RBI) by state inspectorates, including customs
   and the administration of business taxes: (ii) promote transparency related to the advantages granted by the
   government to enterprises in the form of state aid (such as subsidies, tax deductions and exemptions), and
   (iii) provide farmers with faster access to advanced technologies through reducing the testing and
   registration period for new plant varieties.

   Pillar B. Strengthen financial sector stability, promote transparency of shareholding and ease
   conditions for access to finance. This pillar addressed three financial sector issues: (1) strengthening the
   governance and enforcement powers of the regulatory agencies in the financial sector; (2) improving the
   transparency and enforcement of shareholders' property rights; and (3) enhancing access to finance for
   Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) from the banking system through using moveable assets as
   collateral.

   Pillar C. Improve the public investment management framework, make investment subsidies in
   agriculture more efficient and equitable, and improve the coverage of well-targeted social assistance
   programs. This pillar aimed to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditure in the three
   areas mentioned.

   There were no changes in the pillars. There were nine prior actions for DPO1 and eleven for DPO2.




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   DPO1 was financed by an IBRD loan of US$9 million and an IDA Credit of US$21 million (total US$30
   million). The operation was approved by the Board on March 28, 2014 and closed as scheduled on June 30,
   2014. US$30.23 million was disbursed.

   DPO2 was financed by an IBRD loan of US$27.20 million and an IDA Credit of US$17.80 million (total US$45
   million). A crisis in the financial sector and political turmoil in the wake of parliamentary elections (see Section
   4 below), delayed the preparation of DPO2. After substantial design modifications pertaining to the financial
   sector, DPO2 was approved on December 16, 2016 and closed in accordance with the revised schedule on
   September 30, 2017. US$44.62 million was disbursed.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  The program objectives were relevant to country conditions at appraisal and completion. Economic
  challenges facing Moldova at the time of preparation, included major governance issues in the financial
  sector, disproportionately high incidence of poverty in the agricultural sector, high transaction costs for

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Policy Operation(P143283)



  businesses and issues associated with public expenditure effectiveness. The program’s objectives continued
  to be relevant at closure.

  They were also relevant to the government’s National Development Strategy (NDS) "Moldova 2020", covering
  the 2012-2020 period. This calls for a shift in the sources of growth from consumption towards investment,
  higher productivity, enhanced competitiveness, and higher exports. The objectives were well-aligned with
  three of the seven national development strategy priorities: increasing competition in the financial sector,
  developing risk management tools, and improving the business climate. The NDS also identified the
  importance of increasing public expenditure efficiency. The program objectives are relevant to the country
  priorities at the time of appraisal and completion.

  The objectives were relevant to two pillars of the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for
  2014-2017 - improving competitiveness and minimizing social risks through strengthening the efficiency of
  the social assistance system. The cross-cutting governance theme of the CPS underscored the importance of
  addressing financial sector issues and making public expenditure more efficient and equitable. The objectives
  remain pertinent to two of the three pillars of the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2018-2021: (i)
  strengthening the rule of law and accountability in economic institutions; and (ii) improving efficiency, quality
  and inclusive access to public services.



  Rating
  High

b. Relevance of Design
  There is a logical causal relationship between the prior actions and the intended achievement of objectives for
  the most part. Reducing cumbersome regulatory requirements, publicly reporting the benefits provided by the
  government as state aid and reducing the registration period for new plant varieties are relevant for
  strengthening the regulatory framework and enhancing competition. A more secure and effective registry of
  securities and addressing banking sector supervisory shortcomings are pertinent to strengthening financial
  sector stability and promoting transparency of shareholding. Strengthening the framework for public
  investment management, refocusing agricultural sector subsidies, and increasing the scope of social safety
  programs are relevant for the attainment of better managed and more effective public expenditure programs.

  However, design could have taken greater account of Moldova’s limited implementation and coordination
  capacity. The program was spread over six distinct policy areas - regulatory reforms, financial sector
  governance and stability, easing conditions for access to finance from the banking system, improving public
  investment management, refocusing agricultural subsidies, and improving the effectiveness and efficiency of
  social safety programs. A more focused, limited program would have imposed fewer demands on
  constrained coordination and implementation capacity. It is not clear if political economy considerations were
  adequately considered at the design stage. Given the dimensions of the challenges in the financial sector,
  addressing them through a separate, dedicated operation or series, could have been given more
  consideration.

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Development Policy Operation(P143283)




       Moreover, it is not clear in every case why particular policy measures were chosen as prior actions rather
       than others, and in some instances, whether the actions would be strong enough to achieve the objectives.
       Measures to enhance competition were especially weak, being confined to public reporting of advantages
       provided by the government. The requirement that the accounts of relevant public institutions be placed with
       financially solid commercial banks was only marginally related to the program objective of strengthening
       financial sector stability. There was little evidence in Moldova that facilitating the use of moveable assets as
       collateral, would address commercial banks’ reluctance to accept such assets as security when lending to
       SMEs. The pursuit of greater equity by reducing subsidies to corporate farms while increasing them to
       individual farmers, might conflict with the goal of enhanced agricultural efficiency, since small farms may be
       less efficient than large ones.

       Moldova's macroeconomic framework at the time of the preparation of DPO1 was generally satisfactory.
       Economic growth exceeded five percent between 2010-2013, contributing to improved revenue collection and
       a lower fiscal deficit (less than 3 percent of GDP in 2013 compared to over 6 percent in 2009). The exchange
       rate was flexible, and the monetary policy stance was based on inflation targeting. External debt had
       stabilized, and foreign exchange reserves had risen to more than five months of future imports in 2013.
       However, the banking system remained vulnerable to governance-related shocks. Such shocks, including a
       major fraud (see Section 4 below), played a part in a deteriorating macroeconomic environment at the time of
       the delayed preparation of DPO2, along with lower remittances, weaker exports, and a series of summer
       droughts. The economy contracted by 0.4 percent in 2015. There was no IMF program in place. Although
       economic growth recovered to 4.5 percent in 2016, private investment remained weak due to lack of
       confidence in the banking system and tighter monetary conditions.



       Rating
       Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     Strengthen the regulatory framework to improve predictability of the business environment, facilitate
     competition and reduce regulatory compliance costs.

    Rationale
    Sub-objective 1. Strengthen the regulatory framework to improve predictability of the business
    environment. The series attempted to address unclear and copious regulatory requirements that raised the
    cost of doing business. Prior actions included establishing sector Risk-Based Inspection methodologies for
    inspection of firms by state inspectorates, the creation of an online Registry of State Inspectors, legislative

                                                                                                           Page 5 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Development Policy Operation(P143283)



amendments to ensure that adoption of new customs, tax-related, and regulatory legislation that affected
businesses be preceded by a Regulatory Impact Analysis or RIA (all DPO1) and approval of legislation to
decrease the number of state inspection agencies from 33 to 13 ( DPO2).

There were two outcome targets. First, inspection coverage of enterprises was to be reduced, originally by
80 percent in 2013, subsequently revised to 50 percent in 2017 for DPO2. Achievement of inspection
coverage is recorded as 30 percent in 2017, falling short of both targets. Moreover, it is unclear whether the
inspections referred to the share of firms that had at least one inspection, or the average number of
inspections reported by firms, or the number of firms visited by state inspectors. This indicator could not be
measured at closure, since the documentation of definitions and calculations had been lost, and there was
no attempt to recalculate them. The second outcome target was the share of new legislation and regulations
subject to an RIA, which was set at 100 percent in 2015 and revised to 80 percent in 2017 for DPO2. Actual
achievement at closure was 60 percent (although Customs did achieve 100 percent coverage).

Sub-objective 2. Facilitate competition. The policy reforms aimed to facilitate competition by
reducing state aid for businesses, which frequently tilted the playing field. Enabling regulations for the Law
on State Aid were issued (prior action, DPO1). A decree established an institutional mechanism for collecting
information on all state aid, through connection of all providers of such aid to an automated information
system (prior action, DPO2). The government had previously created an inventory of mandated state aid
providers and restricted the number of such providers to 183.

The outcome target was to have 100 percent of providers connected to, and reporting on, the system in
2017. 100 percent connection was achieved, but reporting through the system was 88 percent, the shortfall
being due to inadequate computer skills. According to the task team, 100 percent reporting was achieved in
2018. However, it is difficult to see how achievement of this target facilitated competition. The program,
moreover, did not cover selective tax exemptions, which are under-reported by the Ministry of Finance, and
are a powerful instrument of selective state aid to the private sector.

Sub-objective 3. Reduce regulatory compliance costs. Reforms aimed at reducing these costs in the
agricultural sector, with a view to encouraging the cultivation of new (to Moldova) plant varieties.

The government reduced the testing and registration period for new plant varieties to one year for all annual
crops and one harvest period for multi-annual (fruit tree) crops listed in the EU Catalog (prior action, DPO1).
The outcome target was to increase the number of new registered varieties of seeds and seedlings from 145
in 2013 to 160 in 2015; this was subsequently revised to 210 in 2017. Achievement in 2017 was 198;
according to the ICR (page 5), the shortfall being due to the exclusion by the government of varieties that
showed inferior results in Moldova.

In summary, the targets pertaining to strengthening the regulatory environment were not met; the target
related to facilitating competition was met, though its relevance to the objective is questionable; and
measures to reduce regulatory compliance in the agricultural sector appear to have contributed to a virtual
attainment of the intended number of new registered varieties of seeds and seedlings. The ICR (page 28)
also provides supplementary evidence on achievement of Objective 1 drawn from the World Economic


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Development Policy Operation(P143283)



    Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report. On the burden of government regulation and the extent of market
    dominance, Moldova’s scores remained unchanged between 2014 and 2017 at 2.8 and 3.0 respectively (on
    a scale of one to seven). The score for enhanced competition improved only marginally from 4.2 in 2013-
    2014 to 4.3 in 2017-2018. Efficacy of this objective is rated modest.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     Strengthen financial sector stability, promote transparency of shareholding and ease conditions for access to
     finance

    Rationale
    Sub-objective 1. Strengthen financial sector stability. The series aimed to address three banking sector
    issues: (i) constraints on the two regulatory agencies, the National Bank of Moldova (NBM) and the National
    Commission on Financial Markets (NCFM); (ii) consequent weak financial sector governance; and (iii) poor
    quality of assets and under-capitalization. A prior action for DPO1 was the initiation of a forensic audit of an
    important state-owned bank, which typified sector-wide problems. Further measures were intended under
    DPO2. However, that operation was delayed by a major bank fraud, which came to light in late 2014, and
    which also led all external partners to suspend budget support. DPO2 preparation resumed in February
    2015, after the Prime Minister had agreed to take crucial measures to resolve the banking crisis. Several of
    these were DPO2 prior actions: (i) amendments to NBM’s statutes by vesting it with enhanced regulatory
    and supervisory powers, providing individual regulators with legal protection from lawsuits, and removing the
    Ministry of Justice’s power to amend NBM's regulatory and supervisory decisions; (ii) initiating liquidation
    proceedings of the three banks involved in the fraud; and (iii) launching special audits of three other large
    banks. The main governmental action – a large bailout of individual banks accompanied by (still ongoing)
    investigations into wrong-doing – was not supported by the series.

    There were two outcome targets, one fully and the other partially met. The licenses of the three fraudulent
    banks were withdrawn. Time-bound action plans, prepared by the auditors and based on audit
    recommendations, were completed for two out of the three audited banks. However, the third cancelled the
    contract with the auditing company and developed and implemented its own (less rigorous) plan. Neither the
    prior actions, nor the governmental bailout, have significantly restored financial sector stability. On the
    contrary, according to World Economic Forum data, confidence in banks has declined markedly since 2013,
    reaching its nadir in 2018.

    Sub-objective 2. Promoting transparency of shareholding. The policy reforms in this area aimed at
    addressing deficiencies in the current securities registration system that violated shareholders’ rights and

                                                                                                         Page 7 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Development Policy Operation(P143283)



    contributed to hostile takeover of companies (such as the non-transparent acquisition and ownership of
    financial institutions).

    The government completed the draft law for consolidating the share registry function of corporate securities
    and merging it into a single depository within NBM (prior action, DPO1). NBM’s statutes were amended to
    permit this, and the previously separate depositories of NBM and NCFM were consolidated into a single one
    within NBM (prior actions, DPO2). The Ministry of Justice’s authority to act as a corporate securities
    depository for non-banking companies was abolished. The expected result of these policy actions -
    the transfer of securities to the new corporate securities depository by March 2018 - was not achieved. This
    was partly due to lack of consensus on the consolidation and transfer to NBM. The transfer was postponed
    to the Spring of 2019. Additional information provided by the task team indicates that the securities have not
    yet been transferred.

    Sub-objective 3. Easing conditions for access to financing. The reforms aimed at increasing the access
    to finance for Small and Medium Size enterprises from the banking system, through facilitating the use of
    moveable assets as collateral.

    The Pledge Law was amended in 2014 to facilitate the use of moveable assets as collateral (prior action,
    DPO1), by expanding the types of eligible moveable capital, creating an out-of-court settlement mechanism
    to facilitate rapid resolution in case of default, and establishing a notification registry to ensure transparency.

    The targeted 37 percent increase in the share of loans secured by moveable collateral was not reached. The
    share actually decreased to 27.5 percent in June 2018, from the baseline of 33 percent in 2013.

    In summary, confidence in the banking system was lower at series closure than at the outset. Transparency
    of shareholding had not been achieved. Enabling the use of moveable assets as collateral had no effect on
    SME access to finance. Efficacy of the second objective is rated negligible.



    Rating
   Negligible
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective

     Improve the public investment management framework, make investment subsidies in agriculture more
     efficient and equitable, and improve the coverage of well-targeted social assistance programs.

    Rationale



                                                                                                            Page 8 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Development Policy Operation(P143283)



Sub-objective 1. Improve the public investment management framework. Inefficiencies had reduced the
effectiveness of public spending for national strategic objectives. The DPO series attempted to address this
through investment management reforms.

The government established a new mechanism for planning, selecting, appraising, implementing and
monitoring public investment projects. It also amended the Public Finance Law to reduce the list of
exemptions to the new rules to projects regulated by separate laws or international agreements (both prior
actions, DPO1).

All new eligible projects included in the 2017 Central Government Budget complied with the new legislation,
thereby meeting the outcome target. The share of multi-year investment projects with non-continuous
financing fell from a 33 percent average between 2006-2013 to 11 percent in 2017, exceeding the outcome
target of 20 percent.

Sub-objective 2. Make investment subsidies in agriculture more efficient and equitable. To target
subsidies more effectively, the series supported narrowing the scope of the agricultural machinery program,
which accounted for half the agricultural subsidy fund.

In 2016, the government focused the program on high value products and capped the subsidy an individual
producer could receive (prior actions, DPO2). The share of subsidies going to "high value agriculture"
increased from 38.6 percent in 2013 to 56.5 percent in 2017, almost meeting the outcome target of 58
percent. The share of subsidies allocated to individual, rather than corporate, producers rose from 24.4
percent in 2013 to 29 percent in 2017, again slightly short of the 30 percent target. While the greater equity
objective has been virtually achieved, that of efficiency is less clear. There is little evidence to show that
individual farmers are more efficient than corporate ones. It is not obvious that the removal of several items
from the list of farming machinery eligible for subsidies would stimulate innovation. There is also a lack of
documentation about "high value-added production" and of clarity as to whether this means higher prices or
profit margins.

Sub-objective 3. Improve the coverage of well-targeted social assistance programs. The policy reforms
in this area aimed at better targeting of the social safety programs to the poor and reducing spending
leakages.

The eligibility threshold of the cash transfer and heating allowance programs was to be revised annually,
through amendments to the Budget Laws of 2013 (prior action, DPO1) and 2015 (prior action, DPO2). As a
result, 125,189 people (including 71,286 women) received cash transfer benefits in 2017, compared to
23,339 in 2013, slightly short of the 126,000 (74,000 women) outcome target. 268,884 beneficiaries
(including 69,285 women) received heating allowances in 2017 compared to 30,249 in 2013, exceeding the
target of 126,000 beneficiaries (63,000 women). However, little information is provided on improved
targeting.

In summary, the public investment sub-objective was met, although there is a question about sustainability,
since the measures appear to depend on annual amendments to the Budget Law. The series also resulted in

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 16
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Development Policy Operation(P143283)



    higher coverage of social assistance programs, though there is little evidence of better targeting. Agricultural
    subsidies are more equitably distributed, but it is less clear whether they contribute to enhanced efficiency.
    On balance, the rating for this objective is substantial.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  The relevance of the program's objectives is rated high, but that of design modest. The program covered a wide
  area of reforms in six separate areas. In several instances, it was unclear whether the actions would be strong
  enough to achieve the objectives. Efficacy of the first objective - improving the business environment, facilitating
  competition and reducing compliance costs - is rated modest, since outcomes fell short of expectations. Efficacy
  of the second objective - strengthening financial sector stability, promoting transparency of shareholding and
  easing access to finance - is rated negligible, since none of the sub-objectives was achieved - deteriorating
  confidence in the banking sector was not halted, greater shareholding transparency was not attained, and the
  measures supported by the series did not increase access to credit. Efficacy of the third objective is rated
  substantial. The evidence presented indicates better managed, more equitable public spending, although the
  degree to which efficiency was enhanced is less clear. Overall, shortcomings are considered significant, and
  outcome is assessed as moderately unsatisfactory.


  a.      Outcome Rating
          Moderately Unsatisfactory


  6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

  Governance and corruption risk. Corruption and governance risks in the financial sector remain a serious
  concern in Moldova. A Constitutional Court ruling in October 2013 curtailed the NBM's supervisory powers, and
  a decision to reverse this is still pending. Investigations into bank fraud are still ongoing. Oligarchs retain
  significant influence over the political process. Although charges have been brought against some individuals,
  convictions have been rare, suggesting that the continuing efforts towards proper oversight of the banking
  sector could be undermined.

  Fiscal risk. There is a risk that public investment may be fiscally constrained; it relies heavily on external
  financing.

                                                                                                        Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Policy Operation(P143283)




Weak achievements in most areas supported by the series also present a risk to the program’s sustainability.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
    High

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Design was able to draw on analytical work, including the joint IMF/World Bank Financial Sector
  Assessment Program (FSAP), undertaken in 2014 and from the audit of Banca de Economii. The program
  was prepared in coordination with the other development partners (see Section 2e above). Appropriate
  arrangements were made for addressing fiduciary compliance issues (see Section 10 below). Additional
  financial and technical contributions for complementary activities were provided by the IMF (financial sector
  reform), the EU (public investment management), and the Government of Moldova (additional budget
  support), (ICR, paragraph 24). The ICR provides no details on the contributions from these agencies.

  There were, however, major shortcomings in Quality at Entry. First, although prior experience with World
  Bank-financed operations in Moldova had highlighted the need for selectivity, the operation was complex
  and wide-ranging, encompassing six policy areas with limited synergy. Second, the outcome indicators
  chosen were not always critical, or even fully relevant, to the achievement of the objectives. Third, evidence
  specific to Moldova to support the hypothesis that reforms would achieve their goals was sometimes
  lacking (there was, for instance, little basis to expect that banks would be prepared to accept movable
  assets as collateral for loans). Fourth, the extent to which political economy concerns were analyzed and
  taken into account appears inadequate. In particular, governance risks in the banking sector were
  underestimated (despite concerns about fraud since 2011). Partly because of this underestimation, the
  program’s sub-objectives for the sector were overly narrow, focusing on stability and shareholder
  transparency, rather than on broader governance dimensions. Indeed, financial sector issues in Moldova
  were, and remain, sufficiently serious to justify a separate, dedicated operation or series. Fifth, analytical
  work in some areas could have been more rigorous. For example, assumptions about which types of
  machinery would most assist innovative farming practices were based on the undocumented opinion of a
  consultant, rather than a thorough assessment. Sixth, there were weaknesses in M&E design (see Section
  9 below). Seventh, the timing of the series was questionable, given that implementation suffered from
  political turmoil following parliamentary elections.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  According to the ICR, Bank staff reacted "promptly and skillfully" to the crisis in the banking sector, building
  on the audit of BEM, which provided important insights into Moldovan banking activities. Financial sector
  triggers and prior actions for DPO2 were increased and strengthened based on measures agreed with the

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Policy Operation(P143283)



 IMF and with the Authorities at Prime Ministerial level, However, the quality of results evident at series
 closure were still insufficient to halt declining confidence in the banking sector.

 There were two other shortcomings. M&E design weaknesses were not adequately addressed during
 implementation. Moreover, an Implementation Status and Results (ISR) report for DPO1, which was
 required because of the 24-month gap between the first and second operations, was not produced.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  The Government was reportedly proactive in seeking inputs to the reform program from a broad range of
  stakeholders. During preparation of the National Development Strategy, it had introduced an interactive
  web site to solicit comments and suggestions. There was consultation with Non-Governmental
  Organizations (NGOs). The Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry carried out consultations every
  year with stakeholders regarding the annual subsidy program, prior to its finalization.

  There was, however, a lack of consensus at the highest level of government on the required reforms in
  the banking and agricultural sectors. Pressure from vested interests contributed to implementation
  delays in completing prior actions for DPO1. Although some of these difficulties were resolved during
  preparation and implementation of DPO2, the reform program remains incomplete, especially in the
  financial sector, reflecting in part the continued influence of powerful oligarchs. There were also
  administrative weaknesses. For example, transfer of responsibility for monitoring the program from the
  State Chancellery to the Ministry of Finance led to a lack of continuity, caused some confusion in
  monitoring arrangements, and contributed to the loss of important documentation.


  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  The government as a whole implemented the program, and there is no separate assessment of
  implementing agency performance.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Policy Operation(P143283)




  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The Program Documents provided limited information on the monitoring arrangements. The State Chancellery
  was to be in charge of monitoring progress in the policy areas supported by the operation. However, no details
  were provided on the arrangements for data collection and analysis.

  Some of the indicators in the results framework were inadequate, and documentation of indicator definitions
  was insufficient. Several changes in the results framework for DPO2 (for instance, the reduction in the target
  from 100 percent to 80 percent for legislation and regulations subject to a regulatory impact analysis) were
  not adequately explained. In other cases, the rationale behind the choice of indicators was unclear. For
  example, the “share of loans secured by movable collateral relative to the stock of outstanding loans” was, at
  best, only partially consistent with the Government’s strategic priority - set out in “Moldova 2020” - to reduce
  financing costs, which it hoped would lead to a significant increase in financing volumes. Targeting the share of
  agricultural subsidies supporting "high value activities" did not take account of the lack of documentation on the
  criteria for defining such activities. The introduction of a gender dimension in targeting receipt of social benefits
  was inconsistent with the government definition of eligibility by household.



b. M&E Implementation
  As noted in Section 8 and 9a above, the responsibility for M&E was transferred from the State Chancellery to
  the Ministry of Finance in 2017. The ICR provides no reasons as to why this change occurred. No attempt
  appears to have been made to resolve the confusion surrounding the meaning of some results indicators
  and how they were to be monitored.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR provides no information on M&E utilization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Policy Operation(P143283)



  The series was expected to have a positive social impact, since it supported public expenditure reforms to
  target the poor more effectively and to rebalance agricultural subsidies to the benefit of smaller farmers (ICR,
  page 29). The series did not trigger any safeguards policies, and the ICR does not report on any
  environmental impact.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  A Public Financial Management Assessment conducted before appraisal noted improvements in public
  financial management practices and concluded that the financial management risk was moderate (Program
  Document for the First DPO, page 26). The ICR does not report any fiduciary compliance issues.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   The series presents significant
                                                                                   shortcomings in the form of
                              Moderately              Moderately                   modest design relevance and
Outcome
                              Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory               modest and negligible efficacy
                                                                                   ratings of two out of three
                                                                                   objectives.
Risk to Development
                              High                    High                         ---
Outcome
                                                                                   There were major
                              Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Unsatisfactory               shortcomings in Quality at
                              Satisfactory
                                                                                   Entry.
                                                                                   There were significant
                              Moderately              Moderately
Borrower Performance                                                               shortcomings in government
                              Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   performance.
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                  ---




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Development Policy Operation(P143283)



Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

 The most important lesson in the ICR is the following (with some adaptation of language):

 (1) Development policy objectives that are broad in terms of thematic and sector coverage are likely
 to encounter implementation and coordination difficulties, particularly in countries with weak
 administrative capacity. This is confirmed by experience from these operations, where attempting to
 address several diverse policy areas at the same time stretches implementation capacity and complicates the
 monitoring of impact.

 IEG draws the following lessons:

 Unless political economy dimensions are carefully considered at the design stage, achievement of a
 DPO’s objectives is likely to be jeopardized. In this case, the timing of the operation was less than optimal,
 since implementation suffered from political turmoil following parliamentary elections. Also, more account
 should have been taken of the influence of powerful oligarchs over reform programs, especially in the
 financial and agricultural sectors, and an analysis made of how this might have been mitigated.

 Sectors presenting especially difficult challenges may be more appropriately addressed by separate,
 dedicated operations. Here the issues in the financial sector were of such magnitude and complexity as to
 affect Moldova’s macroeconomic stability as well as general confidence in the economy. Under such
 circumstances, including financial sector reform as one of six distinct policy areas overstretched the country’s
 limited implementation capacity. Still more importantly, the reforms that were attempted were sufficient in both
 number, depth and scope to go to the heart of the problems facing the sector.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

This ICR is thorough and analytical. It provides convincing explanations why some indicators were either not
relevant or not compatible with the program objectives. The discussion of efficacy could have been clearer. In
some cases, it is difficult to understand the rationale for the ratings (the ICR rates outcome as moderately
satisfactory when most of the intended results were not realized). More detailed consideration of M&E,

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Policy Operation(P143283)



especially implementation and utilization, would have been helpful. The organization and coverage are in
accordance with the harmonized IEG-World Bank guidelines. However, at over 30 pages of main text, the
document is long (versus the mandatory length of 15 pages).



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                Page 16 of 16
