     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)



                                                                                   Report Number : ICRR0021514

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P110599                                      AR Essential Public Health Functions II

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Argentina                                    Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-79930                                  30-Jun-2016                                         445,785,893.06

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Dec-2010                                 30-Apr-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            461,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             461,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         445,785,893.06                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Judyth L. Twigg              Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                           Maldonado



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   According to the Loan Agreement (p. 6), the project's objectives were: "(a) to improve the stewardship role of
   the Borrower's federal public health system, through the strengthening of Essential Public Health Functions
   (EPHF); and (b) increase the coverage and clinical governance of the Priority Public Health Programs
   (PPHPs)."




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)



   The Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 8, Table 1) defined EPHFs as policy regulation, surveillance,
   monitoring and evaluation, health promotion, social participation, planning and policy making, equity
   promotion, human resource development, quality assurance, public health research, and emergencies and
   disasters. According to the PAD (p. 7), there were three dimensions of "clinical governance": recognizably
   high standards of care, transparency and accountability for those standards, and constant
   improvement. PPHPs were: non-communicable diseases (NCDs), the Federal Health Program (PROFE),
   vaccine-preventable diseases, vector-borne diseases, HIV/AIDS, safe blood, and tuberculosis. PROFE
   provided regular health care services to vulnerable and uninsured people (women with seven or more
   children, people with severe disabilities, and those over 70 years of age receiving noncontributory pensions)
   by financing capitation payments to provinces (PAD, p. 3).

   The PAD (p. 7) stated that the project was intended to benefit directly around 4.26 million people, including
   those enrolled or eligible for enrollment in the seven PPHPs, and an additional 13 million people indirectly
   through health promotion campaigns and other programs.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                          PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   The project contained three components:

   1. Strengthening of the National Ministry of Health's (MSN's) and Provincial Ministries' (MSPs')
   Stewardship Capacities and Improve the Public Health Infrastructure of the Priority Public Health Programs
   (appraisal: US$ 123.2 million; actual: US$ 87.8 million). This component was to strengthen stewardship in
   public health by: (a) re-engineering the MSN to better address NCDs through technical assistance and
   management training for the national planning unit, NCD Directorates, and Federal Health Council
   (COFESA); (b) technical assistance, research studies, design and development of social communication
   and health promotion plans, development of management and information systems, and training of 800
   network professionals, all toward increasing the capacity of the MSN and MSPs on EPHF and program
   management; and (c) supporting innovations in health promotion to reduce risk factors through technical
   assistance for the implementation of two pilots on integrating health promotion and NCD prevention
   activities, and subprojects related to health promotion and healthy lifestyles, prevention of HIV/AIDS and
   sexually transmitted infections (to be implemented by non-governmental organizations (NGOs), not to
   exceed $30,000 each). This component was also to modernize infrastructure, through support for
   epidemiological and laboratory surveillance of chronic and infectious diseases, including the development
   of national and provincial surveys and registries; expansion of the national public health laboratory



                                                                                                              Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)



   network; support for the National Safe Blood Program, Expanded Program on Immunization, and National
   Food Regulation System; and modernization of supply monitoring systems.

   2. Improve Results at the Provincial Level in Priority Public Health Programs (appraisal: US$ 322 million;
   actual US$ 334.9 million). This component was to support seven programs at the provincial and municipal
   levels: (a) public health surveillance activities and other epidemiological technical systems; (b) disease
   control activities; (c) monitoring of compliance with national and provincial norms and standards; (iv) health
   promotion, communication, education, and social participation activities, with an emphasis on healthy
   lifestyles; (v) local distribution of key medical supplies for public health programs; (vi) regulatory activities
   carried out by the MSPs; and (vii) improving the efficiency and performance of PROFE. Activities to
   improve PROFE were aimed at transforming it into a system similar to a public health insurance system,
   with managed care providing benefits to vulnerable populations for high-cost, low-incidence conditions and
   disabilities through the use of modern administrative, management, and financing tools.

   3. Administration, Monitoring, and Evaluation (appraisal: US$ 14.5 million; actual US$ 22.0 million). This
   component was to finance operating costs of the project coordinating units, external technical verifications
   and audits, and development and implementation of project monitoring and evaluation systems.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

   Project Cost: Planned total cost at appraisal was US$ 461 million. Actual cost was US$ 445.8 million, with
   slightly less than planned spent on the first component, and more than planned spend on the second and
   third components.

   Financing: The project was to be financed as a specific investment loan. Output-based results and per
   capita payments were to be used as financial mechanisms, based on prior successful experience in
   Argentina and other Latin American countries (PAD, p. 10). US$ 445.8 million were disbursed. The
   difference between planned and actual financing was due to exchange rate fluctuations.

   Borrower Contribution: No Borrower contribution was planned or made.

   Dates: The project was approved on December 20, 2010 and became effective on August 3, 2011. It
   was restructured twice. On June 1, 2016, funds were reallocated between disbursement categories, and
   the closing date was extended from June 30, 2016 to April 30, 2018 to provide sufficient time to complete
   civil works. On April 24, 2018, disbursement arrangements were changed. The project closed on April
   30, 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 20
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)



       Rationale


       At the time of appraisal, Argentina was facing a silent epidemic of chronic diseases due to population aging
       and increasing numbers of people practicing unhealthy behaviors. Some progress had been made on
       prevention, but there was no single comprehensive health promotion program. There was inadequate
       quality and access to health care, and costs were unnecessarily high. This project sought to strengthen the
       management and epidemiological surveillance of key programs related to chronic diseases, using a results-
       based approach. It directly supported the government's Federal Health Plan (in place since 2003), which
       focused on policy reforms and actions to increase the effectiveness of public efforts to improve the health
       status of the poor. Addressing the spread of preventable diseases remains a key element of government
       health strategy (Country Partnership Framework, CPF, 2015-2018, p. 27). The objectives were highly
       aligned with the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy at appraisal (2010-2012), which contained proposed
       outcomes on: (i) consolidating improvements in the health sector; and (ii) strengthening public sector
       capacity to reduce inequities and improve the coverage and quality of priority public health programs. They
       remained highly aligned with the most recent CPF (2015-2018), which contained a results areas to achieve
       universal health coverage with focus on the nine poorest provinces, and specifically targeted financial
       support to strengthening the health system and addressing the ongoing NCD burden.



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     Improve the stewardship role of the Borrower's federal public health system

    Rationale

    The theory of change addressed inadequate stewardship on the part of the MSN and MSPs as a result of
    persistent weaknesses in EPHFs. It held that technical assistance, training, works, and goods aimed at
    strengthening EPHFs at the national and provincial levels, as well as results-based transfers to MSPs on the
    achievement of annually-agreed institutional outcomes, would lead to increased capacity of the MSN and
    MSPs on EPHF management, renewed and expanded public health infrastructure supporting EPHFs, and
    strengthened public health activities related to EPHFs. In turn, the stewardship role of the federal public
    health system would be improved through the EPHFs. Hence, the project’s contribution to improved
    stewardship would be assessed by improvements in EPHFs.

    Outputs


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)




Summary: The project supported key activities aimed at enhancing EPHFs, including the development of
norms and regulations, quality assurance mechanisms, epidemiological surveillance, health promotion
through healthy municipalities development and tobacco prevalence reduction, the development and
implementation of information systems to improve efficiency and transparency in patient care and supply
management, and human resources management and development. Four regional blood banks were
constructed or refurbished, vaccine and joint storage centers were expanded, and the National Biotery Lab
was rehabilitated. Public health activities (PHAs) were implemented, based on national program protocols,
to support the functioning of vertical programs in an integrated manner at both national and provincial levels.

Regulation and quality assurance: All public and private health care facilities in the country (over 25,000
health care facilities, 13,000 pharmacies, and 1,100 drug companies) were incorporated into the Federal
Registry of Health Establishments. Health care professionals (over 850,000 health care professionals, with
105,000 medical licenses, 220 health care professions, and 154,000 health care specialties, as well as 1,502
teaching institutions) were assessed and incorporated into a newly established Federal Registry of Health
Care Professionals. Enhanced quality assurance mechanisms for health care and patient safety were
implemented, including the accreditation of intensive care units: 633 intensive care units were evaluated and
properly registered in the system, exceeding the target of 400 units. This result should contribute to the
maintenance of consistent quality standards throughout the country, as well as referrals and planning for
emergency situations. A Sanitary Legislation Information System, providing access to health-related
legislation at all levels, was implemented and is now available on-line.

Surveillance: Support was provided to the National Surveillance System to improve timeliness, frequency,
decentralization, and coverage of reporting. 838 surveillance nodes and 759 laboratories in 23 provinces
were equipped. 22 provinces set up virtual Health Situation Rooms and supporting institutional structures.

Monitoring and evaluation (M&E): The Health Services Information System (SISA) was expanded, including
the incorporation of several new registers developed or enhanced by the project: the Federal Registry of
Health Care Professionals, Federal Registry of Health Care Establishments, Federal Register of
Nominalized Vaccination, Management System of HIV/AIDS Patients, Integrated Monitoring System of
Medical Supplies, Registry of Medical Residences, and a new National Health Surveillance System, as well
as numerous registries for blood donors, health research, and transplants. 4,000 SISA users were trained.

Health promotion: 36 new or improved health promotion agreements, and 37 new regulations, were issued
to promote healthier products, behaviors, and environments. Over 1000 bakeries joined the "Less Salt, More
Life" initiative, and 81% of those have been evaluated and certified by the Healthy Argentina Plan. 190
municipalities underwent self-evaluations to be certified as Health Responsible Municipalities, and 23
provinces elaborated strategic plans for health promotion. 50 communication campaigns and 42 workshops
were held on health promotion and NCD prevention.

Planning and policy making: The systematic and standardized registration of health care professionals and
facilities made possible full assessment of the country's human resources and infrastructure for health, now
being used for needs assessment and planning of health care delivery and workforce development.

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 20
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)




    Human resources development: A Federal Network of Human Resources in Health and Federal Observatory
    of Human Resources in Health now collect, produce, and disseminate information at the national and
    provincial levels. A National System of Accreditation of Medical Residences was established and
    implemented, covering standards for twelve areas of specialization. 1,665 personnel from the MSN and the
    provinces received training in public health labs, blood banks, and vaccination for more than 40 hours, far
    exceeding the target of 800. 24 provinces participated in this training, meeting the target.

    Public health research: Provincial health research systems were strengthened, such that the Ibero-American
    Ministerial Network of Learning and Health Research increased its rating for Argentina's National Health
    Research System from medium for the period 2005-2010, to high for the period 2011-2015. Neither of the
    planned pilot studies with a nutritional sprinkles component (to reduce iron deficiency anemia) were
    completed, not meeting the target of two studies in this area. However, the project supported other
    significant public health research, including tutoring programs for young researchers, annual research
    meetings (including 300 participants from provincial jurisdictions), and an annual public health research
    conference sponsored by the MSN. Nine new ethics committees for health research were established at the
    provincial level.

    Outcomes

    200 participating municipalities were certified as Health Responsible Municipalities, meeting the target. This
    result certifies the promotion of healthy environments conducive to the reduction of risk factors associated
    with NCDs, as well as effective vertical articulation of health care policies between the national, provincial,
    and municipal levels.

    75% of certified departments or local territories had satisfactory or highly satisfactory epidemiological
    surveillance nodes, almost reaching the target of 80%. This increase represents improvements representing
    25% of all nodes and 75% of all reporting. According to the ICR (p. 13), epidemiological surveillance of
    specific events has improved, allowing for timely clinical interventions. For example, reporting of suspected
    arbovirus events (dengue, Zika) is now done automatically, at an individual level, on average two days after
    testing, compared to a pre-project norm of manual submission of consolidated information at the province
    level on a weekly basis. Similarly, notification of results of syphilis testing among pregnant women increased
    from 48% of live births in 2008 to 81% of live births in 2016. The project also provided support to the
    development of a follow-on surveillance system, which was being integrated into SISA and was about to be
    rolled out at the time of the ICR.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL




                                                                                                        Page 6 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)




Objective 2
Objective

Increase the coverage of the Priority Public Health Programs

Rationale

The theory of change addressed inadequate coverage of the PPHPs. It held that technical assistance,
training, works, and goods aimed at expanding PPHP coverage at the national and provincial levels, results-
based transfers to MSPs based on the achievement of annually-agreed institutional outcomes, and results-
based capitation payments for activities aimed at improving coverage under PROFE would lead to increase
capacity of the MSN and MSP to expand PPHP coverage, renewed and expanded public health
infrastructure to support PPHPs, and expanded public health activities related to PPHPs and PROFE. In
turn, coverage of PPHPs would increase.

The same outputs contributed to improvements in the coverage of the PPHPs (objective 2) and clinical
governance of the PPHPs (objective 3), and the two objectives are interrelated, as improvements in
governance would have been expected to contribute to increases in coverage. For purposes of this
assessment, all relevant outputs related to coverage and governance are reported under this objective
(objective 2), with outcomes relevant to clinical governance reported under objective 3.

Outputs

NCDs: In 2012, Argentina enacted one of the first sodium reduction laws in the world. 142
municipalities became tobacco-free, exceeding the target of 140. 1,661 public and private institutions were
certified as tobacco-free. 465 organizations (each employing at least 30 workers) were certified as healthy
work environments. A large number of trainings and capacity-building exercises on NCD prevention and
control were supported.

PROFE: 2,562 PROFE beneficiaries from Tucuman and Misiones enrolled in a pilot clinical governance
program for kidney disease prevention and control, not reaching the target of 4,000. 8,477 PROFE
beneficiaries who were women with more than seven children signed their letter of rights, signaling that they
were aware of their benefits under the program, not reaching the target of 40,000.

Vaccine-preventable diseases: The project sponsored a large number of trainings, knowledge-building
activities, and information technology system strengthening efforts (listed in the ICR, p. 49). Six vaccine
storage centers and two cold chambers were constructed, and other relevant equipment was procured.

Vector-borne diseases: A permanent training system for personnel of the National Coordination of Vector
Control was implemented and is operational, as is a system of real-time notifications of routine and
emergency actions. Capacity strengthening and trainings in Chagas prevention, surveillance, and control
were carried out in the 19 Chagas-endemic provinces, and all relevant provinces have developed provincial
and operational strategic plans for Chagas disease. Similar efforts were implemented for mosquito-

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)



transmitted diseases. Equipment, computers, and vehicles were provided for provincial lab networks to
enhance early diagnosis and reporting. A wide variety of vector control activities, including block monitoring,
inspection and treatment of dwellings, elimination of mosquito breeding sites, testing, education, and
community events were carried out (listed in the ICR, p. 51).

HIV/AIDS: Capacity was strengthened within the HIV-Sexually Transmitted Diseases Directorate to plan,
coordinate, implement, and monitor HIV/AIDS strategies at the national and provincial levels. A wide variety
of studies were supported (listed in the ICR, p. 52). US$26 million was spent on HIV drugs and medical
supplies, as well as implementation of centralized purchasing mechanisms. 476 Centers for Testing and
Counseling were created, carrying out awareness activities and counseling/testing.

Blood safety: New policy regulations and laws were enacted on blood donation, and national registries were
created. Four centralized blood production centers, smaller infrastructure, and equipment were
provided. Hemotherapy specialists and other personnel were trained. 4,894 blood drives were carried out,
including 670 by specialized blood banks in high-demand areas.

Tuberculosis: Capacity strengthening was provided for implementation of the National Program of Control of
Tuberculosis and Leprosy, including actions for strategic planning, prevention, surveillance, and
treatment, as well as planning, coordination, and monitoring at the provincial level. Universal TB treatment
is now guaranteed. 9,000 drug treatments for sensitive and resistant TB were provided in 2016.

Outcomes

Expanded coverage of prevention, diagnosis and treatment was achieved in six of the seven PPHPs
supported under the operation.

NCDs:

Tobacco consumption prevalence among adults ages 18-64 decreased from 30% in 2010 to 25.1% in 2018,
exceeding the target of 27%. The ICR (p. 47) reported that regular exposure to second-hand smoke
decreased from 40.4% in 2009 to 36.3% in 2013; the indicator was not clearly defined, and the ICR (p. 15)
also pointed out that this result was influenced by a large number of factors and therefore cannot be
attributed solely to the project. However, the project-supported NCD prevention activities, public health
communication campaigns, and Healthy Municipalities and Communities Program are likely to have
contributed to a reduction in second-hand smoke exposure. Daily sodium intake per inhabitant decreased
from 11.2 grams in 2009 to 9.2 grams in 2013. Cancer-prevention test access increased in two pilot
provinces. The percentage of women between 40 and 70 years old in the province of Tucuman benefiting
from at least one mammography provided by the health system increased from 10% in 2010 to 90.8% in
2017, exceeding the target of 60%. The percentage of women between 35 and 64 years old in province of
Misiones benefiting from at least one pharmacovigilance or cytology test provided by the health system
increased from 10% in 2010 to 76.6% in 2017, exceeding the target of 60%. The percentage of women



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)



between 50 and 69 years old in the province of Misiones benefiting from at least one mammography
provided by the health system increased from 10% in 2010 to 90.8% in 2017, exceeding the target of 60%.

PROFE

83.3% of PROFE beneficiaries with low-incidence, high-cost diseases were included in the PROFE health
care chain, exceeding the target of 50%. 100% of PROFE beneficiaries newly diagnosed with renal chronic
dialysis were evaluated within six months of beginning dialysis, exceeding the target of 80%. 95.1% of
PROFE beneficiaries who were renal chronic dialysis patients were evaluated and included in the National
Information System for Procurement and Transplantation, exceeding the target of 80%.

Vaccine-preventable diseases

The percentage of children under one year of age vaccinated with pentavalent vaccine declined from 93.6%
in 2010 to 88% in 2018, not meeting the target of an increase to 95%. The ICR (p. 14) explained that
coverage remained stable or increased slightly (to 93.8% in 2015) through most of the project period, but
then dropped in 2016 and 2017 due to burdens on the system's capacity as part of program enhancement
efforts (introduction of new vaccine registration practices and an increase in the number of compulsory
vaccines), and also due to administrative weaknesses (delays in the purchase of vaccines stemming from a
change in providers, weak procurement mechanisms, and inadequate availability of funding). The ICR (p.
19) noted that the actual drop in coverage may have been less than reported as a result of transitioning
registration practices, and the drop was expected to be reversed in 2018 with purchases of vaccines from
new providers. It is not clear whether this reversal took place.

Vector-borne diseases

The ICR (p. 50) reported "significant progress" in vector control, and two provinces (San Luis and Tucuman)
interrupted vectorial transmission. Treatments for Chagas disease increased by 38.8% between 2010 and
2016. The ICR also provided information on prevention of vector transmission of Chagas disease
through entomological surveys and spraying in 2017, but there was no baseline data. The number of
provinces conducting regular monitoring and reporting on Chagas disease increased from zero in 2010 to 19
in 2017.

HIV/AIDS

The ICR (p. 18) reported a 2017 result of 70.6% for the indicator "percentage of operational counseling and
testing centers," meeting the target of 70%; the indicator was not clearly defined. The ICR provided
information on coverage of antiretroviral therapy, but there was no baseline data.

Safe blood




                                                                                                 Page 9 of 20
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)



    Reactive serology (positive results detecting the presence of infections) at the national level decreased from
    9% in 2009 to 4.7% in 2016, indicating less risk of transmission of infections through blood
    transfusion. Blood donations per 1000 inhabitants over 18 years old were reported as increasing from
    25.6% in 2010 to 30.9% in 2017, exceeding the target of 30.6%; this indicator was not clearly defined, as
    percentage is understood to mean per 100 rather than per 1000. The number of transfusion centers
    increased from 244 in 2011 to 861 in 2016. The percentage of deferred blood donors decreased from 21%
    in 2009 to 17% in 2017. The percentage of transfusions of fractionated blood units increased from 84% in
    2009 to 95.3% in 2016, and transfusions of whole or unprocessed blood decreased from 8,406 units in 2009
    (1.6% of transfusions) to 1,160 units in 2016 (0.17% of transfusions). The number of hospital-based blood
    production centers decreased from 238 in 2011 to 147 in 2016, and the number of centralized blood centers
    increased from 27 to 38 over that same time period.

    Tuberculosis

    The percentage of patients testing positive for pulmonary TB who received treatment increased from 54% in
    2007 to 98.6% in 2017.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective

     Increase the clinical governance of the Priority Public Health Programs


    Rationale

    The theory of change addressed inadequate clinical governance (standards of care, transparency and
    accountability, and mechanisms for constant improvement) of the PPHPs. It held that technical assistance,
    training, works, and goods aimed at expanding clinical governance of PPHPs at the national and provincial
    levels, results-based transfers to MSPs based on the achievement of annually-agreed institutional outcomes,
    and results-based capitation payments for activities aimed at improving clinical governance under PROFE
    would lead to increased capacity of the MSN and MSP in clinical governance of PPHPs, renewed and
    expanded public health infrastructure to support PPHPs, and expanded public health activities related to
    PPHPs and PROFE. In turn, clinical governance of PPHPs would improve.

    Outputs were as described above under objective 2.

    Outcomes

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)




NCDs: 74% of provinces began to include injury by external causes in their quarterly reports loaded into
SISA. 5,831 Health Centers for Primary Care were assessed and certified regarding their approach to
NCDs.

PROFE: Three technical audits were conducted on the clinical effectiveness of low-incidence/high-cost
diseases, renal disease, and hæmophilia, exceeding the target of two audits.

Vaccine-preventable diseases: The Federal Register of Nominalized Vaccination is now operational in 22
provinces, and over 40% of individual vaccination events were registered there in 2017. However, its
implementation is not yet consolidated, illustrated by the fact that the percentage of live births registered in
the database compared to the actual number of live births fluctuates significantly from year to year (for
example, 70% in 2016 and 57% in 2017). The ICR (p. 14) noted that the 2016-2017 declines in pentavalent
vaccine coverage for children under one year of age, described under Objective 2, reflected "weaknesses in
the clinical governance and service delivery of the immune-preventable disease program," which translated
into a decrease in coverage (expected to be temporary).

Vector-borne diseases: A system of real-time notification of routine and emergency actions of the personnel
of the National Coordination of Vector Control was implemented under the project and is operational, serving
as a tool for evidence-based decision making and rapid resource deployment during outbreaks. The ICR (p.
18) stated that reporting of Chagas events was strengthened, but no baseline information was
provided. Similarly, the ICR (p. 18) reported that epidemiological surveillance of mosquito-transmitted
diseases has "improved significantly, providing the opportunity for timely clinical interventions," but no
specific baseline or results data were provided.

HIV/AIDS: An HIV Patient Management System was implemented, reducing the application and approval
time for antiretroviral treatment from 15 days in 2010 to 48 hours in 2017, and for viral load authorizations
from 30 days in 2010 to less than a day in 2017.

Blood safety: Volunteer donor management and social communication units were established at the
provincial level. Only one public health laboratory was completed by the project's closing, not meeting the
target of 12 national or provincial labs or blood banks constructed and/or rehabilitated. 12 other physical
works were still under implementation at closing, with levels of progress ranging from 32% to 90%. It was
expected that they would all be completed during the first half of 2019; it is not known whether this took
place. The works were delayed during project implementation due to weak procurement capacity and lack of
adequate budgetary allocations. Blood plasma produced by MSN and provincial labs increased from 33,000
kilos in 2010 to 43,557 kilos in 2017, exceeding the target of 40,000 kilos.

TB: The ICR reported that the system for monitoring of TB drugs and medical supplies was improved and
made operational, but no further information was provided.




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 20
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)



             Due to significant shortcomings in the achievement of improved governance related to vaccine-preventable
             diseases and blood safety, and lack of information related to vector-borne diseases and TB, achievement of
             this objective is rated Modest.



             Rating
      Modest
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

Achievement of the first objective, to improve the stewardship role of the federal public health system through
strengthening of the EPHFs, is rated Substantial due to strong achievement of outputs and meeting of key
outcome targets on healthy environments and epidemiological surveillance. Achievement of the second objective,
to increase coverage of the seven PPHPs, is rated Substantial due to evidence of expanded prevention,
diagnosis, and/or treatment in six of the seven priority areas. Achievement of the third objective, to increase
clinical governance of the seven PPHPs, is rated Modest due to significant shortcomings in the achievement of
improved governance related to vaccine-preventable diseases and blood safety, and lack of information related to
vector-borne diseases and TB. Balancing these ratings, overall Efficacy is rated Substantial.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial

     5. Efficiency


            The PAD's economic analysis (Annex 9) found a net present value of US$ 9.17 billion, with an internal rate of
            return of 55% over a ten-year period, using a 10% discount rate. The analysis quantified health gains and
            translated those gains, including an estimated 300,000 deaths averted, into estimates of direct and indirect
            benefits. Direct benefits (economic years of life saved) increased from US$ 47 million in 2012 to US$ 577
            million in 2020. Indirect benefits (savings associated with reduced hospitalizations, consultations, and
            treatment; economic benefits associated with reduced economic costs of illness and death of working-age
            adults; and impacts on quality of life) increased from US$ 195 million in 2012 to US$ 2 billion in 2020. On the
            cost side of the ledger, in addition to total project costs of US$ 461 million, the analysis included the costs of
            capital and recurrent expenditures related to management of the seven essential public health programs. A
            sensitivity analysis using different assumptions was not performed. Importantly, the PAD's analysis assumed
            that all health gains would be due to the project, when clearly many health gains would have occurred even in
            the project's absence. The analysis could have endeavored to estimate the expected increment that would
            arise from improved stewardship, leading to much lower returns attributable to the project.


                                                                                                                 Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)




The ICR (Annex 4, pp. 59-60) did not repeat the PAD's analysis, but instead listed: (a) reasons that
pentavalent vaccine coverage rates may recover after the reported drop in 2016-2017; and (b) several
economic benefits that were not included in the PAD's calculations, including savings from NCD prevention
activities, Chagas prevention activities, restructuring of the blood network, and implementation of a
management information system for monitoring health supplies. In the absence of formal analysis, the basis
for the ICR's rating of economic efficiency as High (p. 59) is unclear.

The ICR (p. 20) rated implementation efficiency as modest. Inclusion of all 24 provincial jurisdictions in the
project posed implementation challenges, but these costs were argued to have been balanced by the risk
diversification inherent in the approach (assuming uneven levels of commitment and technical capacity);
it may have been a cost-effective approach, given Argentina's federal organization. The ICR (p. 21) explained
that performance-based financial incentives constituted a significant portion of provinces' discretionary health
spending, providing "powerful mechanisms" to incentivize achievement of results, but no further information
was included on the performance-based mechanism. Civil works experienced procurement delays resulting
in the project being extended by 22 months. As the ICR (p. 20) pointed out, those delays deferred the
economic benefits associated with the civil works. Furthermore, insufficient budgetary allocations due to tight
fiscal conditions delayed payments for civil works in 2017 and 2018. Recurrent changes in authorities
(presidential elections in 2011 and 2015, changes in provincial authorities in 17 of the 24 provinces, three
different national health ministers, and 62 different provincial ministers) and program coordinators, at all
levels, also slowed implementation due to shifts in priorities.

Given the absence of a rigorous formal economic analysis with appropriate assumptions at project closure
(especially important for an investment of this magnitude), and with clear evidence of significant
implementation inefficiencies, Efficiency is rated Modest.



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                    Rate
                                                         Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                    Available?
                                                                                   100.00
Appraisal                                               55.00
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)



6. Outcome


The project's objectives were highly relevant to country context, government strategy, and Bank strategy at
appraisal and closing. Achievement of the first objective, to improve the stewardship role of the federal public
health system through strengthening of the EPHFs, is rated Substantial due to strong achievement of outputs
and meeting of key outcome targets on healthy environments and epidemiological surveillance. Achievement of
the second objective, to increase coverage of the seven PPHPs, is rated Substantial due to evidence of
expanded prevention, diagnosis, and/or treatment in six of the seven priority areas. Achievement of the third
objective, to increase clinical governance of the seven PPHPs, is rated Modest due to significant shortcomings
in the achievement of improved governance related to vaccine-preventable diseases and blood safety, and lack
of information related to vector-borne diseases and TB. Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. In the absence of
a rigorous formal economic analysis with appropriate assumptions at project closure, and with clear evidence of
significant implementation inefficiencies, Efficiency is rated Modest. These ratings indicate moderate
shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation, leading to an Outcome rating of Moderately
Satisfactory.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


The ICR (pp. 28-29) reported significant risks to the project's outcomes. The institutional strengthening
produced by the project -- governance at the national and provincial levels, enhancement of vertical and
horizontal coordination in the sector, and implementation of PHAs based on national program protocols --
appears likely to be sustained. A large portion of the staff hired as part of the project's technical assistance
have been formally transferred to the MSN. Third-party evaluation of PHAs has increased accountability in
reporting. Project implementation (with the exception of procurement, financial management, and safeguards)
was carried out within regular national and provincial structures, promoting in-house capacity building that is
likely to persist. The project's safeguards unit has been permanently incorporated into the MSN. However,
PROFE has been transferred outside the MSN, now conceived by the government as a program to serve only
the disabled; its clinical accountability and efficiency gains are therefore at risk. Macroeconomic conditions
threaten budgetary allocations to the health sector. Perhaps most importantly, there is a structural lack of
mechanisms to ensure national-provincial coordination and provincial compliance with national norms,
standards, and reporting; although this issue is addressed by several ongoing Bank-financed operations, many
areas of intervention are not captured by any specific project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)




a. Quality-at-Entry

  The project was a direct follow-on to the Essential Public Health Functions I project (US$219 million, 2006-
  2012), which strengthened the organizational structure and institutional capacity of the MSN and MSPs
  with a focus on prevention of chronic and vector-borne diseases. Key lessons learned at appraisal (PAD,
  p. 11) were drawn from previous project experience in the country and region, including the need to link
  financing closely to outputs and outcomes, with third-party verification; the importance of incorporating
  incentives into project design; the need to define clearly the relationship between national and provincial
  entities; and the importance of impact evaluations. Overall implementation risk was assessed as high
  (PAD, Annex 4), with the most critical risks specified as procurement weaknesses, the potential for
  misappropriation of funds given the project's wide geographic spread, capacity challenges within the
  technical implementing agencies, and the degree of partnership between the central and provincial levels.

  However, there were shortcomings. The project's scope was ambitious and complex, covering 18 vertical
  areas of intervention (11 EPHFs and seven PPHPs), each of which required coordination and
  implementation in 24 different provinces. Overall, this amounted to 432 sub-sets of intervention activities,
  as well as two pilot projects in Misiones and Tucuman, presenting significant challenges for the Bank team
  and coordinating unit. This level of ambition was excessive in the context of well-recognized "poor capacity
  and complexity of institutional arrangements" (PAD, p. 64). In addition, there were gaps in M&E design
  affecting future assessment of outcomes (see Section 9a).


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  The project was "intensively supervised" (ICR, p. 28), with timely and accurate supervision reports. The
  same team involved in preparation remained in place through the project's lifetime, providing continuity
  through one change in team leadership and multiple changes of government and national/provincial
  health leadership. Key technical staff were based in Argentina, allowing for swift identification and
  resolution of challenges as they emerged. Project management and fiduciary challenges were addressed
  promptly, including the development of a Governance and Accountability Action Plan that produced
  improvements in financial management (FM) and procurement. Safeguards were well supervised.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The project was to continue to support the MSN in: (i) collecting routine national health statistics; (ii) monitoring
  public health supply monitoring; (iii) conducting national epidemiological surveillance; and (iv) undertaking
  external audits for measuring results at the provincial level. In addition, the government was to improve the
  information system for chronic diseases and develop a new "clinical governance" monitoring system for
  PROFE, both of which were to be used as new platforms for project-level M&E. The specific project monitoring
  system used in the predecessor project, Essential Public Health Functions Programs I, was to be upgraded and
  used for this project. An impact evaluation was planned, using (among other sources) a 2009 National Risk
  Factor Survey for baseline data. The project's results framework specified five outcome indicators, with
  baselines and targets, and each indicator was carefully defined (PAD, "Operational Definition of Indicators"
  table, pp. 23-26).

  However, there were moderate shortcomings. The PDO statements were broad, lacking specific definitions of
  such terms as "stewardship" and "governance." The outcome indicators were relatively few in number, given
  the broad nature of the PDOs. Most of the 11 EPHFs and seven PPHPs were measured with neither a PDO-
  level indicator nor an intermediate outcome indicator.



b. M&E Implementation

  According to the ICR (p. 23), M&E capacity in the coordinating unit was robust, and project activities were
  well monitored. Implementing institutions at the national and provincial levels collected and reported data as
  planned. Progress reports, including mid-term and end-of-project reports, were well prepared. Third-party
  technical audits were used to monitor outputs at the provincial level. However, the impact evaluation
  rendered "very limited results" due to "methodological weaknesses" (ICR, p. 24); no further information on
  these shortcomings was provided.



c. M&E Utilization

  The project's M&E system served as the de facto M&E system for the MSN, as it was the only tool available
  for consolidation of provincial data on activities being carried out by the national directorates and program
  units. Project M&E also supported the MSN in compiling traditional national health statistics, monitoring
  supplies for public health, carrying out epidemiological surveillance at the national level, and performing
  external audits for the measurement of results at the provincial level. The ICR did not report whether and
  how project M&E data and analysis were used to inform policy or make mid-course implementation
  adjustments.



                                                                                                      Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was rated Environmental Assessment category B and triggered three safeguard policies: OP/BP
  4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.09 (Pest Management), and OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples).

  The Environmental Assessment at appraisal assessed the state of health care waste management in the
  country, including the legal framework, compliance issues, management considerations, and provincial
  capacities. The results were integrated into an Environmental Action Plan. OP 4.09 was triggered to
  support vector control activities in the event of outbreaks that would require the use of pesticides. No
  pesticides were to be procured under the project, and no significant increase in use of pesticides was
  expected to arise from project investments. The Environmental Action Plan included pertinent guidelines for
  any vector control measures in line with national laws and Bank safeguard policies. All relevant
  environmental safeguards documents were disclosed in-country and by Infoshop in September 2010. The
  ICR (p. 26) stated that the creation in the MSN of a Technical Area of Environmental Safeguards (TAES)
  was a key tool of project execution, resulting in a performance rating for the environmental safeguard of
  Highly Satisfactory. TAES established national standards for waste management, provided technical
  assistance to the MSPs to create Health and Environment areas, and enhanced technical training at the
  provincial level.

  The project was estimated at appraisal to benefit indigenous communities and dispersed rural populations
  in 15 of the country's 24 provinces. In conformity with OP/BP 4.10, all 15 of these provinces developed
  Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) under the predecessor project, and these plans were being implemented
  with satisfactory results at the time of this project's appraisal. An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
  was developed on the basis of the existing framework and lessons learned from its implementation, and
  disclosed in-country and by Infoshop in August and September 2010. The ICR (p. 26) reported that the
  project financed activities addressing indigenous peoples in a satisfactory manner. At the provincial level,
  the project led to the creation of 14 Provincial Indigenous Health Units, and 19 of the 20 provinces that
  eventually activated this safeguard policy had a specific indigenous health area by the end of the project
  period. However, performance was uneven; IPP execution averaged 64% but ranged from 0% in two
  provinces to 100% in six provinces.

  In 2017, all safeguards teams working on Bank-financed projects were transferred to the MSN's
  International Financing Unit for Health, facilitating an integrated approach for future health projects.




                                                                                                      Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial management

  The project's FM rating in Implementation Status and Results Reports was moderately satisfactory to
  satisfactory throughout implementation (ICR, p. 24). The Bank team provided FM advice in a timely
  manner. Identified shortcomings -- mainly delays and quality of interim financial report (IFR) submissions --
  were addressed promptly. IFRs were all reviewed and found acceptable. Audit reports were received by the
  Bank with some delay, but they were all found acceptable following review.

  Procurement

  High staff rotation "highly influenced" procurement performance; shortcomings in the quality of procurement
  documents "had a direct impact on implementation efficiency" (ICR, p. 25). To address these challenges,
  procurement supervision included standard prior review, an annual post review mission to identify areas
  needing improvement, and targeted trainings. The last two years of the project were primarily focused on
  executing small civil works contracts; despite "significant efforts" to procure and implement on time, there were
  delays in implementation of procurement processes and deviations during contract execution (ICR, p. 25).



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                       IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                    Modest project efficiency, and
                                                         Moderately                 modest achievement of the
Outcome                        Satisfactory
                                                         Satisfactory               objective to improve clinical
                                                                                    governance of the PPHPs.
                                                                                    The project's scope was
                                                                                    overly ambitious and complex.
                                                         Moderately
Bank Performance               Satisfactory                                         M&E design shortcomings
                                                         Satisfactory
                                                                                    affected assessment of
                                                                                    outcomes.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial               Substantial                ---

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)



Quality of ICR                                            Substantial               ---

12. Lessons


The ICR (pp. 29-30) offered several useful lessons, adapted here:


  • Consensus-building and collaboration between national- and provincial-level actors can help articulate
  strategies and responsibilities of the various levels. This project supported symposia, joint working sessions,
  seminars, workshops, and field visits that helped build consensus and coordination within the framework of
  the country's federal structure.
  • Project evaluation methodologies require definition during preparation in order to ensure availability of
  appropriate data. In this case, data challenges limited the relevance and utility of the final impact evaluation.



IEG offers one additional lesson:


  • Projects with complex, multiple-part objectives require a matching array of outcome indicators. In this case,
  the development objectives covered 18 functional areas across 24 provinces, and the results framework was
  inadequate to assess achievement comprehensively.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR consolidated a large amount of information about a complex project into a well organized, coherent
storyline. It focused on demonstrating the integrity of the project's results chain and on verifiable outcomes. It
contained consistent and careful discussions of attribution of some of the observed results to project-supported
interventions. However, in other areas (for example, sodium reduction), it was not clear to what extent the
project contributed to achieved outcomes. Also, there were instances of inconsistent data reporting (for
example, number of PROFE beneficiaries enrolled in a kidney disease program, reported as 2,562 and 4,000,
p. 17 and p. 48). In assessing efficacy, the distinction between coverage of PPHPs (objective 2) and clinical
governance of PPHPs (objective 3) was not always clear. The efficiency analysis was perfunctory. Finally,
several of the ICR's lessons drew from project elements and experiences that were not described earlier in the


                                                                                                     Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Essential Public Health Functions II (P110599)



document. Balancing the positive elements with the shortcomings (some of which were micro-level), ICR
Quality is rated Substantial.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                              Page 20 of 20
