     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kyrgyz Global Partnership for Education (P132490)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0021507

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P132490                                     Kyrgyz Global Partnership for Education

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Kyrgyz Republic                             Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16201,TF-16209,TF-A4531                  31-Dec-2017                                        12,799,458.50

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Apr-2014                                 30-Jun-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             12,800,000.00                                  12,800,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              12,800,000.00                                  12,799,458.50

 Actual                                          12,799,458.50                                  12,799,458.50




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Judyth L. Twigg               Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                           Maldonado



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   According to the Grant Agreement (page 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 8), the project
   objectives were as follows:


     •   To increase equitable access to preschool education; and
     •   To establish conditions for improving its quality.

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kyrgyz Global Partnership for Education (P132490)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

                                                         PHEVALUNDERTAKENLBL




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

   (Note: Project amounts reported below are for the Global Partnership for Education (GPE) grant only.)

   1. Expansion of quality pre-primary education (Appraisal: US$ 11.6 million; Actual: US$ 11.23 million): This
   component aimed to increase access to preschool education, as part of a school readiness program to
   enter Grade 1. Activities included: development and delivery of a teacher training program for preschool
   education; provision of learning materials and equipment for preschool classes; training for school Deputy
   Directors on implementing the school readiness program in existing primary schools; establishment of
   community-based kindergarten programs in disadvantaged areas; and a pilot initiative for inclusive
   education to serve children with special education needs (SEN).

   2. Improved policy, programs and system effectiveness (Appraisal: US$ 0.34 million; Actual: US$ 0.66
   million): This component aimed to improve policy and programs in support of the proposed reforms in the
   preschool sub-sector, such as the introduction of a shift-based model, inclusive education, and preschool
   financing. Activities included: technical assistance on these reforms; dissemination of newly introduced
   Early Learning Development Standards; piloting of an Early Development Instrument (EDI) measurement
   tool; and classroom observation assessments of teacher performance.

   3. Communications and implementation support (Appraisal: US$ 0.76 million; Actual: US$ 0.80 million):
   This component aimed to finance communication activities and project implementation support. Activities
   included: engaging stakeholders (including parents) on the importance of early childhood education;
   informing stakeholders on current reforms in the preschool sector; third party project monitoring; and
   project implementation support.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

   Project cost

     •The appraised project cost was US$ 16.37 million. This amount included a Borrower contribution of
     US$ 3.57 million for teacher salaries. Not including this amount, the appraised and actual project cost
     was US$ 12.8 million.

                                                                                                             Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kyrgyz Global Partnership for Education (P132490)




   Financing

     •The project was financed by a GPE grant in the amount of US$ 12.8 million, which disbursed in its
     entirety.


   Borrower contribution

     • The appraised Borrower contribution was US$ 3.57 million to cover 100% of teacher salaries; the
     project team confirmed that the government fulfilled this commitment.



   Dates

     • The project closing date was extended from December 2017 to June 2018 to allow completion of
     additional outputs. Project savings were incurred that allowed for a greater number of teachers to be
     trained and preschool programs to be established, as well as a piloting of a per-capita financing model.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale


  Although considered one of the poorest economies in the Central Asia region, the Kyrgyz Republic has
  made some progress in the creation of a liberal market economy and integration into the global economy;
  however, the country is still marked by governance challenges and political instability. In terms of
  demographics, about one-third of the population is under the age of 15, although the specific population
  group aged 7-15 years declined in the period from 2007 to 2012, while the group aged 0-6 years
  increased. In the education sector, compulsory education includes primary and lower secondary education
  (grades 1-9) and coverage is high, with net enrollment in lower secondary at 92 percent. However, quality
  of education is mixed, as both national and international student assessment results indicate low outcomes
  (in 2009, two-thirds of Grade 4 students did not display mastery of essentials in language, math, and
  science; more than three-quarters of 15-year-olds were considered "functionally illiterate"). Only 18 percent
  of children aged 3-6 years were enrolled in preschool in 2010, with significant income and geographic
  disparities. Of these, 90 percent were in formal state-funded kindergarten programs that offer four hours of
  instruction plus four hours of rest and meals. These programs require costly facilities and support staff. In
  recent years, alternative preschool models have been introduced with support from international agencies,
  offering instruction on a half-day basis, requiring only basic facilities and solely teaching staff. Demand for


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Kyrgyz Global Partnership for Education (P132490)



       these "community kindergarten" programs has increased in light of scarce public funding for the more
       formal full-day programs.

       A 2009 Law on Preschool Education set forth the goal of universal coverage with affordable and high-
       quality programs. The government's 2020 Education Sector Plan includes equal access to education,
       particularly for preschool, as a key goal, along with improving the quality and management of education. A
       special focus on integrating children with special needs into the regular preschool system is also
       included. The Bank's Country Partnership Strategy for FY14-17, in effect during project
       preparation, highlighted improved public service delivery as a country development goal, including in
       education, as a critical pre-condition for human capital formation. The Bank's current Country Partnership
       Framework for FY19-22 similarly highlights the development of human capital as an objective, with
       continued emphasis on early childhood education.



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To increase equitable access to preschool education

    Rationale

    The theory of change was overall sound. The project's support for establishing and equipping preschool
    classes (including those in disadvantaged areas), training preschool teachers, and training teachers on SEN
    children was likely to lead to the intended outcome of increased access to preschool. Equity in access was
    to be achieved through expanding classes in the poorest communities (according to poverty mapping and
    enrollment data) as well as piloting activities for reaching SEN children. The longer-term goal was to
    strengthen foundational academic skills to increase employability. The shift-based approach to preschool
    education enabled an increased number of children to be served (an approach that eliminated the more
    costly facility and support staff but did not reduce instruction time).

    Outputs


        • Establishment of 2,779 preschool "school preparatory" classes in 2,204 existing primary
        schools, equipped with furniture and learning materials (no target identified).



                                                                                                      Page 4 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kyrgyz Global Partnership for Education (P132490)



 • Establishment of 120 community-based kindergarten programs (target: 100), including 16 in the hardest-
 to-reach mountainous regions. The ICR (page 13) noted that the project required local governments to
 contribute towards funding of the programs by providing the buildings and teacher remuneration for at
 least five years, thus contributing to a sense of ownership by local stakeholders and financial
 sustainability. Efficient procurement led to project savings, which enabled the establishment of 20
 programs beyond the targeted 100.
 • Training of 5,210 teachers (target: 3,300) in preschool education, primarily selected from the existing
 pool of primary education teachers.
 • Provision of learning materials in Kyrgyz, Russian, and Uzbek languages to all project schools.
 • Support to 33 schools in one pilot district to serve SEN children. This included the provision of SEN
 learning materials to all pilot schools and training of 244 teachers and school social workers on the SEN
 model (target: 150). This inclusive education model was evaluated and recommended for implementation
 nationwide.
 • Information and communication activities on the importance of early childhood education.




Outcomes


 • Enrollment in pre-school "school preparatory" classes was 116,985 by Year 3, surpassing the target of
 80,000. In Year 1, enrollment was 114,451; in Year 2, enrollment was 137,886. The total number of
 children participating in the program over the three year period was 369,322. The ICR (page 13) reported
 that the total number of six-year-old children in project years 1-3 was 395,842; therefore, 93% coverage
 was achieved.
 • Enrollment in community-based kindergartens in the targeted communities was 10,000, achieving the
 target of 10,000. The community-based programs were implemented in poor, hard-to-reach mountainous
 regions. Hence, services were provided to disadvantaged children, in their mother tongues. In the three
 regions with the highest poverty rate, the number of children from poor households enrolled increased
 from 16,195 in 2015-16 to 17,660 in 2016-17, dropping to 15,236 in 2017-18.
 • Enrollment of SEN children in mainstream schools was 50 (no target identified).
 • The share of groups in community kindergarten programs that operate in the Uzbek language was
 10.5%, surpassing the target of 9.0%. The share of groups that operate in the Kyrgyz language was
 87.7%, surpassing the target of 62.0%.
 • The ICR noted that as gender parity in gross enrollment rate had already been achieved for the country,
 the project intended to simply monitor this indicator to ensure that gender parity was maintained. The
 gender parity index for gross enrollment rate for pre-primary school was maintained at 1.0.




                                                                                                Page 5 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Kyrgyz Global Partnership for Education (P132490)



    Due to the surpassing of targets for preschool enrollment (attributable to both expanded supply due to
    procurement savings and increased demand due to outreach), along with evidence of having reached
    disadvantaged populations, achievement is rated High.


    Rating
   High
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     To establish conditions for improving its quality

    Rationale

    The theory of change was overall sound, with the project's support for teacher training (including
    implementation of teacher performance assessment tools), learning materials, strengthened legal and
    regulatory framework, and measurements of student readiness likely to contribute to conditions for improved
    quality.

    Outputs


        • Provision of a package of essential teaching-learning materials to all 2,779 preschool "school
        preparatory" classrooms (target: 100% coverage). The ICR (page 18) reported that the storybooks in
        Russian and Kyrgyz languages were submitted to the XIV CIS Member States International Competition
        among publishers and won first place for quality and content.
        • Training of 5,210 teachers (target: 3,300) for the preschool "school preparatory" program, most of
        whom were selected from the pool of existing primary education teachers.
        • Training of 310 teachers (target: 250) for the community-based kindergarten programs.
        • Training of 2,930 deputy directors on the school preparatory program (target:2,200).
        • Training of 210 methodologists to provide one-on-one mentoring support to teachers.
        • Introduction of the EDI, which was used to monitor school readiness.
        • Dissemination of early learning standards and subsequent revision of the preschool curriculum.
        • Piloting of per capita financing for the education sector.




    Outcomes




                                                                                                      Page 6 of 14
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Kyrgyz Global Partnership for Education (P132490)



                  • 100% of the teachers trained in the preschool "school preparatory" program were certified to teach,
                  surpassing the target of 90%.
                  • The quality score of teacher pedagogical practices improved by 10%, surpassing the target of 5%
                  improvement. Two sample-based surveys were conducted in 2015 and 2017. Emotional support scores
                  improved by 9.81%; classroom organization scores improved by 10.56%; and instructional support scores
                  improved by 8.61%. The project team clarified that an improvement in scores beyond 5% is considered
                  statistically significant in terms of education outcomes.
                  • The EDI was tested in two rounds and then adopted by the Ministry of Education and Science (MoES) for
                  nationwide use.


             In addition, the following results from the EDI indicate increased learning attainment among those enrolled:


                  • Improved language and cognitive development skills, physical well-being, social competence, emotional
                  maturity, communications, and general knowledge ("effect size" greater than 2.0, signifying statistical
                  significance).
                  • Decreased disparity among children from the lowest wealth group in the areas of language and cognitive
                  development and social competence.


             Due to the provision of quality learning materials and surpassing of targets for improved teacher
             performance, along with improved student learning outcomes, achievement is rated High.


             Rating
      High
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale

Achievement of the objective to increase equitable access to preschool education is rated High, due to the
surpassing of targets for preschool enrollment, along with evidence of having reached disadvantaged
populations. Achievement of the objective to establish conditions for improving preschool education quality is
rated High due to the provision of quality learning materials and surpassing of targets for improved teacher
performance, along with improved student learning outcomes. The overall Efficacy rating is High.




Overall Efficacy Rating
High


                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Kyrgyz Global Partnership for Education (P132490)




5. Efficiency


During project appraisal, there was no cost-benefit analysis conducted, although the PAD's economic and
financial analysis (Annex 6) cited generally accepted international evidence on the benefits and cost-
effectiveness of preschool education. In addition, the PAD drew upon data and analysis from sector studies
to support the conclusion that support to the preschool sector was cost-effective: the 2009 Program on
International Student Assessment; the 2012 Public Expenditure Review, which concluded that "preschool
attendance is a more cost-effective policy for improving student achievement (measured by test scores in
reading) in students tested at 15 years of age compared to other interventions such as teacher training or
pupil:teacher ratios"; and the 2014 Public Expenditure Review, which concluded that coverage of preschool
services could increase four-fold without increasing costs if the sector offered shift-based vs. full-day
programs.

The ICR (Annex 4) provided similar cost-effectiveness data. An analysis of unit costs (desks, chalkboards,
cabinets, teacher desks) with the two previous Fast-Track Initiative (FTI) projects pointed to comparable unit
costs. An additional analysis of cost per hour for the shift-based versus full-day program indicated the
following:


   • In rural areas, the cost per hour for the project's "school preparatory program" was 1,478 Kyrgyz som,
   and the cost per hour for the project's community-based kindergartens was 3,158 Kyrgyz som. These
   compared favorably to the cost per hour for traditional state-funded kindergarten, which was 4,727 Kyrgyz
   som.
   • In urban areas, the cost per hour for the project's "school preparatory" program was 1,338 Kyrgyz som,
   and the cost per hour for the project's community-based kindergartens was 2,553 Kyrgyz som. These
   compared favorably to the cost per hour for traditional state-funded kindergarten, which was 4,160 Kyrgyz
   som.


Despite the shortened school day (three-hour program with no rest or meal time), the quality of learning
appears to have not been affected; in fact, EDI scores indicate learning improvements.

Additionally, the project accumulated savings due to efficient procurement, which allowed the exceeding of
targets: additional preparatory classes at existing primary schools and newly-established community
kindergartens, and training of methdologists. The project did experience a six-month closing date extension,
although the ICR reported that this was due to the project's savings, which were being used for additional
outputs to increase project impact. There were no major implementation problems reported that would have
caused other project inefficiencies.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kyrgyz Global Partnership for Education (P132490)



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                      Rate
                                                            Point value (%)             *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                      Available?
                                                                                        0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


Relevance of the objectives is rated High. Achievement of the objective to increase equitable access to
preschool education is rated High due to surpassing of targets for preschool enrollment, along with evidence
of reaching disadvantaged populations. Achievement of the objective to establish conditions for improving
its quality is rated High due to the provision of quality learning materials and surpassing of targets for improved
teacher performance, along with improved student learning outcomes. Efficiency is rated Substantial due to
unit cost analyses indicating efficient use of project resources. These ratings indicate no shortcomings in the
project's preparation and implementation, leading to an Outcome rating of Highly Satisfactory.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


Technical capacity, with regards to preschool curriculum and assessment tools, was well established through
project support. Political support for expanding access to preschool is likely to be sustained, as reflected in the
Law on Preschool Education that has been in effect since 2009; in addition, the pilot program on the inclusive
education model was included in the National Concept on Inclusive Education, which is planned to be
implemented nationwide. For the community-based kindergartens, local governments were required to
contribute funding, specifically by providing the facility and funding for teacher salaries for at least the first five
years, thereby contributing to financial sustainability. However, the country is still vulnerable to external
shocks, and there will likely continue to be some volatility in the public budget for education.


                                                                                                          Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kyrgyz Global Partnership for Education (P132490)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

  The project built upon two previous GPE/FTI grants, the second of which had included technical assistance
  for developing a 3-4 month "school readiness" preschool program. Due to unexpectedly high demand for
  the preschool services, including in rural areas, the government made the decision to offer a full-year
  "school readiness" program using existing primary school facilities, but it needed further donor support to
  update learning materials and teacher capacity. The project design responded to these needs, while
  also including targeting strategies to increase coverage, for example using poverty maps and enrollment
  data to identify disadvantaged groups and also piloting an inclusive education program to identify
  and benefit SEN children. Given the inadequacies of the existing government structure, such as the
  tendency of sectors to operate in "silos," the project design focused on early childhood education, as an
  intermediate step towards developing a broader early childhood development approach for the country.
  The risk assessment identified substantial risks in the areas of political commitment,
  implementation capacity, and fiduciary management. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework was
  strong with clear baseline and target data, relevant and measurable indicators, and timely evaluative
  studies, though a more explicit focus on equity outcome indicators at the PDO level could have been
  included.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  There were regular supervision missions carried out during the project period, including a midterm review
  mission. The Bank team drew upon the existing strong relationship with the MoES, due to regular
  communication and past history of operational support, to ensure timely responses to implementation
  issues. M&E implementation was strong, with data collected as planned and evaluative studies conducted,
  the findings of which were used to inform project adjustments and demonstrate achievements. Savings due
  to efficient procurement were used to increase project impact. The fiduciary team was based in the region
  and provided regular support, with no major issues reported for either financial management or
  procurement.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kyrgyz Global Partnership for Education (P132490)



  Satisfactory



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The M&E design was strong, with both the results framework and M&E arrangements well considered at the
  project's outset. The results framework monitored key outputs as well as outcomes using measurable and
  relevant indicators that covered key aspects of the project objectives (access and quality); however, there was
  no explicit PDO-level indicator for the aspect of equity, other than "number enrolled in community-based
  kindergartens" (presumably reaching the poor) and intermediate outcome indicators (number of special
  education needs children supported). The project also introduced internationally recognized measurement tools
  for teacher performance and early childhood development, both of which were to be implemented in two rounds
  during the project period.



b. M&E Implementation

  Indicators were tracked regularly as planned. Evaluative assessments of key activities - teacher training and
  school readiness - were conducted, not only providing robust evidence of project impact but also informing
  adjustments to project design during the project period. Both assessments included two rounds of sample-
  based classroom observations/testing to provide baseline and final results commensurate with the project
  period. MoES staff were trained on the implementation of the assessment tools, and M&E functions have
  been integrated into existing MoES routines to support capacity development.



c. M&E Utilization

  As noted above, evaluative activities were sequenced appropriately and thus findings were used to inform
  project design adjustments. For example, results from the classroom observations of teachers in the first
  assessment round led to adjustments in the training modules to address gaps in key domains and also to
  introduce one-on-one teacher mentoring. Both assessment tools were also approved by the MoES for
  further use nationwide. The ICR (page 21) also reported that data were used to demonstrate progress to the
  public and key stakeholders.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kyrgyz Global Partnership for Education (P132490)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project due to minimal school construction
  activities. The safeguard policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) was triggered, and an
  Environmental Management Framework was prepared. The Framework required the use of site-specific
  checklists and Environmental Management Plans for each school construction site prior to initiating work. A
  regional safeguard team conducted reviews of project sites and confirmed that all construction and waste
  treatment was in compliance with safeguards.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial management: Regular reviews of financial management were conducted, and no major issues with
  compliance were reported. There was no information reported in the ICR on whether audits were conducted or
  whether there were any qualified opinions. The project team reported that it was not aware of any qualifications
  on audits.

  Procurement: Regular reviews of procurement, including post-procurement reviews on a sample basis, were
  conducted, and no major issues with compliance were reported except for minor delays at the project
  start. Efficiencies in procurement led to project savings, which were then used to deliver additional project
  outputs.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                        IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                       Highly Satisfactory        Highly Satisfactory        ---
Bank Performance              Satisfactory               Satisfactory               ---

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kyrgyz Global Partnership for Education (P132490)



                                                                                    The results framework could
Quality of M&E                 High                       Substantial               have focused on "equity" more
                                                                                    explicitly
Quality of ICR                                            Substantial               ---

12. Lessons


Lessons drawn by the ICR, adapted by IEG:


  • A strong and clearly laid out results chain, translated into a strong results framework and M&E design, can
  aid project performance and reporting on achievements. In the case of this project, the well-focused results
  chain with attributable outputs and outcomes, and relevant and measurable indicators on access and quality,
  led to effective monitoring and feedback loops.
  • Community-based kindergartens can be a low-cost alternative to preschool education when the goal is to
  expand access in remote areas. In the case of this project, local contributions via facilities and teacher
  salaries helped to lower costs, and assessments showed that learning outcomes improved in poor areas with
  this alternative model.




13. Assessment Recommended?

Yes

Please explain


To verify outcomes, particularly the transition rates from pre-primary to primary schools and learning
outcomes, and to learn lessons from the significant achievements in Efficacy and M&E.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR had a strong focus on results and a clearly articulated results chain. It was notable for its use of M&E
data and findings to substantiate achievements. The quality of the analysis was strong, as the results chain
presented in the ICR clearly linked project outputs to outcomes. Although the results framework did not
include sufficient indicators on equity, the ICR included additional data and analysis (Annex 6)
to supplement. However, particularly given the weak governance and low fiduciary capacity noted in the PAD,


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kyrgyz Global Partnership for Education (P132490)



there was very limited information reported in the ICR on fiduciary performance, other than that there were no
problems with compliance with fiduciary standards, and there was no information on audit results.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
