     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PH-GEF Integrated POPs Management Proj (P106885)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021584

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P106885                                   PH-GEF Integrated POPs Management Proj

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Philippines                               Environment & Natural Resources


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-95839                                  30-Jun-2016                                           6,036,931.10

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 20-May-2010                               30-Sep-2017

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            8,640,000.00                                    8,640,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             8,640,000.00                                    8,640,000.00

 Actual                                         6,036,931.10                                    6,036,931.10




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Divya Kapoor               John R. Eriksson             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   The project development objective (PDO) is to assist the Philippines in minimizing the risk of human and
   environmental exposure to Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) by strengthening the regulatory and
   monitoring framework and improving capacity for and providing demonstrations of, safe management of



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PH-GEF Integrated POPs Management Proj (P106885)



   Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs), reduction of releases of unintentionally produced POPs, and reduction of
   exposure to POPs in contaminated sites.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   Component 1: Strengthening Regulatory Framework and Capacity Building for POPs Monitoring



   (Appraisal Estimate US$ 0.58 million; Actual at Project Closing US$ 0.25 million)



   The objective of this component was to strengthen the regulatory and monitoring capacity for phasing out
   the use of and reducing exposure to and releases of POPs. The component would (a) assist the
   Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) in developing and updating supporting policies
   and regulations for POPs management, (b) assist the Department of Health (DOH) and the DENR in
   developing and establishing a national exposure monitoring for POPs through surveys of exposure risks
   and measuring of POPs in targeted populations, and (c) undertake long‐term planning for residual POPs
   management issues.



   Component 2: Reduction of Releases of Unintentionally Produced Persistent Organic Pollutants



   (Appraisal Estimate US$ 3.43 million; Actual at Project Closing US$ 1.53 million)



   The objective of this component was to better understand and demonstrate the reduction of the releases of
   dioxin and furan emissions. The component would (a) assist the DENR and Department of Science and
   Technology (DOST) in improving knowledge about dioxin and furan emissions through the determination of
   emission factors for open burning sources, verifying the ability of specific technologies to reduce emissions,
   and updating and publicly disseminating the dioxins/furans inventory; (b) assist local governments, through
   DENR, in demonstrating practices that are able to prevent or suppress fires at disposal sites and reduce
   barriers to the elimination of backyard garbage burning and to disseminate the results to encourage
   replication; and (c) assist DOST in disseminating and providing national training to Unintentionally Produced


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 13
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  PH-GEF Integrated POPs Management Proj (P106885)



Organic Pollutants (UPOPs) generators on guidelines on Best Available Technology (BAT) and Best
Environmental Practice (BEP) for reducing UPOPs releases from open burning.



Component 3: Management of Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs)



(Appraisal Estimate US$ 2.17 million; Actual at Project Closing US$ 2.04 million)



The objective of this component was to assist the country in minimizing the risk of human and
environmental exposure to PCBs by strengthening oversight and by improving the on‐site management
practices by PCB owners in all sectors that use them. Through training and technical assistance (TA), it
would assist (a) the DENR in raising awareness, completing testing and registration, and developing a
database and inventory of PCB sources; (b) PCB owners in implementing on‐site PCB management
including equipment identification, testing, labeling, inventory, and safe storage; and (c) the DENR in
monitoring and enforcing.



Component 4: Identification and Remediation of POPs Contaminated Sites



(Appraisal Estimate US$ 1.62 million; Actual at Project Closing US$ 1.49 million)



The objective of this component was to strengthen the enabling capacity of the country to reduce risks
posed by POPs contamination of the environment by identifying POPs‐contaminated sites; establishing a
strategic framework, technical guidelines, and professional capacity to help address them; and building
public knowledge and awareness. The component would assist (a) the DENR in undertaking an inventory of
POPs‐contaminated sites and through a hazard ranking system identifying those that pose a high risk to
human health and the environment; (b) the DENR in developing a national strategy for POPs‐contaminated
site remediation; (c) landowners in demonstrating the use of risk‐based criteria to develop and undertake
site remediation and site control; (d) the DENR in developing guidelines and standards for site remediation
and control; and (e) the DENR improving its capacity for enforcement and to provide training and improve
public awareness of POPs‐contaminated site management.



Component 5: Project Management




                                                                                                Page 3 of 13
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PH-GEF Integrated POPs Management Proj (P106885)



  (Appraisal Estimate US$ 0.84 million; Actual at Project Closing US$ 0.73 million)



  This component would finance consultants and incremental operating costs of the Project Management
  Office (PMO) in the DENR Environmental Management Bureau (EMB) for its day‐to‐day project
  management activities, including project management and coordination; information, education, and
  communication; monitoring and evaluation; and financial management and procurement.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost:

  Total Appraisal Estimate: US$ 8.64 million

  Actual Disbursement: US$ 6.036 million



  Project Financing:

  World Bank Financing:

        GEF Grant Original Estimate US$ 8.64 million; Actual Disbursement US$ 6.036 million

  Borrower contribution:

        Original Estimate US$ 16.03 million; Actual Disbursement Philippines Peso 275,178,163.88 (approx.
           US$ 5.3 million using April 2019 exchange rate; as per ICR annex 3, page 57, the equivalent
           amount was US$ 4.3 million). No direct explanation in ICR for the reduced borrower contribution.



  Key Dates:

  Approval: 20 May 2010

  Effectiveness: 24 June 2011

  Original Closing: 30 June 2016

  Restructuring - all Level 2 restructurings:

       




                                                                                                  Page 4 of 13
                                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                        PH-GEF Integrated POPs Management Proj (P106885)




                                                 o 29 April 2011 (Change in Results Framework and in Loan Closing date, Reallocation
                                                   between disbursement categories, Change in disbursement arrangements, procurement and
                                                   implementation schedule);
                                                 o 30 June 2015 (Change in Results Framework, Change in Components and Cost, Change in
                                                   Disbursement arrangements and in Legal covenants);
                                                 o 30 June 2017 (Change in Results Framework and in Loan Closing date).

                                      Actual Closing: 30 Sep 2017




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale


               The project objectives are relevant to the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) and the Philippines’ overall
               development goals. While the CPS 2015-2018 doesn’t directly mention the project, the CPS' environment
               related engagement areas are overall aligned with the project’s development objectives, contributing
               directly to the reduction of emissions from solid waste and consequent improved health outcomes. Also, the
               project’s objectives align with the Philippines commitments under the Stockholm convention to achieve its
               emissions reduction and subsequent elimination obligations. However, the PDO was overambitious (ref
               section 8 below) - specifically the targets of the indicator for PCBs subject to environmentally sound
               management were overambitious and subject to financing and support from outside of the project. Overall
               project design also failed to account for the challenges that could arise with project implementation as the
               source of POPs in the Philippines involved four distinct POPs areas - POPs from pesticides, dioxides and
               furans produced by industrial processes, PCBs in electrical transformers, and POPs contaminated sites.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             The project development objective (PDO) is to assist the Philippines in minimizing the risk of human and
                             environmental exposure to Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) by (1) strengthening the regulatory and
                             monitoring framework and (2) improving capacity for and providing demonstrations of, safe management of

                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 13
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         PH-GEF Integrated POPs Management Proj (P106885)



                      Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs), (3) reduction of releases of unintentionally produced POPs, and (4)
                      reduction of exposure to POPs in contaminated sites.


                      Rationale


                      The ICR notes (page 18) that the PDO was complex and included a single higher-level and longer-term
                      outcome which was ‘difficult’ to evaluate as the impacts would be beyond the ‘purview’ of the project. Annex 1
                      of the ICR indicates zero or no baselines. A matrix of outcome indicators and corresponding outputs is
                      summarized as below (ICR pages 18-19).



                          1. Outcome – Strengthened regulatory and monitoring framework for POPs management
                                 o Output – Number of new legal instruments formulated/modified for POPs management that are
                                    adopted – Original target 19, Revised target 7, Actual at project completion 5 (71%)
                          2. Outcome – Improved capacity for and providing demonstrations of safe management of PCBs
                                 o Output – POPs and POPs waste destroyed, disposed or contained in environmentally sound
                                   manner (metric tons) – Original target 2400 PCB oils and 4480 PCB waste, Revised target 435
                                   PCB oils and 1140 PCB waste, Actual at project completion 114.15 PCB oils and 339.07 PCB
                                   waste (26% PCB oils and 30% PCB waste)
                          3. Outcome – Reduction of releases of UPOPs
                                 o Output – Local government units (LGU) certified by EMB as having no operating dumpsite
                                   within their jurisdictions – Original target 3, Revised target 3, Actual at project completion 1
                                   (33%)
                                 o Output – LGUs certified by EMB as having a sanitary landfill operating according to standard
                                   operating procedures, including application of daily soil cover – Original target 2, Revised
                                   target 2, Actual 0 (0%)
                          4. Outcome – Reduction of exposure to POPs in contaminated sites
                                 o Output - Contaminated land managed, or dump sites closed under the project (hectare) –
                                   Original target 6, Revised target 6, Actual at project completion 2.32 (39%)
                                 o Output - National Strategy on management of POPs contaminated sites adopted – Original,
                                   Revised and Actual – Yes strategy adopted (100%)



                      Rating
                      Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale


Having partly achieved some sub-outcomes and not having achieved others at all (with one exception noted
above), on balance the achievement of the PDO is judged negligible. Based on the narrative presented for the


                                                                                                                      Page 6 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PH-GEF Integrated POPs Management Proj (P106885)



restructurings, it is noted that several project activities were reduced significantly in scope during project
implementation and several activities were dropped. This was one of the contributing factors for the negligible
rating for efficacy. The theory of change makes a critical assumption that strengthening the regulatory framework
and improving capacity for POPs management and demonstrations, will automatically lead to the reduction of risk
of human and environmental exposure to POPs. Thus, the project, as designed, is not enough for the sufficient
achievement of project impact. While the reduction of ambition of the project is by itself an insufficient condition
for rating efficacy as negligible, the lack of achievement of the revised targets and the incomplete implementation
of several interventions (as summarized above) contribute to the overall negligible rating for Efficacy. Thus, owing
to major shortcomings in achievement of the project objective and lack of evidence of sufficient outcomes and
outputs, the overall efficacy is rounded down and rated as negligible.



Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary reason
Negligible                                                 Low achievement

5. Efficiency


As per the PAD (page 18), with the lack of precision in health benefits of POPs reduction, a cost-effectiveness
approach was adopted for the project, and the project aimed to maximize the cost-effectiveness of decision
making by reducing uncertainties related to sources, technologies and exposure pathways for POPs. It notes
that the interventions chosen under the project were the least cost options for reducing exposure and have
substantial co-benefits making them economically cost negative. As per the ICR (page 26), the assumptions at
appraisal could not be validated and evidence to support the least-cost option could not be provided at closure
due to the absence of detailed data on the costs of the interventions, including cost of site remediation, cost of
inventory and technology choices, as well as regulatory and liability regimes. The Task team explained that,
despite best efforts, the project was unable to recruit experts to collect the data and implement the design
suggested in the PAD. Administrative efficiency was also low owing to significant delays in project
implementation and incomplete project outputs at closing. Overall efficiency is thus rated as negligible.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PH-GEF Integrated POPs Management Proj (P106885)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



The overall outcome rating is Highly Unsatisfactory owing to a Substantial rating for Relevance, and Negligible
ratings for Efficacy and Efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



The ICR affirms that while the project did not achieve its objective of minimizing exposure to POPs in a
measurable way, it contributed to strengthening the Philippines’ ability to do so in the future. The main risk is
the local governments’ commitment to carrying out the POPs strategies and enforcing laws and regulations,
accompanied by the availability of financing for implementation.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  The ICR confirms (page 32) that the World Bank had identified an area of support that was and remains
  relevant to the Philippines’ environment, public health, and the global commons (Stockholm Convention
  on POPs). Project activities targeted high priority areas, including strengthened regulatory and monitoring
  framework for POPs management, improved capacity for safe management of PCBs, improved capacity
  for and demonstration of reduction of releases of UPOPs, and improved capacity for and demonstration
  of reduction of exposure to POPs in contaminated sites. However, the project design was overambitious,
  highly expansive and complex in relation to the weak coordination capacity of the implementing agency
  (ICR page 32). The targets of the indicator for PCBs subject to environmentally sound management were
  overambitious and subject to financing and support from outside of the project. Overall project design
  also failed to account for the challenges that could arise with project implementation as the source of
  POPs in the Philippines involved four distinct POPs areas ((1) POPs from pesticides, (2) dioxides and
  furans produced by industrial processes, (3) PCBs in electrical transformers, and (4) POPs contaminated
  sites) resulting in numerous implementing agencies and complex coordination challenges. Another
  weakness (ICR page 33) was that waste picker livelihood issues were ‘delegated’ to a parallel activity
  funded through the Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF) which also experienced implementation

                                                                                                       Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PH-GEF Integrated POPs Management Proj (P106885)



  delays and incomplete implementation of project activities. Thus there were shortcomings in project M&E
  and in the assessment of risks that affected implementation. On balance the shortcomings in quality-at-
  entry were significant and the rating is Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


 The first two restructurings were a ‘missed opportunity’ (ICR page 33) to address issues like revising the
 project PDO and setting targets that were attainable by the implementing agencies. The ICR also states
 that the standard GEF budget allocation was insufficient for the ‘proper’ supervision of the project in light of
 the ‘significant’ safeguards requirements (ICR para 94). Additional Bank budget was provided to the team.
 There was also an Integrity (INT) investigation for the project which slowed down project implementation.
 The ICR affirms that (para 96) more proactive measures could have been taken to mitigate the
 implementation challenges. The Task team noted that revising the PDO during implementation, preferably
 before the mid-term review, may have improved project outcome ratings. On balance the shortcomings in
 supervision were major and the rating is Unsatisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 As explained below, there was limited linkage between outcome indicators and the higher-level outcome in
 the PDO. Everything that the PDO sought to achieve was not captured in the Results framework and the
 indicators. There was no indicator for measuring the risk of human or environmental exposure to POPs,
 against which the targeting accomplishment of minimizing exposure could be measured. However, the
 results framework included targets that would help understand and assess the degree of human exposure
 in the future by creating better inventories of POPs and the hazards they pose (ICR page 29), although
 these are not by sector. The ICR also highlights that the methodology for measuring reduction in backyard
 burning, which constituted 60 percent of the reduction target was not adequately implemented, and owing
 to the challenge, this indicator was dropped in 2015.


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PH-GEF Integrated POPs Management Proj (P106885)




b. M&E Implementation


  The ICR reports that during the restructuring in June 2015, the indicators that were dropped, added or
  revised, weakened the underlying results chain by removing activities and outputs integral to information
  related elements (ICR para 78). Another weakness was the lack of an efficient tracking of counterpart
  funds utilized by the project and partners (ICR para 77).



c. M&E Utilization


  The ICR reports that (page 30) an important example of M&E utilization was the Government’s
  reassessment and modification of its PCB disposal strategy considering the dramatically higher PCB
  amounts reflected in the updated PCB inventory under the project. This improved information about the
  scale and nature of PCB stockpiles and contaminated equipment contributed to a reevaluation of the
  deadlines for PCB disposal, which were suspended, as well as adoption of a more enabling approach
  toward issuance of PCB transport and export permits given that the amounts involved dramatically
  exceeded the capacity of the existing domestic disposal facility.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


   Environmental: The project was assessed as a category A project, for environmental assessment. The main
   instrument for this project was the Environmental and Social Assessment Framework (ESAF). The ESAF
   prescribed a category A rating and required a full Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA).
   According to the ICR (page 31), at the close of the project, a supplementary Safeguards Action Plan had to
   be drafted and agreed with the Government to cover the residual risks coming from the uncompleted
   activities. The ICR (page 36) reports that residual safeguards risk due to unfinished activities after project
   closing were mostly resolved by December 2018 when activities in the Safeguards Action Plan were
   completed. Environmental Assessment Policy (OP 4.01) was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory in the last
   Implementation Supervision Report.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 13
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PH-GEF Integrated POPs Management Proj (P106885)



  Social: The ICR reports (page 31) that at appraisal, World Bank’s Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) and
  Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) Policies were triggered. The Environmental and Social Management
  Framework (ESMF) included an Indigenous Peoples Framework as one of the subproject sites was thought
  to be subject to an ancestral domain claim under the Philippines’ Indigenous Peoples Rights Act. The ESMF
  also included a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework to deal with cases of involuntary
  resettlement due to temporary or permanent land acquisition or restricted access in relation to the land that
  would be subject to site remediation and controls. It also included a Social Development Framework for
  Waste Pickers intended to address potential losses of livelihoods of waste pickers. Compliance with the
  agreed procedures and instruments was generally satisfactory. Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) was
  rated Moderately Unsatisfactory in the last ISR. The ICR mentions that the "abrupt" closure of the project
  (ICR para 87) left some unfinished safeguards work in activities of Components 2 and 4 (the Task team
  explained that the government did not to endorse the request for an extension, which led to the "abrupt"
  project closure) - this necessitated remedial measures in the form of a Safeguards Action Plan.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


  Financial Management (FM): The ICR notes (page 32) that the project encountered FM issues at the
  beginning of project implementation but subsequently improved when an FM specialist was hired for the
  project and the Operations Manual was completed. Also, the FM system of the project was rated
  Moderately Unsatisfactory during most parts of the implementation period. The rating was due to delayed
  submission of interim financial reports and audited financial statements to the World Bank as required
  under the Grant Agreement. Also, the project was not able to comply with the submission of the internal
  audit report by the DENR‐Internal Audit Service (IAS), which was also one of the financial covenants. The
  IAS review requirement was eventually removed from the Grant Agreement during project restructuring in
  June 2015. The Task team confirmed that audit reports for the first 3 years (2011-2013) reflected
  Unqualified audit opinion. From 2014-2017, however, audit reports were all Qualified due to various
  reasons.



  Procurement: Several ineligible expenditures were noted during regular project supervision that were
  eventually resolved through refund (ICR page 32). The ineligible expenses include excess travel
  allowance, purchases of equipment outside the Procurement Plan, and goods procured and charged to
  training but subsequently considered ineligible.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  NA



d. Other

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PH-GEF Integrated POPs Management Proj (P106885)



   The project did not have explicit gender-targeted activities or targets. While some POPs do have gender-
   specific health effects for men and women and the level of exposure can vary by gender, owing to different
   occupational exposure scenarios, there was lack of precise data available to the project on specific health
   impacts by gender.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Highly
Outcome                                               Highly Unsatisfactory
                                Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  Per IEG policy, the lowest
                                Moderately                                        constituent rating applies in this
Bank Performance                                      Unsatisfactory
                                Unsatisfactory                                    case; namely, Bank Supervision
                                                                                  is Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons



Some lessons adapted from the ICR are below:



The importance of setting realistic and relevant targets requires careful study and planning:
The procedural and technical process for designing and adopting regulatory instruments that are
critical for project success should be well studied and planned for so that related project
implementation risks can be mitigated, and delays planned for. For instance, in this project the legal
output for an executive order for the interagency task force on POPs management involved prior
interagency coordination, and a lengthy approval and issuance process with final approval by the
Office of the Philippine President. According to the ICR (para 101), this was unachievable within the
project life.



A narrow focus on POPs reduction by sector could be better than a comprehensive plan
covering all emissions sectors, to achieve tangible results: The project had incorporated
several distinct POPs areas ((1) POPs pesticides, (2) dioxides and furans produced by industrial
processes, (3) PCBs in electrical transformers, and (4) POPs contaminated sites) resulting in
numerous implementing agencies and complex coordination challenges. Some successful POPs
projects in other countries focused on a single area, or where there was a substantial direct
government involvement (for example UPOPs from hospital waste and PCBs owned by government


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PH-GEF Integrated POPs Management Proj (P106885)



utilities in Tunisia - P100478) that allowed greater control of activities and outputs, and achievable
targets.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



This is a comprehensive, candid, well-written ICR with good quality of analysis, as well as some useful lessons.
There are however some gaps in the narrative around why the PDO and Results Framework were not revised
during the restructuring, and the context of the INT investigation. The Task team provided prompt clarifications
when requested.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 13
