     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11) (P110156)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICR00004723

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P110156                                    SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11)

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Eswatini                                   Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80190,TF-11740                        31-May-2016                                           35,609,430.75

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Mar-2011                                30-Sep-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            20,000,000.00                                    16,336,866.00

 Revised Commitment                             36,321,842.25                                    16,321,842.25

 Actual                                         35,661,552.04                                    16,321,841.43




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Salim J. Habayeb            Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   The objectives of the project were to (i) improve access to and quality of health services in Swaziland with a
   particular focus on primary health care, maternal health and TB, and (ii) increase social safety net access for
   OVC (Loan Agreement, 12/14/11).



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11) (P110156)




   Explanatory note: TB means pulmonary tuberculosis, and OVC means orphans and vulnerable children.



   The scope of the project was national, and the country’s population was estimated to be one million people.



   Note on an associated outcome target revision: The objectives, project scope and components did not
   change, but one associated outcome target was revised downward on 5/26/16 under a level II
   restructuring. Since both original and revised targets were substantially achieved, neither the ICR nor this
   ICR Review applied a split evaluation because a split methodology would not add value to the project’s
   outcome assessment in this case.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   1. Strengthening the capacity of the health sector (Appraisal US$3.90 million; Actual US$4.7 million).



   The component aimed at improving governance and management of the health system at the regional level
   and health care regulation through the development of a regulatory and accreditation framework, by:



         Strengthening regulatory functions in the health sector by: reviewing the Borrower’s legal and
          regulatory framework; reviewing and adopting international and regional health agreements with a
          focus on public health; and strengthening oversight functions and professional health regulatory
          bodies, including the Medical and Dental Council and the Nursing Council.
         Strengthening the accreditation system in the health sector, including for health facilities and
          associated health training institutions; and strengthening hospital boards for improved planning and
          increased autonomy.
         Strengthening planning and fiduciary functions by building capacity of the health planning unit for
          better planning and coordination, with a focus on the development of health planning skills and

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11) (P110156)



         capacity, including the regional health management teams; finalizing the essential health care
         package; providing technical assistance; and training on financial management and procurement.



2. Facility-level support to improve access, quality and efficiency of services (Appraisal US$24.38
million; Actual US$26.9 million).



Support to clinics, health centers and hospitals, including support to the implementation of TB/HIV
integrated care, emergency obstetric and neonatal care, and health care waste management. Such support
was to include:



      Rehabilitating and upgrading infrastructure, providing equipment and furniture, designing and
         implementing infrastructure and equipment maintenance plans for selected health care facilities, and
         providing training and strengthening capacity to improve proper handling and maintenance of health
         infrastructure and medical equipment.
        Strengthening TB and HIV co-epidemic response through the provision of training and capacity
         building for HIV/TB coordinators, health care workers and ex-TB patients at the national and regional
         levels; conducting a study to identify good practice approaches for HIV/TB care at the community
         level and strengthening infection control measures at the national TB center; and establishing digital
         x-ray services at national and regional levels by financing the acquisition of digital x-ray equipment
         and provision of training for related use.
        Improving emergency obstetric and neonatal care through increased availability and capacity by
         developing and disseminating guidelines and protocols; training of midwives and medical
         doctors on postnatal and post-abortion care; supporting the hiring of anesthetic nurses; providing
         ambulances; developing and disseminating information, education and communication materials to
         increase awareness on midwifery; and emergency training, capacity building and technical
         assistance to the health management information system and to the sexual and reproductive health
         program to improve the monitoring of outcomes.
        Supporting the implementation of the health care waste management program and environmental
         and social management plans by developing policies, providing consumables and technologies for
         health care waste treatment and disposal, and training of health care staff on waste management.
        Supporting nursing training institutions aiming to improve the quality of nursing skills and increase
         access to nursing and midwifery services by rehabilitating selected nurse training institutions,
         developing a national strategic plan for nursing and midwifery, updating the existing national
         midwifery curriculum, and developing and implementing manuals and guidelines for mentorship and
         preceptorship.



3. Strengthening of orphans and vulnerable children (OVC) Safety Net (Appraisal US$6.2 million;
Actual US$4 million). The component aimed at supporting the implementation of the OVC Scheme to
increase social safety net access for OVC households, by:


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11) (P110156)




        Developing key features of the OVC Scheme and the OVC Scheme Manual that outlines its
         operational set-up and processes, preparing and installing a cash transfer payment mechanism,
         providing training and technical support for the Department of Social Welfare and the National
         Children’s Coordination Unit at the central and regional levels for the implementation of the OVC
         Scheme, establishing a management information system, designing an impact evaluation, and
         developing a list of beneficiaries as the pilot expands.
        Piloting the OVC Scheme, by providing OVC cash grants to beneficiaries to strengthen the ability of
         vulnerable households to care for OVC and meet their basic needs, and supporting the monitoring of
         the OVC Scheme through the management information system, external monitoring and impact
         evaluation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


  Costs and financing. The original project cost amounted to US$38.3 million consisting of an IBRD loan of
  US$20 million, a European Union (EU) grant of US$16.3 million, and a Borrower contribution of US$2
  million equivalent to cover staffing and operating costs for the last two years of the project. The actual cost
  was US$37.6 million.



  Dates. The project was approved on 3/10/11 and became effective on 5/9/12. A Mid-Term Review was
  carried out on 10/24/14. The project closed on 9/30/18, two years and four months beyond the original
  closing date (5/31/16). The project underwent five Level II restructurings shown below. The first
  restructuring of 5/26/16 modified the results framework and extended the project closing date (see details
  below). The rest of the restructurings were triggered by serial EU tranche funding. The following
  summarizes the five restructurings:



        5/26/16: The restructuring revised the results framework by dropping two outcome indicators,
         introducing new ones, and revising intermediate indicators to improve measurability (ICR, p.
         14). One outcome target related to service access was moderately revised downwards, from 80% to
         75% (see section 9b). The restructuring reallocated funds across disbursement categories and
         extended the original closing date by 22 months, from 5/31/16 to 3/31/18, to provide more time to
         complete project activities
        9/27/16: Second tranche of EU co-financing.
        6/27/17: Third tranche of EU co-financing and changes in the reporting of some indicators from
         cumulative to annual measurements.
        3/28/18: Fourth tranche of EU co-financing and extension of project closing date by an additional six
         months from 3/31/18 to 9/30/18.




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 17
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11) (P110156)



                           6/29/18: Following full disbursement of EU financing on 6/30/18, this final restructuring adjusted
                            funding ratios for the remaining project period (until 9/30/18).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


During the years preceding the project, the country had unfavorable indicators in maternal, neonatal, and
child health. Maternal and infant mortality were high. The maternal mortality ratio was estimated at 589
deaths per 100,000 live births (2007), and the infant mortality rate at 85 deaths per 1,000 live
births. Unequal access to health services was influenced by unequal distribution of health facilities,
personnel, and types of services offered across health facilities (ICR, pp. 6-7). In 2009, Swaziland had a
GDP per capita income of US$2,533 (World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2009), although nearly
70% of the population lived below the upper poverty line of US$9.50 per capita per month. Co-infection of
HIV and TB occurred in over 80% of all TB cases. The high rates of AIDS resulted in an increased number
of OVC in the country (estimated at 144,000 or about one third of Swazi children, PAD, p. 2) along with an
increase in child-headed households (ICR, p. 52). The project was consistent with the National Health
System/Sector Strategic Plans I and II (2009-2018) and was responsive to the needs of the country.



At closing, the project continued to be relevant to the World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy (CPS
FY2015–FY2018) for the Kingdom of Swaziland, specifically to Pillar II, Objective 2 on Social Services
Delivery, which highlighted HIV/AIDS, TB, and OVC support. Four project indicators constituted CPS
Objective Indicators (TB treatment success rate; percentage of health facilities that provide five public
health services; Caesarian deliveries as a percentage of institutional deliveries; and improved support to
poor families through OVC cash transfers). The TTL noted (5/1/19) that the project was pivotal in raising
attention to health system strengthening, as the government’s prior focus was on specific diseases or
compartmentalized activities. At the same time a wider sectoral approach increased the breadth and
complexity of project activities, although such a broader shift was not well captured by the project title.



Given full alignment between project objectives and the country partnership strategy around project closing,
relevance of objectives is rated High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                                      Page 5 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11) (P110156)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective

               Improve access to health services with a particular focus on primary health care, maternal health and TB.


               Rationale


               Activities related to improving health system performance, including technical support for health planning and
               budgeting; improved regulatory mechanisms, governance, and management; support to health centers and
               hospitals, including through standard operating procedures and guidelines; support to nursing training
               institutions; better management of primary care services, emergency obstetrics and neonatal services, and
               TB/HIV services; health care waste management; and construction of health facilities in underprivileged areas
               could reasonably be expected to contribute to enhanced health sector capacity and performance, which in
               turn would plausibly contribute to better access and quality of health services.



               Given various underlying determinants to health outcomes, and given the presence of active partners in the
               health sector (ICR, p. 10), direct attribution of outcomes to the project should be taken with caution, while also
               noting that the role of the project was predominant in developing health care facilities. Main partners
               providing support, directly or through technical assistance, were the European Union and Italian Cooperation
               (the EU co-financed the project); the Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria; President's
               Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief; UNICEF; WHO; and UNFPA.



               Outputs and intermediate results



                     People receiving essential health, nutrition, and population services increased from a baseline of
                      25,400 in 2011 to 167,081 in 2018, exceeding the target of 153,703.
                     Pregnant women receiving antenatal care during a visit to a health provider increased from a baseline
                      of 13,963 in 2012 to 177,704 in 2018, exceeding both the original target of 24,323 and the revised
                      target of 132,186.
                     The percentage of HIV positive TB patients (adults and children), who were initiated on antiretroviral
                      therapy, increased from a baseline of 50.7% in 2011 to 97.6% in 2018, exceeding the target of 90%.



               Outcomes


                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11) (P110156)




      Health facilities that provided at least five public health services [(i) family planning, modern methods;
       (ii) postnatal care; (iii) management of sexually transmitted infections/HIV; (iv) immunization; and (v)
       growth monitoring] increased from a baseline of 56.3% in 2010 to 77.4% in 2018, essentially achieving
       the original target of 80%, and exceeding the revised target of 75%.
      Caesarean deliveries, as a percentage of institutional deliveries at health facilities, increased from a
       baseline of 10.2% in 2011 to 13.5% in 2018, exceeding the target of 12% (however, this indicator, on
       its own, is not an optimal measure of access as it could be high even with a limited catchment
       population; and a high rate may also indicate unnecessary overuse of the procedure beyond what is
       medically necessary).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

Improve the quality of health services with a particular focus on primary health care, maternal health and TB.

Rationale


The rationale is the same as described under Objective 1 above.



Outputs and intermediate results



2,242 nurses and midwives were trained, and deliveries attended by skilled health personnel reached
167,081, exceeding the target of 153,703. People receiving tuberculosis treatment in accordance with the
WHO-recommended "Directly Observed Treatment Strategy" witnessed a gradual and favorable decrease
from a baseline of 9,180 in 2011 to 2,760 in 2018, exceeding the target of 6,100. This positive trend was
associated with decreasing TB infections in the community (TTL 5/1/19), substantiated by national data
illustrating a gradual decline in TB incidence, prevalence, and case notifications.



Outcomes




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11) (P110156)



The TB treatment success rate among bacteriologically confirmed cases increased from a baseline of 71% in
2011 to 89% in 2018, exceeding the target of 85%. However, this result is insufficient to assess the
achievement of the overall objective to improve the quality of health services, as the ICR did not provide
information on outcomes that would substantiate improved quality of primary health care and maternal health
resulting from the project.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective

Increase social safety net access for orphans and vulnerable children.

Rationale


The establishment of a cash transfer scheme, targeting mechanism, information system, and payment
delivery mechanism could reasonably be expected to generate predictable cash transfers benefiting OVC to
support the purchase of food, school materials, and transport support to health facilities. In turn, the resulting
safety net scheme for OVC would plausibly contribute to increased access to this social safety net. Also, in
the broader and longer-term context, the scheme was reasonably expected to mitigate the impact of
HIV/AIDS on OVC.



Outputs and Intermediate results



In addition to the information on the safety net design aspects noted in the rationale above, the project
provided training and technical support to the Department of Social Welfare in support of the OVC scheme;
established a management information system; and designed and conducted an impact evaluation. Quarterly
payment lists were generated to support regular and predictable cash transfers to beneficiaries. The
percentage of grievance and redress cases that were resolved within 45 days from receipt and registration
reached 75%, attaining the target.



The beneficiaries were selected based on a proxy means test from each of the four regions of the country
(ICR, p. 13). Beneficiaries were selected from one rural constituency per region, and there was no selection
from urban constituencies that were less poor.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11) (P110156)



                      Outcomes



                      OVC beneficiaries who received cash transfers on a quarterly basis increased from a zero baseline in 2011 to
                      reach 15,920 in 2018, exceeding the target of 8,000. According to the ICR (p. 19), exchange rate gains
                      enabled a larger number of beneficiaries to be reached than originally targeted. An impact evaluation
                      indicated that cash transfer recipients had better school attendance, consumed more essential foods, had
                      more household savings, and had better funding for transportation to seek health care (ICR, p.30).



                      The ICR suggested future scale-up of the program, subject to more detailed assessments of efficiency and
                      fiscal space (ICR, p. 24), and the Borrower (ICR, p. 70) suggested increasing the cash transfer amount to
                      fully cover all the needs of beneficiary children. The electronic payment system introduced by the project for
                      OVC cash transfers was adopted by other development partners in the country (ICR, p. 26).




                      Rating
                      High


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale


The aggregation of one fully achieved objective with an almost fully achieved objective and with one partially
achieved objective indicates a Substantial rating for overall efficacy.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial


      5. Efficiency


The PAD’s economic analysis (pp. 24-25) was insufficient, as it offered generic arguments about the economic
justification for the project based on the following expected benefits: first, that there were large positive
externalities associated with the investments, such as in maternal and child health; second, that the project
would contribute to improving the efficiency and effectiveness of existing sectoral spending and resource
allocations; and third, that indirect benefits from the OVC cash transfer pilot were expected to yield long-term


                                                                                                                        Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11) (P110156)



positive impacts from the anticipated incentives that would be created, such as better school attendance among
vulnerable school-age children.



The ICR (pp. 47-50) conducted an economic analysis for component 2 (facility-level support to health services)
as it constituted 76% of the investment, and the nature of its interventions allowed economic analysis
calculations. The ICR estimated the number of lives saved through caesarean section, safe delivery,
establishment of health facilities that provide at least five public health services, and effective TB
treatment. Reasonable assumptions on the impact of interventions were made based on international literature,
which indicated that maternal deaths were reduced by 35% and neonatal deaths by 22.7%. The analysis
assumed a 5% discount rate, computed with consideration of the treasury bond rate and inflation. The analysis
concluded that the net economic benefits generated by the project resulted in a positive net present value
estimated at US$17.5 million, with an internal rate of return of 7%, and a cost-benefit ratio of 2.1. A sensitivity
analysis using a discount rate of 10% displayed a cost-benefit ratio of 1.4.



There were significant shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation, indicating that the project was not
efficiently implemented. Effectiveness was delayed by 14 months after project approval because of delays in
recruiting essential staff for the implementation and coordinating teams, and in finalizing the Project Operations
Manual. The project was extended twice for a total of two years and four months to complete its
activities. Staffing and services of project-constructed facilities remained partial after seven years of project
implementation. Apart from the lack of staff, all facilities reported sub-standard equipment and stock of supplies
(ICR, p. 68). The lack of standards for medical equipment and health facilities enabled the procurement of
equipment that required high maintenance and that was not suitable for resource-constrained settings (ICR, p.
69). There was no effective monitoring of procured goods and services. Equipment was delivered long before
the completion of facilities, resulting in expired warranties before the equipment was installed (ICR, p. 28) was
installed (ICR, p. 28). Also there were contextual issues related to stock-outs of essential drugs that were
supported by other sources, outside project financing, but which had implications on the quality of services (ICR,
32).



Government policy was inconsistent in the area of human resources, as it instituted a no-recruitment policy, and
yet new staff were critical to achieve the project's intended outcomes (ICR, p. 65). There was no monitoring of
the locations where nursing graduates were employed, and the location of midwives who graduated in 2018
from the project-supported nursing school was unknown. Personnel turnover was high, and roles and
responsibilities were not clear (ICR, p. 65). In addition to delays in civil works, there were delays in technical
assistance and in the implementation of OVC-related activities. The Borrower’s comments (ICR, pp. 68-69)
noted that the project was too broad with poor coordination and delayed execution, that line ministries lacked
awareness about the project, and that relevant stakeholders were not adequately involved and passively
participated in implementing the project, which was perceived as a World Bank project.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11) (P110156)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    76.00
ICR Estimate                                              7.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



Relevance of objectives is rated High as the objectives remained fully aligned with the country partnership
strategy and with national plans. Efficacy is rated Substantial, as the project almost fully achieved its
objectives. Efficiency is rated Modest because of significant shortcomings in the efficiency of
implementation. Therefore, the overall Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory, indicative of moderate
shortcomings in the project’s overall preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



The ICR (pp. 32-33) reported important risks to development outcomes. Most are rooted in resource
constraints. The availability of adequate human resources and pharmaceutical supplies remains a risk to the
sustainability of outcomes. The ICR noted that this risk can be mitigated though collaboration with the
Ministries of Public Service and Finance. The maintenance of infrastructure and equipment is another risk
exacerbated by the weak capacities of the Ministry of Health (MOH). The ICR suggested that this risk may
be mitigated through coordination with the Ministry of Public Works and through public-private partnerships,
including the possibility of leasing equipment from the private sector. There is no sustained budget and
personnel to support continued implementation of health care waste management functions. At the time of
the ICR, no alternative resources had been identified to sustain the cash transfer scheme for
OVC. However, substantial institutional strengthening was realized under the project, including skills
development for district health and social welfare staff, and studies informing the sector on health financing,
hospital governance and management, and health legislation and regulation, including health insurance
(ICR, p. 25).


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11) (P110156)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  The Bank’s strategic choice to support health services and OVC was pertinent. The Bank Team
  adequately identified risks and weak capacities. In view of limited prior Bank engagement, the Team
  judiciously provided early attention to planning technical assistance and fiduciary aspects and
  oversight. The results framework had gaps, as it did not adequately reflect all PDO aspects that would
  be required to enable full outcome assessment (ICR, p. 29). Health facility planning was well targeted to
  serve poor communities, but with shortcomings that were subsequently revealed by the fact that most
  facilities required new construction rather than rehabilitation as initially planned (ICR, p. 27).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


 Supervision was undertaken regularly with a total of 15 ISRs adequately reported. Supervision and
 implementation included fiduciary and technical specialists. The Bank Team was reportedly proactive in
 identifying and addressing threats to the achievement of outcomes and the Bank’s fiduciary role, as
 evidenced by the project restructuring and improvements in the results framework. The utilization of
 exchange rate savings led to doubling the number of OVC cash beneficiaries. According to the ICR, the
 project team was able to navigate through a challenging governance and economic environment, while
 adequately providing oversight to fiduciary aspects, where no shortcomings were observed.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization



                                                                                                 Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11) (P110156)



a. M&E Design


 Project activities reflected the theory of change. The indicators reflected the objectives, but did not
 encompass all aspects of the stated objectives. Baselines were available. The indicators were
 measurable. Maternal health indicators were provided in absolute numbers only, and lacked percentages
 that would have provided information about utilization, e.g., attended deliveries, and pregnant women
 receiving antenatal care. The measurement frequency of indicators was not fully clear, as the term to be
 monitored "regularly" was used. Data were planned to be collected from MOH’s routine health
 management information system, the demographic and health survey, health facility surveys, and the OVC
 cash transfer information system that was to be established by the project. Measurement of the
 percentage of births delivered by a skilled attendant required a household survey. A data quality
 assessment undertaken in 2009 with a focus on HIV concluded that MOH data was of adequate quality
 standards, with a score of 3.9/5 (PAD, p. 42). An impact evaluation for the OVC scheme was planned.



b. M&E Implementation


  Routine data collection was implemented as planned and the impact evaluation for the OVC scheme was
  carried out. The results framework was revised in 2016 in consultation with MOH departments to ensure
  that definitions were well understood, and that indicators were aligned with existing systems. The
  percentage of births delivered by a skilled attendant was dropped as it was unlikely that a household
  survey could be undertaken by the closing date, and it was replaced by caesarean deliveries as a
  percentage of institutional deliveries. The TB case notification rate was dropped and replaced by TB
  treatment success rate among bacteriologically confirmed cases, which is a more robust indicator for TB
  treatment quality and effectiveness. Other clarifications were introduced to other indicators. The TTL
  also noted (5/1/19) that the new indicator on TB treatment success was better aligned with the TB
  program’s strategic objective, and would also reflect the ability of the national program to manage
  TB. The TTL explained that TB notifications were declining, in concert with decreasing TB infections in
  the country, and substantiated by gradual declines in TB incidence, prevalence, and case notification.



c. M&E Utilization


  In addition to the routine use of data for project monitoring, findings were used to inform the design of
  the upcoming follow-on Health System Strengthening Project. M&E was used to support the
  establishment of a system for OVC cash transfer, which was also used as a platform for the registration
  of grievance redress cases. The ICR stated that M&E findings were used by government stakeholders
  for advocacy and lobbying to sustain the cash transfer scheme after project closing. Also, the TTL
  (5/1/19) noted that project findings raised awareness about the need to strengthen the health system’s
  building blocks as a whole rather than focusing on specific diseases separately.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11) (P110156)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


   The project was classified as Category B and triggered safeguard policy OP 4.01 for environmental
   assessment, as the project anticipated an increase in health care waste generated by health facilities. A
   Health Care Waste Management Plan and an Environmental and Social Management Framework were
   prepared to address waste management and the environmental effects of civil works related to the
   construction of health facilities. An Environment Management Plan was later prepared for the construction
   of facilities. During implementation, the project supported the government in preparing the National Health
   Care Waste Management Policy which was approved by parliament, after which waste management
   regulations would be developed. But the ICR did not offer information about actual implementation and
   compliance.



   In the operations portal, the overall safeguards rating was recorded as Moderately Satisfactory. The TTL
   (5/1/19) clarified that the project commissioned an Environmental Compliance Officer to monitor
   construction activities and to submit monthly compliance reports, through which documentation and
   reporting were adequately implemented. Environmental performance was rated as moderately satisfactory
   for several reasons: delay in presenting the Health Care Waste Management Policy to the cabinet; delays in
   renewing permits for waste collection; issues of wastewater management and drainage, and maintenance
   of facilities; and water supply issues to some of the newly constructed facilities.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


   Financial Management. Financial management aspects were adequately implemented. Independent
   external audits of project financial statements were carried out regularly. No qualified audits were
   reported.



   Procurement. Procurement complied with guidelines, but the major challenge was related to weak
   capacities and significant delays. During appraisal, the procurement risk within the country was rated
   substantial, as procurement legislation was still undergoing reform, and the country’s capacity to execute
   World Bank-financed procurement was recognized as weak. During implementation, there was a high
   turnover of staff who were trained. The project supported the procurement process through technical


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11) (P110156)



   assistance and supervision. The challenges for the proximal stages of the procurement process were
   overcome, but remained for the follow-up processes and monitoring stages after contract awards.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


   As noted in Section 4 under Objective 3, the electronic payment system introduced by the project for OVC
   cash transfers was adopted by other development partners in the country, resulting in an unintended
   positive externality for the project (ICR, p. 26).



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                       IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  This ICR Review rated efficiency
                                                                                  as Modest because of significant
Outcome                           Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  shortcomings in the efficiency of
                                                                                  implementation.
                                                                                  This ICR Review rated the
                                                                                  quality of supervision as
                                                                                  Satisfactory, and the quality at
                                                                                  entry as Moderately Satisfactory
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  because of inadequate health
                                                                                  facility planning and gaps in
                                                                                  planning full outcome
                                                                                  assessment.
Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons



The ICR (pp. 33-34) offered several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons
restated by IEG:



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11) (P110156)




Collaboration with other ministries facilitates health sector performance. Under the project,
several challenges were dependent on other ministries, such as the Ministry of Public Service for
human resources; the Ministries of Public Works and Economic Planning for infrastructure
maintenance; and the Ministry of Finance for stockouts of essential drugs.



The inclusion of critical inputs such as essential drugs in the project financing plan prevents
a negative impact on project services that may be caused by uncertain supply from other
financing sources. During project implementation, support to pharmaceuticals and human
resources was expected from other financing sources, including from development partners, but
such expectations did not materialize resulting in pharmaceutical shortages.



Utilization of comprehensive quality improvement techniques facilitates the monitoring of
service quality. The quality of health services was a key project area, and the introduction of
quality improvement plans for health facilities would have strengthened the monitoring of quality
aspects.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



The ICR provided a detailed overview of the project experience in a clear and candid manner. The theory of
change was generally aligned to development objectives. The evidence and analysis were aligned to the
messages outlined in the ICR, but with shortcomings in the completeness of information on outcome evidence,
where gaps were related to the project’s M&E design rather than the ICR’s analysis. The ICR was internally
consistent, although the financing table in the main report was not fully consistent with the financing information
provided in Annex 3. The narrative and evidence supported the ICR's main conclusions, except for
efficiency. The ICR provided a noteworthy discussion on gender aspects, pro-poor approach, and impact of
OVC support on vulnerable households, including for schooling. Lessons derived from project experience were
outlined in the ICR. The ICR followed the majority of guidelines, but did not offer information about actual
implementation and compliance with environmental safeguards, which were subsequently provided by the
TTL. The ICR lacked a glossary for its numerous abbreviations and acronyms.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
SZ-Health, HIV/AIDS & TB Project (FY11) (P110156)



Substantial




                                                                                 Page 17 of 17
