          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          First Pub Inv Reform Sppt(P151487)



                                                                                    Report Number : ICRR0021453

   1. Project Data



    Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
    Niger                                      Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


    Programmatic DPL
    Planned Operations:           3             Approved Operations:         2

    Operation ID                                Operation Name
    P151487                                     First Pub Inv Reform Sppt


     L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
     IDA-56560                                 30-Nov-2016                                         77,240,520.00

     Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
     03-Dec-2015                               30-Nov-2016

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                           80,000,000.00                                             0.00

     Revised Commitment                            80,000,000.00                                             0.00

     Actual                                        77,240,520.00                                             0.00




     Prepared by                  Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator         Group
     Paul Holden                  Robert Mark Lacey          Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)


PHPROJECTDATATBL




     Operation ID                               Operation Name
     P159969                                    Second Public Investment Reform Sppt Cr. ( P159969 )



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Pub Inv Reform Sppt(P151487)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                      Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-56560,IDA-D1670                        31-Mar-2018                                              50,634,943.80

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Feb-2017                                31-Mar-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                              49,971,581.69                                                 0.00

 Actual                                          50,634,943.80                                                 0.00




2. Program Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives

   The project development objectives (PDOs) from the Financing Agreement (p. 6) for the first DPO were: (i)
   strengthening Public Financial Management (PFM) and public investment management (PIM) systems; (ii)
   improving the management of the public irrigation sector including a model for the multipurpose operation of
   the Kandadji Dam; and (iii) enhancing the institutional framework for the electricity sector.

   The PDOs for the second DPO were (i) to improve the quality, reliability and accountability of the country’s
   PFM and PIM systems; (ii) to establish the policy and regulatory framework necessary for a well-functioning
   public irrigation system; and (iii) to facilitate the reform process of the electricity sector (Financing Agreement
   for the Second DPO, p. 5).

   The measures related to the Kandadji Dam were part of the third operation, which was to be cancelled, the
   PDOs were modified to exclude those related to the Dam. This Review will be based on the PDOs of the
   second DPO.

   A third DPO in the series had been planned, but changing circumstances resulting from external shocks, a
   deteriorating security situation and setbacks to the Nigerian economy, led to its cancellation at the time the
   second operation was approved.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas

   The series had 3 pillars.


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Pub Inv Reform Sppt(P151487)



   Pillar 1: Strengthening Public Investment Management (PIM) and Public Financial Management (PFM),
   which focused, first, on improving PIM, PFM and Treasury management, which was to be achieved by
   strengthening the PFM and PIM systems and by improving the predictability of cash management; and,
   second, on policy-based budgeting through the adoption of a standardized methodology for medium term
   expenditure frameworks (MTEFs) for public health, education, rural development, water resources,
   transportation and energy.

   Pillar 2: Improving the Management of the Public Irrigation Sector. This pillar aimed to improve the
   management, planning and regulation of the economically vital irrigation sector through better functioning of
   the National Agency for Irrigation Schemes (Office National des Aménagements Hydro-Agricoles, ONAHA)
   to improve agricultural productivity. The ONAHA was meant to enforce the rules regarding the functioning
   and maintenance of public infrastructure by farmers and promote private irrigation operators.

   Pillar 3 supported improving the legal and institutional framework for the electricity sector. An Electricity
   Code would provide a framework or rules and regulations to govern the sector’s operation. The Code would
   be implemented through a regulatory agency. The aim was to expand electricity supply while maintaining
   cost efficiency by integrating Niger into the regional electricity market, encouraging private participation in
   energy generation, creating a sector regulator, and ensuring that the sector was economically viable.




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   DPO1 (an IDA Grant of US$80 million equivalent) was approved on December 3, 2015 and closed on
   schedule November 30, 2016. US$77.24 million was disbursed. DPO2 (an IDA Grant of US$50 million
   equivalent) was approved on February 28, 2017 and closed on schedule on March 31, 2018. US$50.63
   million was disbursed.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives


  At appraisal, the objectives of the DPO series were aligned with two of the five priority areas of the Country
  Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the fiscal years 2013-2016 - strengthening governance, and enhancing
  capacity for the delivery of public services (the others were promoting “resilient growth”, reducing
  vulnerability, and mainstreaming gender issues). The 2018-2022 Country Partnership Framework
  concentrates on rural productivity, the building of human capital and improving governance (p. 14). The
  objectives of the DPO series are directly relevant to the first and third of these.

  At the commencement of the series, the objectives were aligned with the Government’s development
  strategy. The strategy aimed at strengthening public institutions; inclusive development; increasing food

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Pub Inv Reform Sppt(P151487)



  security; diversifying the economy; and promoting social development. In early 2018, faced with a rapidly
  deteriorating security situation and economic difficulties in neighboring Nigeria, the strategy was changed to
  focus primarily on agriculture, underlying the importance of the program’s support for enhanced irrigation
  management. Since increasing food security remained an important part of the Government’s development
  strategy, the objectives continued to be aligned with development priorities.



  Rating
  Substantial

b. Relevance of Design


  The causal chain linking the measures supported by the series and attainment of the intended results was
  less than fully convincing. With a view to improving the quality of public investment, the authorities were to
  create an institutional framework for the selection and evaluation of projects at both central and sector
  ministry levels, while provisions were to be made for funding feasibility studies. Accountability of public
  expenditure was to be enhanced by faster publication of quarterly budget execution reports. Reliability was to
  be reinforced through reforms to the commitment and payments processes, and by simplifying the ratification
  of public sector loans from external development partners. While these were appropriate first steps, because
  of the brief time frame, there was little possibility of testing their impact over such a short period. In and of
  themselves, they were unlikely to be sufficient to achieve the stated objectives.

  Similarly, an extension of ONAHA’s geographical coverage, together with new rules for the establishment and
  operation of Irrigation Water Users’ Associations (IWAUs), were likely necessary, but again insufficient to
  attain the objective of a policy and regulatory framework for a well-functioning public irrigation system. Critical
  to the latter was a new Irrigation Law, which, rather than a prior action for DPO1 or DPO2, was a trigger for
  the cancelled DPO3. Since the Law did not materialize, the irrigation sector continues to lack an appropriate
  legal framework.

  Reform of the electricity sector was to be attained through changes in the Electricity Law and Code,
  establishing and operationalizing a regulator, and by exercising closer control of the electricity utility’s
  (NIGELEC’s) financial situation through audits and monitoring of its strategic development plan. These
  measures constitute a credible causal chain.

  The program’s structure was coherent and focused, given the economic and fiscal importance of the irrigation
  and electricity sectors. The choice of instrument was also appropriate, in view of the country’s financial needs
  and the policy nature of the objectives.

  Niger’s macroeconomic situation at the time of preparation of both operations was affected by security and
  humanitarian shocks, weak commodity prices, and the reduction of trade flows to neighboring countries.
  Growth averaging about four percent in 2015-2016, was barely above the rate of population increase. Annual
  inflation was subdued at about one percent per year. Fiscal revenues under-performed, reflecting

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            First Pub Inv Reform Sppt(P151487)



       weaknesses in tax and customs administration, and difficulties in the mining, oil, and telecommunications
       sectors, as well as reduced trade with Nigeria. Consequently, expenditures were held below budget levels.
       Key risks, which largely materialized, included the continued negative impact of regional conflicts,
       vulnerability to natural disasters, and the economic downturn in the sub-region. Niger requested a new three-
       year arrangement under the IMF’s Extended Credit Facility, which was approved in January 2017.



       Rating
       Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To improve the quality, reliability and accountability of the country’s PFM and PIM systems

    Rationale

    To improve the quality of public investment, the government made a number of changes to the institutional
    framework for project selection and management. Two decrees were approved (prior actions, DPO1), one
    establishing the process for selecting and evaluating investment projects, and the other setting out the terms
    of reference and organizational structure of a Directorate for Studies and Programming within each sector
    ministry. The Directorates were to prepare investment projects and monitor their implementation in
    collaboration with relevant stakeholders, and were responsible for the preparation of feasibility studies,
    creating data bases, and capacity building in their respective ministries. A line item was to be included in the
    annual Budget Law to ensure sufficient funding for feasibility studies (prior action, DPO2). While the
    supported actions were expected to enhance project selection and adherence to strategic priorities, any
    concrete results (for example, higher quality investment projects) would only materialize after a considerable
    time span, most likely beyond the time horizon of even the initial three operation series. Given this time
    span, there were no results indicators related to the quality of public investment management.
    　
    Enhanced reliability was to stem from a number of interrelated measures. First, all Treasury cash plans,
    sectoral commitments and procurement plans were to be finalized by December 15 of the preceding year
    (prior action, DPO2). This was intended to improve the predictability of disbursements and to eliminate
    excessively rigid Treasury regulations on cash release. Regulations were also altered to facilitate the
    carrying over from one year to the next of financing for specific projects. Second, procurement plans and
    processes were to be "more timely," though there is no concrete explanation on how this might be achieved.
    Third, a circular was issued by the Council of Ministers simplifying ratification procedures for external
    financing (sometimes it could take 100 working days to ratify a loan from an external partner). Fourth, a
    methodology was to be adopted for medium-term expenditure frameworks (MTEFs) for a number of key


                                                                                                         Page 5 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            First Pub Inv Reform Sppt(P151487)



    sectors (prior action DPO2) and their preparation (trigger for the cancelled DPO3). Adoption of effective
    MTEFs makes high demands on planning capacity. The adoption of the methodology was subsequently
    dropped as a prior action in the second operation, though the ICR reports that it was achieved. Furthermore,
    this allowed the government to enter into multi-year contracts with contractors, thereby reducing processing
    costs and achieving budget savings. The main outcome indicator to measure greater reliability was the
    deviation between the voted capital budget and the actual out-turn. This was targeted to fall from 41 percent
    in 2012 to 35 percent in 2017/18. In fact, it slightly increased to 41.19 percent. This is explained by
    unexpectedly high security expenditures which forced a reduction in amounts released from the capital
    budget. The ratification process was accelerated from 100 days from loan signature to 45, in line with the
    target.
    　
    Accountability and transparency relied on two measures: the Ministry of Finance was to ensure quicker
    publication of quarterly comprehensive budget execution reports (prior action, DPO1), and Multi-Year
    Economic Budget Documents were to be submitted to the National Assembly before June 15 of each year
    (this was carried out during DPO2, but was not a prior action). 　There was one results indicator – the period
    after the end of the quarter within which execution reports were to be published was reduced from eight to
    four weeks, in line with the target, although the operational impact of the shorter timeframe was not
    specified.

    In summary, there was some evidence presented on enhanced quality of expenditure management,
    although the main indicator of greater reliability of budgeted expenditures was not met; and the reduced
    reporting time on budget execution, was a welcome improvement and provides some evidence of greater
    accountability and transparency.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     To establish the policy and regulatory framework necessary for a well-functioning public irrigation system

    Rationale

    Irrigation, on which Niger’s agriculture is heavily dependent, was to be made more effective by bringing a
    larger area under the jurisdiction of a strengthened ONAHA. A decree was approved with the aim of
    empowering ONAHA to carry out its functions more equitably and efficiently through clearer specification of
    its responsibilities (prior action, DPO1). The rules of operation were modified to ensure farmers’ rights to
    irrigation.



                                                                                                       Page 6 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            First Pub Inv Reform Sppt(P151487)



    This was followed up with the signature of a multi-year performance contract between the government and
    ONAHA (prior action, DPO2). It was complemented by the elaboration of new rules for establishing and
    operating Irrigation Water Users’ Associations (IWUAS) to facilitate interface between ONAHA and the
    farmers (prior action, DPO2). The program had intended to support the submission of a comprehensive draft
    Irrigation Law to the National Assembly (trigger for the cancelled DPO3). This would have updated the
    sector’s governance, which still relied on a legal framework dating from 1960, when all irrigation systems
    were government-controlled and restricted to large-scale collective rice cultivation. The law was not
    prepared, and the action was dropped when DPO3 was cancelled. The program further aimed to enhance
    the management of the Kandadji Dam to meet irrigation requirements for two cropping seasons, while
    optimizing hydroelectric generation and ensuring adequate maintenance. However, this was also dropped
    from DPO2 owing to unresolved ownership and operating rights and obligations on the Niger River (an
    international waterway), and to resettlement issues.

    Both outcome targets related to this objective were met. The irrigated area under ONAHA’s jurisdiction rose
    from 14,000 hectares prior to the program to 15,600 at its end, exceeding the target of 15,000. Ten IWUAs
    were created in accordance with the target. However, these indicators do not capture adequately and
    evidence regarding how the intention of “establishing the policy and regulatory framework necessary for a
    well-functioning public irrigation system” was achieved This objective was not achieved. Lack of progress on
    the Irrigation Law meant that the different types of irrigation system in existence in Niger were not legally
    recognized; there were no established principles for asset management, and no legal basis covering the
    respective rights and responsibilities of farmers and the State (or between the IWUAs and ONAHA)
    regarding these assets; and the intended permanent forum on irrigated agriculture did not come into
    existence. The dropping of an improved management model for the Kadadji Dam from DPO2 would also
    have had a negative impact on the efficiency and productivity of irrigated agriculture.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective

     To facilitate the reform process of the electricity sector

    Rationale

    Following a long period without progress, the government demonstrated its commitment to take the
    necessary steps to reform the electricity sector and improve the utility’s (NIGELEC’s) financial situation by
    passing an Electricity Code and a law establishing the organization and functioning of a regulatory authority
    for the energy sector that had been submitted to the National Assembly (prior action, DPO1). These legal
    measures were considered essential to expand electricity supply to meet excess demand in an efficient


                                                                                                       Page 7 of 14
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               First Pub Inv Reform Sppt(P151487)



    manner. The new Electricity Code would facilitate Niger’s integration into the regional electricity market,
    private participation in energy generation, the creation of an independent sector regulator, and the
    maintenance of economic and financial sustainability in the power sector. The Law would define the sector’s
    institutional structure and tariff regime. Both pieces of legislation were subsequently approved, and the
    government issued application decrees (prior actions, DPO2). In addition, the Minister of Energy and
    Petroleum issued an Executive Order to carry out a legal, operational, organizational and financial diagnostic
    of NIGELEC and to establish a Standing Committee to monitor the execution of the utility’s strategic plan
    (prior action, DPO1). The diagnostic recommended a wide variety of measures, including restructuring
    NIGELEC’s debt/equity structure in order to optimize the management of working capital and facilitate
    access to financing.

    There was one outcome target related to this objective –putting in place and implementation of the new cost-
    based tariff regime – which was met. The new tariff structure, which Bank-funded technical assistance
    helped design, and which is intended to fully recover costs, became effective in January 2018. Average
    tariffs increased by 17 percent for the first year, while the poor benefited from a 33 percent reduction for the
    first 50 kwh used. The series also strengthened NIGELEC’s financial soundness. Implementing one of the
    diagnostic’s recommendations led to a reduction in the debt/equity ratio to 50-50. Since a 2014 audit report
    showed that the financing structure of NIGELEC had insufficient equity to properly manage its operations
    (ICR p. 9) the financial restructuring should facilitate the utility’s ability to expand and diversify – only ten
    percent of the population are currently connected, and most of this demand is met from imported electricity,
    signifying that NIGELEC is little more than a distribution company.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome


  The series’ objectives were substantially relevant to Bank strategy and, at least initially, to government priorities
  (although by closure, the latter had changed as a result of deteriorating security and regional economic
  prospects). Relevance of design is rated modest, since the causal chain between the measures supported by
  the series and attainment of the intended results was less than fully convincing. The substantial rating of the first
  objective’s efficacy reflects some evidence of higher quality public expenditure systems, in particular the multi-
  year economic budget, although the outcome target to measure greater reliability was not met. The chosen
  target for enhanced transparency was met with a rating for the first object being substantial. Efficacy of the
  second objective is modest, since the absence of critical legislation and the dropping of strengthened
  management of the Kadadji Dam from the program meant that a policy and regulatory framework necessary for

                                                                                                         Page 8 of 14
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        First Pub Inv Reform Sppt(P151487)



a well-functioning public irrigation system has not been established. The third objective – facilitating the reform
process of the electricity sector – was substantially achieved. A new Electricity Code and Law are in effect, as is
a new tariff structure and sector regulator, while a thorough diagnosis of the utility has identified a wide range of
necessary reforms, some of which are already being implemented. Overall, the outcome is assessed as
moderately satisfactory.


a.     Outcome Rating
       Moderately Satisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating


Niger has continued to implement reforms beyond those directly supported by the two operations in the areas of
public financial management (establishing an MTEF and multi-year budgeting) and irrigation (there are more
IWUAS, and ONAHA has set up an environmental and social management unit). At closure, there was nothing
to suggest that electricity sector reforms would not be sustained and perhaps even deepened. However, the
Irrigation Law establishing the responsibilities and rights of water providers and users has yet to be passed. In
addition, there are considerable risks associated with the broader economic and social environment.
Implementation capacity remains weak. The economic situation in neighboring Nigeria gives cause for concern.
Niger’s own rapid rate of population growth makes it more difficult to translate economic growth into higher per
capita income (the country has the highest fertility rate in the world, with an average of seven children per
woman in 2016). The country is facing increased security threats on its borders from instability in Libya,
spillover from the conflict in Mali, and violent extremism in northern Nigeria.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
       Substantial

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

     The ICR (p. 14) states that “each pillar of the program was supported by a significant body of analytical
     work, which was critical to program design.” PFM reform was based on both World Bank and IMF analysis
     and review of public expenditure management; financial accountability, the budget, and public investment
     management. The second pillar benefited from Bank diagnostic analysis of the irrigation sector, while the
     third pillar relied on power and energy sector reviews.

     Although the program was substantially aligned with Bank and government strategy, DPO2 required
     adjustment because some risks proved to have been underestimated in the design of DPO1. According to
     the ICR (p.14), program design drew on past experience, and hence recognized “limited capacity in a

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Pub Inv Reform Sppt(P151487)



  context of frequent shocks.” However, Niger’s implementation capacity was, in fact, over-estimated. This is
  seen, for example, in the shortfalls in developing the Kandadji Dam management model, the fact that an
  Irrigation Law was not passed, and delays in adopting PFM reforms. There were significant weaknesses in
  M&E design (see Section 10 below).

  A further issue was that the approval of the critical new law governing the irrigation sector was not a prior
  action. This had serious consequences for the impact of reforms in that sector


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  According to the ICR, the Bank team was proactive in securing adjustments so that the program could be
  completed in a timely manner. The decision not to proceed with the third operation was justified – new
  challenges had materialized through external shocks that could not be addressed in the context of an
  already defined, ongoing program, but required a new direction in dialogue. Given the criticality of the
  Irrigation Law to the reforms supported under the second objective, more could have been done to secure
  its passage. The ICR (para 71) points out that the Kadadji Dam issues were beyond the control of the DPO
  series. Weaknesses in the results indicators, especially those related to the first objective, were mostly
  addressed.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance

  The ICR (p. 22) states that the government was fully committed to the program and was proactive in
  working with the Bank in both design and implementation. It attempted to maintain the momentum of
  reform despite security-related and political challenges. Implementation was the responsibility of an inter-
  ministerial committee chaired by the Minister of Economy and Finance. This committee delegated day to
  day management of the program to a technical committee, which represented all relevant agencies. The
  ICR does not report any particular coordination difficulties. Good progress was made in reforming the
  electricity sector, including timely establishment of a new framework for regulation and tariff setting
  procedures. There were, however, moderate shortcomings. While the Ministry of Finance reinforced its
  team to ensure that the publishing deadlines for the quarterly budget execution reports were met, delays
  in fulfilling the original triggers meant that the activity required significant revisions. While the Ministry of

                                                                                                        Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Pub Inv Reform Sppt(P151487)



  Agriculture succeeded in operationalizing 10 water users’ associations, it was unsuccessful in
  addressing the Kandadji dam issues. It was also unable to obtain approval of the Irrigation Law.


  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
   ---


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  Of the eleven original results indicators for DPO1, several presented significant deficiencies. For example, two
  indicators for the first objective - the percentage of investments selected based on sector strategies and
  included in forward budget estimates, and the time period within which annual financial statements were
  submitted for audit – were unrelated to prior actions. An indicator for the second objective was the percentage
  of publicly developed irrigation schemes for which ONAHA had made an annual assessment the previous year.
  This indicator took no account of the fact that ONAHA undertook annual assessments in any case. All three
  indicators were dropped for the second operation. Another irrigation-related indicator – ”number of public
  collective irrigation schemes with a utility value that exceeds 3” – was not only opaque, but relied on a survey
  that was never carried out. This indicator was replaced by the number of operational IWUAs. There was no
  electricity sector indicator related to fiscal sustainability, which was a central theme of the program. The results
  framework was not designed to capture the effects on the achievement of objectives of the dropping of the
  Kandadji Dam from the program, nor of insufficient progress on a new Irrigation Law.



b. M&E Implementation

  Responsibility for M&E was assumed by the Inter-Ministerial Committee which coordinated program
  implementation, with the technical committee handling day-to-day data collection, compilation, and analysis.

  For DPO2, two PFM indicators, two irrigation indicators and one electricity indicator were either dropped or
  significantly revised. The ICR (p. 16) reports that the modified set of indicators were tracked and regular


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Pub Inv Reform Sppt(P151487)



  reports provided. Nonetheless, the results framework had to be supplemented by additional information,
  available in the program reports, to complete the ICR.



c. M&E Utilization

  The M&E framework was used to make adjustments to the reform program.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects

  The Irrigation Law, that has as yet to be passed, would support the screening of irrigation projects for
  environmental risks consistent with the Bank’s environmental safeguard requirements, and would also
  provide for assistance to farmers to help them with sound irrigation and water management practices.


  A Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA) was conducted to take account of the impact of the new
  electricity tariff structure on the poor; however, the ICR does not provide more details.


  The ICR (p. 20) states that there were no specific gender impacts.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  There is no discussion of fiduciary issues in the ICR.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       First Pub Inv Reform Sppt(P151487)



    ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  The modest ratings of design
                                                                                  relevance and of the efficacy
                                                                                  of two out of the three
                               Moderately                                         objectives constitute
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory                                       significant shortcomings,
                                                                                  leading to a moderately
                                                                                  unsatisfactory outcome
                                                                                  assessment
Risk to Development                                                               The external environment
                               Modest                 Substantial
Outcome                                                                           deteriorated, adding to risks
                                                                                  There were significant
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory     shortcomings in Quality at
                               Satisfactory
                                                                                  Entry (see Section 7a above)
                               Moderately
Borrower Performance                                  Moderately Satisfactory     ---
                               Satisfactory
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                 ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons


 The ICR draws a number of lessons, of which the following two are of particular interest (with some
 adaptation of language):

 Overly ambitious reforms in relation to a country’s capacity can cause delays, and even undermine a
 program. Capacity constraints have a substantial impact on the likelihood of successful implementation and
 need to be taken into account in some detail at the design stage. In this case, implementing a medium-term
 expenditure framework in a number of ministries posed challenges, as did multi-year budgeting and carry-
 over commitments for multi-year projects. In the irrigation sector, key issues such as preparation of an
 appropriate legal framework and management of an important dam, were not carried out as planned.


 In strengthening an irrigation authority, the deployment of experts who have knowledge in similar


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       First Pub Inv Reform Sppt(P151487)



contexts enhances the likelihood of successful implementation. In this case, the participation of irrigation
experts with experience in other West African countries assisted improvements in ONAHA. In addition,
IWUAs began to receive funding against agreed targets rather than through random budget availability.


IEG draws the following lesson:


Where changes in legislation are key to a program’s success, it is advisable to make the enactment of
such changes early prior actions. This takes account of the limited influence of the Executive in securing
legislative modifications and reduces the possibility that lack of an adequate legal framework would blunt the
impact of other reforms.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR is well written and contains a great deal of information, but its organization is confusing in places. The
presentation of information jumps from prior actions to triggers and back again. More discussion of the
program’s relationship to Bank strategy for Niger would have been useful, as would more in-depth and
systematic consideration of M&E indicators.




a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 14
