     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021536

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P120895                                     HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Haiti                                       Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1360,IDA-H5510,IDA-H8120               30-Jun-2013                                       100,521,951.62

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Mar-2010                                 29-Jun-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             65,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                             102,800,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                         100,526,845.01                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Kavita Mathur               George T. K. Pitman           Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   Original Project Development Objectives (PDO)




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)



   The PDO was "to support the Recipient in its early sustainable recovery efforts from the effects of the
   Emergency, through selected interventions aiming at contributing to rebuilding key institutions and
   infrastructure" (Financing Agreement page 4).



   Revised PDO



   The Project’s PDO was revised under the 2012 First Additional Financing (AF) to remove the word “early”
   before “sustainable recovery efforts.” According to the Additional Grant paper (para 36), removing the word
   “early”, signaled that the project was moving beyond supporting the recovery efforts following the earthquake
   and would be supporting the broader infrastructure and institutional development needs of the country.



   The revised PDO was "to support the Recipient in its sustainable recovery efforts from the effects of the
   Emergency, through selected interventions aiming to rebuild key institutions and infrastructure (Restructuring
   Paper page 6).




   Dropping the word “early” from the PDO had the effect of expanding the scope of the project and does not
   require a split rating in the assessment of the outcome (ICR Manual page 45).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  10-Sep-2012

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   The project had three components:




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)



Component 1 – Restoring Key Economic and Financial Functions of the Recipient's Key
Institutions (cost at appraisal US$10.0 million, actual cost US$24.8 million). This component
would support: (a) the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) in reinstating its basic functions, such
as budget formulation, execution and reporting; and (b) to carry out activities to assist in fully re-establishing
the government's functions, including physical structure rehabilitation, and thereafter operationalizing it
through the provision of goods and equipment and technical assistance. Key institutions that would be
supported under this component were the Central Bank, the Procurement Regulatory Agency, the National
Statistical Institute, the Ministry of Planning and External Cooperation, and the Auditor-General's Office.



Component 2 – Emergency Rehabilitation of Selected Public Infrastructure (cost at appraisal US$35.0
million, actual cost US$55.3 million). This component would finance: (a) the rehabilitation or reconstruction
of key institutional and transport infrastructure through the piloting of sound social and environmental
practices and all related studies and supervision activities; and (b) strategic studies to increase the
resilience of the reconstructed infrastructure.



Component 3 – Institutional Support, Reconstruction Planning and Project Management (appraisal
cost US$5.0 million, actual cost US$7.7 million). This component would provide support to: (a) restore the
functioning capacity of key institutions of the Recipient’s crisis governance framework; (b) carry out planning
activities for the short, medium and long-term reconstruction phases; (c) carry out institutional strengthening
activities; (d) finance Project management activities; (e) establish and operate an engineering clearinghouse
in the Ministry of Public Works, Transportation and Communication (MTPTC) to manage the technical
knowledge deriving from assessments carried out by national and international institutions and thereafter to
disseminate good engineering practices and innovative solutions; and (f) assist the Recipient with
preliminary basic recovery activities.



The project also included a project preparation advance (PPA) of US$15 million to start-up emergency
activities. The PPA was refunded from the first IDA Grant. The PPA was expected to finance: (a)
the acquisition and distribution of mobile solar-powered lanterns to affected communities; (b) immediate
health and nutrition services to vulnerable populations affected by the earthquake; (c) acquisition of
temporary housing equipment (prefabricated premises and office space) to host selected Haitian
institutions; and (d) project preparation activities such as engineering designs or social and environmental
safeguards documents, as well as technical support to the Government (e.g. with regard to damaged
building assessments). On an exceptional basis, the acquisition of new construction equipment would also
be considered.



Revised Components



The first AF was requested by the Government of Haiti (GoH) for scaling-up original activities to enhance
the development impact. It financed modified project activities in support of public sector reform (component

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)



  1) and provided continued financing for investments in the transport and infrastructure sectors (component
  2), such as the operation of the Truitier Debris Processing Facility, for the building structural assessment,
  and for the construction of the Labadie-Cap Haitian road. The cost of the components was increased as
  follows: (i) component 1 was increased by US$12 million (from US$10 million to US$22 million); (ii)
  component 2 was increased by US$20.3 million (from US$35 million to US$55.3 million); and (iii)
  component 3 was increased by US$2.7 million (from US$5 million to US$7.7 million).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


  Project Cost. The total actual project cost was US$100.5 million, significantly higher than the original
  estimate of US$65.0 million. The cost increase was because the project scope expanded from early
  recovery efforts to longer-term infrastructure improvement to increase resilience to natural disasters. The
  financing gap between the original and actual cost was funded through Additional Grants.



  Financing. The project was originally financed through a IDA Grant of US$65.0 million.



  The first Additional Grant of US$35.0 million was approved on September 16, 2012 to scale up project
  activities. The Bank approved a second Additional Grant on October 28, 2016 in the amount of US$2.8
  million to fill a financing gap under Component 1 and a restructuring to reallocate funds between
  Component 1 and Component 2



  There were no other sources of financing.



  Borower Contribution. None expected.



  Dates. The project was extended for a total of five years. The original closing date was June 30, 2013 and
  the actual closing data was June 29, 2018.



  The first Additional Grant and the first restructuring (September 2012) extended the project for three years
  from June 30, 2013 to June 30, 2016 to align the closing date with the additional activities under the first
  Additional Financing.




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 18
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)



                       The second restructuring (June 2016) extended the Grant’s closing date by six months, from June 30, 2016
                       to December 31, 2016. The extension was requested to allow for the completion of remaining activities
                       under Components 1 and 2 (a small custom building and the Labadie-Cap Haitian road) which had suffered
                       some delays due to both a challenging political and governance environment and technical issues.



                       The second Additional Grant and a third Restructuring (October 2016) reallocated funds between
                       Component 1 and Component 2 and extended the Grant’s closing date by an additional year, from
                       December 31, 2016 to December 31, 2017.



                       Fourth restructuring (December 2017), the closing date was further extended by six months from December
                       31, 2017 to June 30, 2018 to allow for the completion of activities critical to the implementation of the MEF’s
                       Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


Alignment with the country’s priorities. On January 12, 2010, Haiti was devastated by a massive
earthquake. In Port-au-Prince, the National Palace, the main ministries, the national penitentiary, the
parliament building, and the United Nations headquarters were heavily damaged. The capacity of the
Government of Haiti (GoH) was severely weakened by the earthquake due to the loss of life of critical staff
and by partial or total collapse of its primary buildings. In addition, the primary road network linking the
capital to the southern peninsula was damaged. The project was prepared in response to the massive
earthquake and the project objectives were highly relevant to the country priorities at the time of appraisal.
Given successive natural disasters in Haiti, in 2012 the objectives were revised beyond just providing
support to “early” sustainable recovery to supporting the broader infrastructure and institutional
development needs of the country.



Alignment with the Bank’s strategy. The project objectives were aligned with the cross-cutting theme
“Governance, Accountability and Sustainability” laid out in the current Bank’s Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for Haiti for FY2016-2019. The long-term support to building infrastructure and
institutional development is in line with the third Area of Focus “resilience” and the cross-cutting themes -
Objective 11 “Improve Capacity for Sustainable Basic Service Delivery” and Objective 8 “Strengthen
Natural Disasters preparedness”.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating

                                                                                                                         Page 5 of 18
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)



               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective

                To support the Recipient in its sustainable recovery efforts from the effects of the Emergency, through
                selected interventions aiming at contributing to rebuilding key institutions.

                Rationale


                Theory of Change: After the devastating earthquake, the capacity of the Government of Haiti (GoH) was
                severely hindered by both the loss of life of critical staff and by partial or total collapse of its primary buildings.
                The initial activities financed by the Project Preparation Advance focused on equipment and supply for the
                initial recovery. Furthermore, restoring functions of key institutions was prerequisite to carry out sustainable
                recovery efforts.



                Outputs



                        Temporary offices were constructed for key institutions such as the General Directorate of Taxes
                          (DGI), Budget Administration (DGB), and the Treasury and Economic Study Department (DEE).

                        The project fully equipped 262 work stations with computers, communication equipment, and power
                          generators.

                        Reconstruction and operationalization of a new customs office was done. This building was designed
                          to resist future earthquakes. However, slight design modifications (improving the building defenses
                          against demonstrators’ invasion and possible attempts to damage the building) delayed its opening to
                          the public.

                        The reorganization and filing of the treasury archives was completed.

                        15 accounting posts were filled against the target of four to control budget expenditures in line
                          ministries.




                                                                                                                         Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)




      The Public Financial Management (PFM) reforms committee was put in place and has been
       operational since 2014.

      Capacity building activities of the Court of Accounts was carried out. However, by project closure, the
       Government had not completed the implementation of the reforms to the legal framework that would
       eventually allow the Court to better perform its control functions.

      The project supported the MTPTC in the establishment of a Building Technical Evaluation Unit (BTEB)
       to manage the rapid assessment of earthquake affected building and houses. A regional BTEB office
       was opened in the Nord Department (highly exposed to seismic risk). Engineers and building
       evaluators were trained and by May 2010, 92,000 buildings were assessed by BTEB. By project
       closure, 430,000 buildings were assessed, achieving the target of 430,000.

      Technical guidelines such as a Repair Guide for Small Buildings, a Retrofit Guide for Small Buildings,
       and a Manual for Seismic Resistant Construction of Small Buildings, were developed by MTPTC.



Outcomes



In response to the early recovery efforts (which was supported by the project preparation advance),
humanitarian aid was provided to the vulnerable people. This included: (i) nutrition portions to 50,000 children
under 5 years of age and to 15,000 pregnant women, and (ii) 50,000 solar powered lanterns to residents in
four cities affected by the earthquake (Port-au-Prince, Delmas, Jacmel and Léogâne).



With the provision of the office spaces and fully functioning work stations, the capacity of the key institutions
of the Ministry of Finance (General Directorate of Taxes, Budget Administration and the Treasury and
Economic Study Department) to carry out their main functions such as budget preparation, taxes collection;
payroll and salary payments was restored. Between January and March 2010, revenue collection by the
General Directorate of Taxes increased from 25 percent to almost 50 percent of the pre-earthquake targets
and increased steadily in the following years (ICR para 32). The capacity to process the salaries of civil
servants was restored.



Although, the capacity building activities were provided to the Court of Accounts, the Court remained jammed
by its constitutional mandate of "ex-ante" audit of public contracts. The ICR does not explain what are these
ex-ante audits.



There was decrease in the number of months between the end of a fiscal year and actual submission of the
consolidated government general accounts for external audit to the Supreme Audit Institution (CSCCA). The


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)



lag before external audit of government’s general accounts was reduced from about 12 months to 9 months
but missed the project target of 7 months.



The capacities of key entities such as Inter-Ministerial Committee for Territorial Planning (CIAT) and MTPTC
and its technical directorates (Building Technical Evaluation Unit (BTEB) and Urban and Rural Equipment
Maintenance Unit (SEEUR)) was enhanced. The project assisted the Inter-ministerial Committee for
Territorial Planning (CIAT) in developing strategic documents for territorial planning. The 2010, “Haiti
Tomorrow – Centre-Artibonite Loop Territorial Strategy for Reconstruction” established a vision for the
Government of Haiti and articulated the concept of a more even distribution of economic activities and
financial resources throughout the country. These proposed policy changes led to the approval of US$58
million Bank-supported project in 2013 (Haiti Center and Artibonite Regional Development Project -
P133352).



The manual for “Seismic Resistant Construction of Small Buildings” was developed. The capacity of the
Ministry of Public Works, Transportation and Communications to carry out the recovery and reconstruction
process, and to promote the diffusion of construction best practices, including para-seismic standards at the
national level was enhanced.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

To support the Recipient in its sustainable recovery efforts from the effects of the Emergency, through
selected interventions aiming at contributing to rebuilding key infrastructure.

Rationale


Theory of Change: Project activities included the rehabilitation of selected priority infrastructure (roads and
bridges); clean-up of drainage system, and the establishment and operation of the Truitier Debris Processing
Facility, which were critical for the achievement of the project objective “supporting the sustainable efforts of
recovery from the effects of emergency”. These investments were expected to improve the connectivity for
the residents, prevent flooding of the blocked canals during the rainy season, and provide processing of
debris as per international standards.



Outputs


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)




      The clean-up of the drainage system before the 2010 rainy season (April-May) and hurricane season
        (July-November) was carried out. Five primary canals were cleared and over 110,000 m3 of waste
        and debris material was extracted.

      The main road network connecting Port-au-Prince to the four Departments of the South Peninsula
        (National Road #2 and National Road #4) was restored.

      About 8.5 km road in the northern region of Haiti was constructed. This road is an important link
        connecting Cap-Haitian, Haiti’s second largest city, with Labadie, a cruise ship harbor.

      The Truitier Debris Processing Facility was established and is operational. The facility processed over
        1.3 million m3 of earthquake rubble during 2010-2014.



Outcomes



The ICR estimated that key infrastructure rehabilitation provided by the project benefited 1.1 million people.



The clean-up of the canals carried out under the project avoided their flooding during the rainy season and
benefitted about the 22,000 people who were at risk of flooding.



The ICR reports (para 44) that the construction of the road link connecting Haiti’s second largest city Cap
Haitian with Labadie, contributed to the economic development of the Cap-Haitian region by increasing
accessibility and allowing tourism development. The local community leveraged complementary investments
to carry out: (i) the rehabilitation of a last mile connectivity road to local facilities including to a public school,
providing safe and all-weather access for 373 students and 1,500 people, and (ii) the rehabilitation of the
technical training center. The ICR does not provide any data on tourism.



The travel time from Cap-Haïtien to Labadie is now estimated 18 minutes compared with an average 45
minutes on the previous unpaved road, representing a 60 percent reduction in travel time with the Project.
The average annual daily traffic on the road at project closure was 7,251 vehicles per day (composed of 62%
motorcycles, 33% cars and pickups, 3% buses, and 2% trucks). The ICR reports (para 24) that there were no
reliable baseline traffic figures for the road. Before construction, the road was unpaved and recurrent rock
falls or landslide would slow or completely block the traffic. The observed traffic before construction was much
lower than the current traffic.



                                                                                                          Page 9 of 18
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)




                      The operation of the Truitier Debris Processing Facility provided a proper way of managing earthquake rubble
                      in accordance with the international standards. Some local residents found job opportunities at the facility. In
                      addition, the operator went beyond the debris facility and provided technical assistance to the agency in
                      charge of the operation of the Truitier landfill (Services Métropolitains de Collecte des Résidus Solides
                      (SMCRS)). The operator helped SMCRS organize the landfill, maintain a road circuit within the landfill (using
                      the debris), instructed the different stakeholders using the landfill (for compost, hospital wastes, sludge, etc.),
                      and stopped fires at the landfill (ICR para 42).



                      Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale


The project substantially achieved the objectives of supporting the GoH in rebuilding key institutions and
infrastructure following the emergency.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial


      5. Efficiency


At appraisal, due to the emergency nature of the project, no quantified economic and financial analysis was
carried out. The Emergency Paper, however, discussed some of the qualitative benefits of the project. These
included: (a) relieving life threatening situations through health and nutrition support; (b) prevention of the
catastrophe from scaling up, by preparing the execution of selected emergency works, before the start of the
next rainy season (drainage clean-up, assessments of the damage. and infrastructure design); and (c) improving
access to the South and South-East Regions of the country, which was severely affected by the earthquake.



Economic Analysis. The economic assessment only included roads and highways that covered 8% of project
costs.




                                                                                                                          Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)



During the preparation of the Additional Grant, the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) for the construction of Cap
Haitian-Labadie road was conducted. The ERR was estimated to be 14% (using producers’ surplus analysis).
The benefits included the impact on job creation, income generation, poverty and tourism.



The ex-post ERR was 27% (using consumers’ surplus analysis) using the Bank's Roads Economic Decision
Model. Benefits included reduction in vehicle operating costs and travel time costs. The ICR reports that at
completion a different methodology was used because the additional grants paper did not include detailed
methodology (ICR page 52). The completion of the Cap Haitian-Labadie road was delayed due to: (a) the
change in the design (the road was moved away from the coast); (b) the extension of the road to a nearby
fishing village; and (c) a hurricane in October 2016, heavy rainfall in February 2017, and a hurricane in
September 2017.



Unit Cost Comparison. The ICR reports (para 48) that the unit cost of the rehabilitation of the road was
US$100,000 per kilometer, which is comparable to Fragile, Conflict and Violent (FCV) settings (for example in
Yemen or Afghanistan). Similarly, the rubble removal unit cost for the canal cleaning was US$15/m3compared
to US$10/m3 for earth removal unit cost. However, the unit cost of subsequent debris management was high
(US$30/m3), because the debris was contaminated with human waste.



Cost Overruns. The road rehabilitation activities saw no cost overrun overall (ICR page 49). However, the
reconstruction of the Pont Fauché bridge experienced cost overruns because of the damage caused by
Hurricane Sandy (2012), which increased the cost from US$3 million to US$7.15 million. This was because
the bridge had to be relocated because of extreme erosion. The unit cost of US$150 000/linear meter for the
bridge was substantially higher than average costs of US$100 000/linear meter in other countries.



Administrative Cost. Overall, administrative cost represented a 1.9 percent of total project costs. The ICR
reports (para 49) that the administrative costs of US$700,000 incurred by UCE over the eight-year
implementation period was reasonable compared to similar projects in similar fragile settings. However, the
administrative cost for UCP was US$1.3 million, higher than anticipated at appraisal and during additional
Grants. While UCP managed other donor projects this overstretched their capacity and led to delays in decision-
making and implementation, thus indicating organizational inefficiencies.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)




                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    8.00
ICR Estimate                                              27.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



The project objectives were highly relevant to the country and government priorities. The project substantially
achieved the objectives of supporting the GoH in rebuilding key institutions and infrastructure following the
emergency. Project efficiency is rated modest. Overall, the project outcome is moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



Although the project assisted in strengthening the capacity of the key institutions (MEF, MTPTC, BTEB and
CIAT) for disaster risk management and reconstruction, the risk to the development outcome is considered
substantial because of the fragile country context which adversely affects adequate staffing and sustained
funding for these institutions.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  The project was prepared in eight weeks to respond to the earthquake that left the capital in a
  catastrophic situation. The project’s design was based on lessons learned from previous World Bank-
  financed operations in Haiti and from the Bank’s experience in emergency response operations in fragile
  states.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)



  The lack of data and difficulty in evaluating the extent of the damages to infrastructure and institutions
  was challenging for sizing the emergency response. Project activities were identified through close
  consultations with the GoH and line ministries. The project design was flexible and included budget
  allocation to procure works, goods, and services as the demand arose (ICR para 69). The project set
  high quality standards and included comprehensive technical assistance for the implementation of project
  activities. For example, the design of the road rehabilitation works included climate adaptation measures.
  Attention was also given to promote high labor-intensive work, thereby promoting generation of incomes
  for the affected population (ICR para 86).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


 The project was supervised by a field-based multidisciplinary team which included a senior infrastructure
 specialist and a financial management specialist. This contributed to the establishment of a regular
 dialogue with the GoH, and a close supervision of the project. The Bank team was proactive in preparing
 two Additional Financings in response to the client’s needs. The Bank team supported the PIU in effectively
 implementing the social safeguards. Adequate Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was put in place
 (ICR paras 89 and 90).



 There were a few shortcomings; The project team failed to quickly address the problems with the outcome
 indicators. Also, the project team did not update and increase the targets on some of the indicators. In
 addition, the project DO rating slipped and stayed in the MS from 2013.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 Due to the emergency nature of the project, the PDO level indicators were simple. However, the indicators
 were output oriented. The PDO indicator “MEF restored internal control and audit, and able to process

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)



 payroll” was relevant for the initial emergency restoration of basic functions. The PDO indicator “project
 influenced the reconstruction planning process for Port au Prince and surrounding affected areas so that
 public consultation mechanisms are strengthened” measured public consultation inputs to the
 reconstruction planning process while the PDO indicator “estimated number of people benefiting from
 repaired infrastructure” aimed at estimating the number of beneficiaries.



 At the time of first restructuring, a “Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA)” indicator was
 added. However, due to the client’s low capacity for M&E, this was dropped at the second restructuring.
 Instead, five new Public Financial Management (PFM) indicators were added.



 In addition, three indicators to capture compliance of project construction activities with international codes
 were added. These were: (a) customs building is constructed and operational, complying with international
 social and environment standards; (b) Truitier Debris Processing Facility is operational, complying to
 international social and environmental standards and support implementation of all stakeholders’ efforts for
 debris removal; and (c) Aviation safety equipment is strengthened to support air traffic accordingly to
 international standards. Compliance of procured goods for aviation safety infrastructure in line with
 Standards and Recommended Practices (SARP) of ICAO.



b. M&E Implementation


  During implementation, key institutions collected the basic output data such as length (km of road
  rehabilitated), volume of rubble removed from the canals, number of buildings assessed, and the volume
  of debris processed. The ICR reports (para 75) that the monitoring of financial management activities was
  challenging because of underperforming systems. Training was provided to the UCP’s M&E staff on
  supervision and monitoring of activities. The UCP submitted biannual and annual monitoring reports to
  the World Bank in a timely manner.



c. M&E Utilization


  The project’s monitoring was used for the scaling up of activities that were supported by the additional
  financing.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)




a. Safeguards


  At appraisal, the project was assigned Environmental Category "A" on account of the activities associated
  with the Truitier Debris Processing Facility that was located within the perimeter of the Port-au-Prince
  municipal landfill. Five safeguards were triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural
  Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest Management (OP/BP4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and
  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).



  Since the project was processed under OP 8.00 as an emergency operation, the preparation of impact
  assessments and safeguards instruments, along with disclosure of documents, was done following Board
  approval. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) principles, including guidance on
  the development and consultation and disclosure of resettlement needs, was prepared and disclosed on
  April 23, 2010.



  According to the Additional Grant Document, the project retained its Environmental Category "A", and no
  new safeguards policies were triggered. While the Pest Management policy (OP/BP 4.09) was triggered
  under the original project as a precaution due to the project’s involvement in the Trutier Debris Processing
  Facility, this policy was dropped as there were no pest issues associated with the rubble processing, nor
  with any other activities of the original project and proposed AF (Additional Grant Paper para 66).



  The environmental safeguard performance was rated as Moderately Satisfactory (MS) in the
  Implementation Status and Results (ISR) Report throughout implementation. The Bank team assisted the
  PIU's in improving its capacity for safeguard management. An external expert was recruited to work along-
  side the PIU’s environmental staff and provided on-the-job training. In addition, a comprehensive
  environmental and social baseline studies were conducted on Truitier landfill to ensure compliance with
  safeguards policies and international standards for the debris activities. World-class experts were hired to
  design the debris processing site.



  Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) were prepared for five separate works that resulted in the relocation of
  12 households, land acquisition for 136 households, and non-land economic displacement of 223
  households. Until December 2017 the ratings for social safeguards performance was either satisfactory or
  moderately satisfactory, thereafter the rating was dropped to moderately unsatisfactory due to pending
  compensation for land acquisition of 19 Project-Affected People (PAPs). The ICR reports (para 83) that an
  escrow account was opened, and steps were taken to implement a proactive Grievance Redress
  Mechanism. After project closure, the Bank Team was expected to supervise the “open cases”
  under parallel World Bank-financed projects managed by the same Project implementation unit (UCE) (ICR




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)



   para 83). The project team informed IEG that since the writing of the ICR, 11 out of the 19 PAPs have been
   compensated. The Bank team is working with the authorities to compensate the remaining 8 people.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


   Financial Management (FM). Although a FM Specialist was hired to perform the management of fiduciary
   activities (FM and procurement) on behalf of the Project’s two implementing agencies (UCE/MTPTC and
   UCP/MEF), the FM performance was rated moderately unsatisfactory in the ISRs until February 2012.This
   was due to weak budget planning and poor monitoring. The accounting and financial reporting was also
   weak and the project’s unaudited financial reports (Interim Financial Reports, IFR) were rarely submitted
   on time.



   To improve FM performance, the fiduciary activities were transferred from the financial specialist to the
   implementation agencies of MTPTC and MEF in February 2012. During the period 2014 to 2018, FM
   performance was rated moderately satisfactory in the ISRs. However, since the two implementing
   agencies were unable to standardize their budgetary and accounting procedures, FM remained weak. The
   Project’s Audit Reports found recurrent internal control weaknesses except for the 2015 Fiscal Year. These
   included issues with the budget management, planning and monitoring, delays in documentation of project
   expenditures, and inadequate archiving of project’s documentation.



   Procurement. The ICR does not discuss procurement issues. The Bank team informed IEG that there
   were no issues relating to procurement. Procurement was carried out according to the Bank guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately                                       There is no discrepancy
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory                                     between IEG and ICR rating.

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)



                                                                                  However, there is discrepancy in
                                                                                  ICR itself. On page 3, Bank
                                                                                  Performance is rated
                                                                                  “Satisfactory”, while on page 27.
                                                                                  It is rated “Moderately
                                                                                  Satisfactory”.
Quality of M&E                    Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                    ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons



The ICR identified a number of lessons, the three most important are presented here with some
modification of language:



        Effective coordination among donors, key stakeholders, and NGOs led by the
         Government is essential for efficient disaster response. The project experience shows
         that coordination was important to define achievable and solid milestones and indicators,
         develop a cohesive reform framework, and address issues of capacity building.

        Setting baseline and target values in an emergency context is a challenge. Therefore,
         at project appraisal the design of the M&E and financial management frameworks could be
         simple. The project can include components to build the capacity of institutions and once the
         capacity is built, the frameworks can be refined to carry out effective monitoring.

        The project demonstrated successfully how a new dual type of emergency project i.e.
         mixing humanitarian activities with sustainable reconstruction planning can effectively
         support a country’s disaster recovery effort.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



The ICR is comprehensive and very well written. It is internally consistent and results oriented. A minor
shortcming relates to the rating of Bank Performance, which is rated satisfactory on page 3 and "moderately


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT MST Infra. & Instit. Emerg Recov.j (P120895)



satisfactory" in paragraph 92. The quality of evidence presented is adequate and the analysis is clear. The
lessons are well crafted. The ICR does not discuss procurement issues.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 18
