     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Regional Connectivity Program (P113184)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0021667

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P113184                                     Pacific Regional Connectivity Program

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Tonga                                       Digital Development


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H7310,TF-99368                          23-Aug-2016                                          16,496,338.32

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Aug-2011                                 23-Jul-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            17,200,000.00                                       500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             17,660,297.21                                       460,297.21

 Actual                                         16,496,338.32                                       460,297.21




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Kavita Mathur                 Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Tonga-Fiji Connectivity project is the first phase of the Pacific Regional Connectivity Program. The
   objectives of the program were to reduce the cost and increase the availability of international bandwidth for
   participating countries, and thereby facilitate the development of a wide range of ICT applications to support
   social and economic development in the Pacific Region.

   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Grant Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page vi) was "to improve the enabling environment for

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Regional Connectivity Program (P113184)



   telecommunications and Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) in Tonga, including greater
   competition and increased access to infrastructure and services by reducing the costs of international
   connectivity and strengthening the telecommunications regulatory framework".



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project comprised three components:

   1. Submarine cable system (cost at appraisal US$32.6 million; actual cost US$31.9 million). This
   component planned to finance the construction of an 827 kilometer (km) of submarine fiber-optic cable
   between Tonga and Fiji (thereby connecting Tonga to the global telecommunications network) and a cable
   landing station in Tonga. The second project restructuring extended the cable to two additional islands in
   Tonga (Ha'apai and Vava'u), thus increasing the total length to 1,217 km.

   2. Enabling environment (cost at appraisal US$1.0 million; actual cost US$1.2 million). This component
   planned to finance technical assistance (TA) to the Ministry of Information and Communications. The
   targeted areas were: (a) telecommunications policy, legal and regulatory development, and licensing
   harmonization; and (b) capacity building on regulation.

   3. Project management and administration (cost at appraisal US$0.40 million; actual cost US$0.8
   million). This component was expected to provide administrative support to the Ministry of Information and
   Communications on project management, procurement, financial management, communications strategy
   and audit.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The actual project cost was US$26.2 million, substantially lower than the appraisal estimate
   of US$34.0 million. This was due to cost savings, as the actual cost of construction of the submarine fiber
   optic cable was lower than expected at appraisal. The extension of the cable to the two additional islands
   was financed by the cost savings and the sale of 16.7% of stocks of the Tonga Cable Limited (TCL) to
   Digicel, a private operator.

   Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA grant of US$17.2 million and a Pacific Regional
   Infrastructure Facility (PRIF) Trust Fund of US$0.5 million. Therefore, the Bank financing for the project was
   US$17.7 million. The actual amount disbursed was US$16.49 million (US$16.03 million from the IDA grant
   and US$0.46 million from the PRIF Trust Fund). US$0.04 million of the PRIF Trust Fund was cancelled.

   Co-financing. There was co-financing for complementary infrastructure development activities from the
   Asian Development Bank. Appraisal estimate was US$9.70 million. This amount was fully disbursed.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Regional Connectivity Program (P113184)



   Borrower contribution. The Borrower contribution from the Tonga Cable Limited (TCL) was estimated at
   US$6.6 million. The ICR (page 10) notes that the actual contribution from TCL at closure could not be
   verified.

   Dates. The project closed on July 23, 2018, two years after the original closing date of August 23, 2016.

   Restructurings. The project was restructured four times through a Level 2 restructuring.

         The first restructuring on May 28, 2012 reallocated IDA Grant funds from component one to
          component three.

         The second restructuring on October 16, 2013 reallocated IDA grant proceeds from component two
          to component three.

         The third restructuring on October 21, 2013 reallocated the PRIF grant to technical assistance
          activities.

         The fourth restructuring on July 29, 2016 resulted in following changes: (i) the scaling-up of
          component one activities (discussed above in section 2d); (ii) the reallocation of funds between
          components; (iii) the modification of the results framework (discussed in section 10b); and (iv)
          the extension of the closing date by two years for completing the ongoing activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO was highly relevant to the government strategy and to the Pacific Regional context. Tonga is a
geographically remote small country in the Pacific region, with a narrow market and resource base. At
appraisal, Tonga was dependent on satellite links for internet connectivity, which was very expensive
compared to connectivity through fiber-optic submarine cable. Internet was available to only 2% of the
population and broadband access to 0.9%. Limited telecommunications capacity due to satellite links
was inadequate to meet the growing demand and high cost of international bandwidth had hindered the
roll-out of high-speed broadband internet services.

The government strategy articulated in the Tonga Strategic Development Framework for the 2015-2025
period, highlighted the need for providing and maintaining infrastructure and technology for a knowledge-
based economy. The regional strategy, endorsed by ministers and regional agencies in the Framework for
Action on ICT for Development in the Pacific 2010, underscored the need for extending internet
connectivity, through improving ICT infrastructure and services.

The PDO was fully aligned with the Bank’s country strategy for Tonga and the Bank's regional engagement
strategy for the Pacific Region. The PDO was relevant to the second pillar of the 2011- 2014 Tonga Country
Assistance Strategy. This pillar highlighted the need for generating opportunities from greater global and
regional integration. The PDO was relevant to the Bank's Regional Partnership Framework for 2017-2021.
This framework identified the need for enhancing the government's capacity to deliver digital services


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 12
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Pacific Regional Connectivity Program (P113184)



               to citizens and encouraging public sector innovation at the regional level. The Bank's regional country
               diagnostic of 2016 identified expanding the coverage of mobile phones and internet services as priorities for
               economic development.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase the access to telecommunication and Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs)
                             infrastructure and services.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The construction of the submarine fiber-optic cable between Tonga and Fiji, together with
                             the technical assistance for creating the enabling environment by developing the telecommunications policy,
                             establishing an independent telecommunications regulator and improving regulatory oversight, are causally
                             linked to increasing competition in the sector, reducing the costs of international connectivity and thereby
                             increasing access to telecommunication and ICT infrastructure and services.

                             Outputs

                                        The monopoly cable operator "Tonga Cable Limited" (TCL) was restructured through partial
                                          privatization resulting in the Government of Tonga selling of 16.7% of the company to the private
                                          operator Digicel, the second mobile operator. The share purchase and shareholders agreement was
                                          signed on February 2017.

                                        About 1,217 km of submarine fiber-optic network was built as targeted. This included the international
                                          Fiji-Tonga link and the domestic extension link to the two islands (Ha'apai and Vava'u).

                                        The Communication Act was passed in 2016. The project provided TA for the development of this
                                          act. The act provided two types of licenses: a network operators license and an Internet Service
                                          Providers (ISPs) license.

                                        The Communications Act laid the foundation for the establishment of an independent
                                          telecommunication regulator, the Communication Commission. However, the commission has not
                                          been created to date and the regulatory function is being performed by the Ministry of Meteorology,
                                          Environment, Information, Disaster Management, Climate Change and Communications (MEIDECC)
                                          (ICR paragraph 34).



                                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 12
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Pacific Regional Connectivity Program (P113184)




  TA was provided for developing legislations on areas such as, cybercrime, data protection, privacy,
    and e-transactions. However, only cybercrime act was passed. Tonga acceded to and ratified the
    Budapest Convention on cybercrime. This convention is the first international treaty seeking to
    address internet and computer crimes, by harmonizing national laws, improving investigative
    techniques and increasing cooperation among nations. Regarding the other legislations, the ICR (para
    34) notes that further support is planned under the forthcoming World Bank e-Government project in
    Tonga.

  Outcomes

  At project closure, as targeted six service providers were given licenses to operate in Tonga. These
    were: TCL, Digicel Tonga Limited, Tonga Communications Corporation (TCC), the University of South
    Pacific, EziNET and Triesten. Of these, TCL did not offer retail services and the University of South
    Pacific used its license to provide connectivity to its academic institutions and facilities. EziNET
    provided satellite connectivity for Tonga. Triesten was not using its license. Therefore, there were only
    two operators “TCC and Digicel”, that were offering mobile or fixed broadband retail services. This
    implies that the telecommunications and ICT market in Tonga, at closure had a duopolistic structure,
    with two main operators. In fixed broadband, TCC was the only provider.

  As a result of TCL restructuring and regulatory reforms, the access to the capacity created through the
    submarine cable was available to market players on a nondiscriminatory, open-access basis.

  After the Communications Act of 2015, as well as the partial privatization of TCL, progress was made
    to lower the wholesale prices significantly, with the government effecting stronger wholesale price
    regulation. The average price that TCC and Digicel paid for the wholesale capacity link at project
    closure was US$75/Mbit/month. This was significantly lower than the target price of US$150/ Mbps
    per month. Since March 2018, new lower wholesale prices with operators were negotiated alongside
    capacity increases. The list prices for this period are not yet available.

  The volume of international traffic increased to 1,300 megabits per second (mbps) in October 2017.
    This exceeded the target of 700 mbps. The average per minute cost of international call (in US$) was
    reduced from 0.35 in July 2011 to 0.13 at project closure, slightly exceeding the target of 0.15. The
    average retail price of internet services decreased from US$75 (baseline) to US$3.00 at project
    closure. This exceeded the revised target of US$5.00. At project closing, the international Internet
    bandwidth was 4,400 mbps, far exceeding the revised target of 850 Mbps (ICR para 41).

  About 101,100 internet subscribers benefitted from the project activities at closure. This exceeded
    both the original and revised targets of 20,000 and 55,000 respectively. The extension of the
    submarine fiber optic cable to the two domestic islands, provided internet connectivity to 19,863
    people living in these islands. The ICR (paragraph 42) notes that people living on these islands
    (representing 20 percent of the population), were hitherto served only through slower and more
    expensive satellite and domestic microwave links. According to Tonga's 2016 Census of Population
    and Housing, out of a total of 75, 625 persons over ten years old, 45,836 had a mobile data plan with
    TCC or Digicel. This constituted 60% of the population in the islands. (However, having a mobile data
    plan does not necessarily mean they were using it). There were no targets for this indicator. The
    project did not measure the reliability and quality of internet access, or services usage.


                                                                                               Page 5 of 12
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Pacific Regional Connectivity Program (P113184)




                      Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale
The project activities substantially improved access to telecommunication and ICT infrastructure and services in
Tonga.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial


 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. An economic analysis was conducted at appraisal and at closure for the construction
of the submarine fiber-optic cable. This accounted for about 96% and 94% of the appraisal and actual cost. The
methodology entailed comparing the economic benefits of submarine cable system links with satellite links.
The project costs included construction costs of the submarine fiber optic cable, the cable landing station, and
the annual operating costs of the cable system. The benefits were assumed to come from broadband
penetration. The analyses compared two scenarios: first, the 2010 projections on the Gross Domestic Product
(assuming an annual GDP growth rate of 5% and broadband penetration up to 2017) and second, the actual
GDP and broadband penetration up to 2017. The Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) was calculated by
applying the net present value to the difference in GDP, due to the so-called broadband effect. The Project's
ENPV at US$19.7 million, which was more than twice the projected ENPV (US$9.4 million). This was primarily
due to the difference in the projected and actual broadband penetration rates, with the latter far exceeding the
former. The economic analysis for the domestic cable extension links to the two islands was not conducted, as
the link was commercially operational only in March 2018.

Cost savings. There were cost savings of US$4.4 million as the actual cost of the construction of the submarine
fiber-optic cable was lower than expected at appraisal. These savings, together with the proceeds from selling of
16.7% of TCL stocks to Digicel were used for scaling up activities (domestic extension link to the two
islands) (ICR, paragraph 22).

Administrative and Operational Issues. During 2015-17, there were implementation delays when the
extension to the domestic link was being negotiated. These delays were due to political considerations in
general and shareholder opposition to the TCL's Board for selling shares of a public enterprise. These issues
were eventually resolved, and the domestic links were build and at project closure. Most activities (with the
exception of establishment of an independent regulator and enacting some legislation) were completed.


Efficiency Rating


                                                                                                         Page 6 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pacific Regional Connectivity Program (P113184)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the government priorities and the Bank’s strategy both at the country level and at
the regional level is rated as high. Efficacy of the objective "to increase the access to infrastructure and
services" is rated substantial. Efficiency is rated as substantial. Taking these ratings into account, outcome is
rated as satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional risk. There is a moderate risk that the regulatory environment will not develop as envisaged.
Although the Communication Act was enacted in 2016, the final decisions on establishing the independent
telecommunications regulator are still pending, to date. Given that the Ministry of Meteorology, Environment,
Information, Disaster Management, Climate Change and Communications continues to be the regulator, it is
not clear whether there is a political willingness to create an independent regulator. Furthermore, there is a
substantial risk as to whether an independent regulator, once appointed, would have the required capacity to
regulate the market (ICR para 81).

Economic Risk. Tonga’s telecoms market is small and attracting new ISPs to the market is
challenging. Therefore, there is a moderate economic risk that the market environment will not continue to
develop and that the positive developments in prices and access might slow or stall.

Exposure to natural disasters. There is substantial risk associated with physical disruptions to the cable
due to natural disasters or ship anchors, which could temporarily limit the country's access to necessary
communications infrastructure, given that Tonga's redundancy options through satellite connections
are limited and cannot replace the bandwidth on the cable. The ICR (paragraph 81) notes that the disruption



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pacific Regional Connectivity Program (P113184)



in January 2019 effectively cut off Tonga from the global internet for a period of two weeks, before the
damage was repaired.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project preparation took into account Bank's experience in implementing telecommunications sector
  reform projects, regional connectivity projects, and operations in the Pacific region (PAD, paragraph 34).
  Lessons incorporated at design included: (a) a strong role for public sector, as the project was not
  deemed to be attractive to the private sector as a commercial venture, given the small market size and
  limited telecommunications traffic. The Tonga Cable Limited (TCL), which was to operate the
  telecommunications cable and provide wholesale access to internet service providers and mobile
  operators, was 100% owned by Tonga Telecommunications Corporation, a public enterprise. While this
  arrangement created a monopoly position for TCL, the related risks were to be alleviated by
  strengthening the regulatory oversight; and (b) a relatively simple design, combining investments
  in the submarine cable system with technical assistance to the Ministry of Information and
  Communications.

  Several risks were identified at appraisal, including substantial risks of implementation delays due to the
  lack of consensus about the appropriate business model, limited institutional capacity of TCL and the
  Ministry of Information and Communication, and financial management risks. Several mitigation
  measures were adopted, such as securing upfront agreement on governance, and appointing staff with
  financial management expertise. Even with the mitigation measures, the overall project risk was rated as
  substantial. The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were
  appropriate (discussed in section 10a).

  There were moderate shortcomings in design. Given the lack of capacity at the Ministry of Information
  and Communication and the Ministry of Meteorology, Environment, Information, Disaster Management,
  Climate Change and Communications, the project activities could have included activities such as large
  scale training and awareness raising programs to promote digital skills. There were some shortcomings
  in M&E design (discussed in section 9a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Eleven supervision missions were conducted during the implementation period of six years (average of two
 missions a year). These missions were conducted jointly with the co-financier, the Asian Development
 Bank and included technical and legal specialists. The continuity of leadership was maintained, with no
 change in the Task Team Leader during implementation. The supervision team was flexible in responding
 to changing client needs, such as using project savings in the infrastructure component to finance the

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Regional Connectivity Program (P113184)



 construction of domestic links. The supervision team actively supported the negotiation process, for
 securing financing for constructing domestic links to the islands through partial privatization of TCL. The
 supervision team also conducted a workshop on financial reporting to improve the financial management
 (discussed in section 10b).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The key outcome indicators, reduction in the wholesale price of international connectivity link, increase in
 the volume of international traffic, reductions in the average price of per minute cost of international call and
 retail prices of internet services, were appropriate for monitoring project performance. The project
 implementing agency was in charge of collecting, analyzing and disseminating data to stakeholders.

 There were no appropriate indicators at M&E appraisal for monitoring aspects with respect to regulatory
 improvements. There were no indicators to measure internet reliability and usage.



b. M&E Implementation
  Two new intermediate indicators were added for measuring regulatory development (ICR, paragraph 23).
  These included: (i) implementation of open access principles, to ensure that TCL capacity could be
  accessed openly by any interested party under transparent and nondiscriminatory terms; and
  (ii) restructuring the monopoly cable operator TCL, through its selling off a minority share to Digicel, the
  second mobile operator, to balance the playing field between the two operators in the market.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was used for monitoring project performance. The ICR (paragraph 69) notes that M&E
  data was systematically reported as part of every mission and the data was useful in decision making
  during the 2016 restructuring process.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Regional Connectivity Program (P113184)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B project. Three safeguard policies were triggered; Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP 4.01); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) (PAD,
   paragraph 63). The PAD (page vii) notes that an environmental assessment was conducted and an
   Environment Management Plan was prepared to address environmental and natural habitats issues. The
   PAD also notes that no resettlement was expected and the potential impacts relating to livelihoods included:
   (i) minimal damage to fishing grounds of customary Fijian owners; (ii) temporary affects to fishermen in Fiji
   and Tonga, due to the laying of the cable; (iii) impacts to inshore fishing in Tonga and Fiji. The PAD notes
   that a Compensation and Resettlement Framework was prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal.

   The ICR (paragraph 73) notes that no waivers from the Bank's safeguard policies were recorded and the
   project complied with applicable safeguards. The ICR (paragraph 73) also reports that there was no need
   for resettlement, as the land for the cable landing stations was acquired from the government.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. An assessment was conducted at appraisal to judge the financial management
   capacity of the implementing agency (PAD, paragraph 59). The financial management assessment risk for
   the program was rated as moderate to substantial, in view of the limited institutional capacity and
   experience. The ICR (paragraph 74) notes that there was compliance with financial management and all
   project audits were unqualified. The ICR also notes that internal controls, maintained by both the Ministry
   of Finance and National Planning and Tonga Cable Limited, provided assurance over the use of project
   funds. Bank's financial management specialists provided implementation support to help the client improve
   financial management arrangements in 2018, through conducting a workshop on financial reporting for
   stakeholders.

   Procurement. An assessment was conducted at appraisal to judge the procurement management
   capacity of the implementing agency (PAD, paragraph 58). The procurement risk was rated as
   substantial, in view of the limited capacity. A procurement plan was prepared at appraisal and this plan
   was to be regularly updated to reflect the actual project implementation needs. The ICR (paragraph 75)
   notes that although savings were realized in the construction of the submarine fiber-optic cable, bids for
   consultant services were higher than expected. The ICR also notes that the co financing with the Asian
   Development Bank, delayed procurement as both parties had to agree on debarment rules, which took
   more time than expected. Apart from these issues, the ICR (paragraph 75) notes that there were no other
   procurement issues during implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 12
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Pacific Regional Connectivity Program (P113184)



   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory           Satisfactory              .

Quality of M&E                    Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pages 30-31) draws the following main lessons, from the experience of implementing this
project, with some adaptation of language.

(1) In small country situations, careful consideration should be given to
country characteristics and needs including scale and growth, and activities need to be
designed and tailored accordingly. Unlike many prior Bank financed ICT projects with public-
private partnerships, this project envisioned a strong role for the public sector at appraisal, given the
small size of the market and relatively limited telecommunications traffic. The project attempted to
address monopoly risks through strengthening regulatory oversight and increased private sector
participation during implementation. This approach could be relevant for the Small Island Developing
States.

(2) Technical assistance activities need to be designed based on a careful consideration of
public sector capacity and availability of skilled resources. The technical assistance and
training provided under this project could have benefitted from more follow-through (such as through
training activities) aimed at longer-term implementation support. Moreover, special attention needs
to be given to the adequate staffing of the institutions responsible for ICT policy and regulation,
training and education, and attracting from abroad to Tonga the necessary skills/competence.

(3) Given the quick pace of social change from the rapid growth of fast Internet access, it
would be useful to invest in awareness raising programs aimed at promoting digital skills.
This could include cooperation with civil society organizations and through academic partnerships.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Regional Connectivity Program (P113184)




The ICR is well-written and provides a candid narrative. For instance, it clearly discusses the reasons for why
public-private partnerships might not have been feasible, given the small size of the country and relatively
limited internet traffic. It also provides a reasonably good description of the methodology followed for the
economic analysis. It is consistent with the guidelines and the ratings are appropriate. It draws reasonably good
lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

The ICR could have been concise and would have benefitted through better editing (at 31 pages the ICR is
more than twice the recommended length of 15 pages). Also, in Annex 1, the date for "Formally revised target"
and "Actual achieved at completion" is the same, 23 July 2018.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 12
