     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Vocational Training (P099047)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021660

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P099047                                    IN: Vocational Training

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                      Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-43190                                 31-Dec-2012                                           251,740,708.08

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Jun-2007                               30-Sep-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            280,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             252,218,754.36                                               0.00

 Actual                                         251,740,708.08                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof        Judyth L. Twigg            Eduardo Fernandez                 IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   The project development objective (PDO) of the Vocational Training Improvement Project (VTIP) as set out in
   the Financing Agreement was “to improve the employment outcomes of graduates from the Recipient’s
   vocational training system, by making the design and delivery of training more demand responsive.” The
   project was to be implemented in 33 States/Union Territories.


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Vocational Training (P099047)




   The Project Appraisal Document substantively had the same formulation.



   This Review will assess efficacy based on “improving the employment outcomes of graduates from the
   Recipient’s vocational training system." The second part of the PDO indicates how the first part will be
   achieved, and therefore denotes an output rather than an outcome. The assessment will therefore be made
   against two project outcome indicators: (i) the share of graduates employed within a year of graduation; and
   (ii) the real monthly earnings of graduates a year after graduation. A third indicator - the share of certified
   graduates including female graduates – will be treated as an output/intermediate outcome indicator.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   The project included three components:



   Component 1: improving quality of vocational training (estimated IDA cost at appraisal US$228 million;
   actual cost US$221 million). The component had three sub-components:



   Sub-component 1.1: This sub-component was to improve the quality and relevance of training in 400
   competitively selected Industrial Training Institutes (ITI). This was to be done by: (i) refurbishing and
   equipping all the selected ITIs; (ii) establishing centers of excellence (COE) in about 300 ITIs that would
   provide broad-based multi-skilling courses followed by specialized modules focusing on individual industrial
   sectors, to be run in parallel with the existing Craftsman Training Scheme (CTS) model; (iii) refurbishing
   teacher-training infrastructure; (iii) revising training curricula with industry participation and upgrading
   training facilities accordingly; (iv) launching new trade courses and discontinuing existing ones that no
   longer reflected industry demand; (vi) establishing facilities for a central management information system;
   and (vii) establishing training, counseling and placement cells to facilitate job search.



   Sub-component 1.2: This sub-component was to enhance the system’s capacity to train new instructors,
   and provide basic and refresher courses as well as specialized programs to current instructors. This was to
   be done by: (i) establishing 10 Instructor Training Wings (ITW) in selected ITIs for basic level training; (ii)


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  IN: Vocational Training (P099047)



conducting refresher training courses; and (iii) organizing specialized training courses outside the Ministry of
Labor and Employment (MOLE).



Sub-component 1.3: This sub-component was to establish an incentive fund to provide grants to well-
performing States to carry out sub-projects to strengthen vocational training in those States, including
introducing shorter-term training programs in emerging areas requiring specialized skills.



Component 2: Promoting Systemic Reforms and Innovations (estimated IDA cost at appraisal US$29
million; actual cost US$9 million). The component had three sub-components:



Sub-component 2.1: This sub-component was to promote reforms by supporting studies and
consultancies to: (i) set up a national vocational qualification framework (NVQF); (ii) design a policy
framework for registering private training providers and courses offered by them that meet NVQF standards;
(iii) design models for training the informal sector workforce; and (iv) assess the feasibility of establishing a
training fund for financing formal training courses in publicly and privately financed training institutions, and
training programs conducted by employers for new employees.



Sub-component 2.2: This sub-component was to set up an innovations fund to provide grants for carrying
out pilot activities for improving the quality of vocational training provided by ITIs.

Sub-component 2.3: This sub-component was to build capacity of three central institutions in developing
new curriculum and instructional media packages, skills assessment and testing, and training
standards. The three institutions were: the APEX Hi-tech Institute at Bangalore (AHI), the Central Staff
Training and Research Institute at Kolkata (CSTRI), and the Ministry of Labor’s National Instructional Media
Institute (NIMI).



Component 3: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (estimated IDA cost at appraisal US$23
million; actual cost US$11 million). This component was to finance project management and monitoring
and evaluation.



Changes




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Vocational Training (P099047)



  1. Revised components. The VTIP experienced four Level 2 restructurings. In all four instances, the
  closing date was advanced as indicated below under “Dates," and all four extensions were requested by the
  government to ensure implementation of project activities.



        The first Level 2 restructuring in December 2012 was requested to compensate for implementation
         delays at the beginning of the project. It also introduced changes in basic instructor training: instead
         of establishing 10 ITWs, 5 Institutes of Training of Trainers (ITOT) were to be established offering
         both basic and advanced instructor training; and refresher training for instructors was consolidated
         with such activities in existing advanced training institutes.
        The second restructuring in November 2014 addressed implementation delays due to general and
         State elections, and to allow completion of ongoing tracer studies on graduates, innovative activities,
         and utilization of performance-based incentive grants.
        The third restructuring in September 2015 involved a shift in responsibility for the project from MOLE
         to a new Ministry of Skills Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE).



  The fourth restructuring in September 2016 was to complete still ongoing activities, and provide a bridging
  mechanism between VTIP and a proposed Strengthening for Industrial Value Enhancement Project
  (STRIVE, P156867, 2017-2022, IDA commitment of US$125 million).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


  Project Cost. Total project cost at appraisal was estimated at US$359 million. Actual project costs at
  closing were US$330.74 million.



  Financing. IDA initially was to provide US$280 million; the amount disbursed was US$251.74 million.



  Borrower contribution. The Borrower provided US$79 million, as planned.



  Dates. The project was approved on June 5, 2007 and became effective on December 17, 2007. Its
  original closing date, December 31, 2012, was extended four times: from December 31, 2012 to November
  30, 2014; from November 30, 2014 to September 30, 2015; from September 30, 2015 to September 30,
  2016; and from September 30, 2016 to September 30, 2018, at which point the project closed.




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IN: Vocational Training (P099047)



   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale


               The VTIP objectives were relevant to the Bank’s Country Strategy, government policy, and the country
               situation, with weak employability of graduates from the public vocational training system. The objectives
               were fully consistent with the World Bank Group’s India Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY18-
               22. Its focus area 2 – enhancing competitiveness and enabling job creation – included increasing access to
               quality market-relevant skills development. The VTIP objectives were relevant to government policy,
               notably the national policy for skills development, issued in 2015, which focused on improving labor market
               outcomes for graduates from its CTS by addressing major issues of quality in vocational training. The CTS
               operates the MOLE vocational training (VT) system through the ITIs and private Industrial Training
               Centers. A significant step was to be the introduction of a new approach by introducing multi-skilling into
               ITIs through COEs.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             Improve the employment outcomes of graduates from the Recipient’s vocational training system

                             Rationale


                             The PDO was to be achieved by increasing the share of pass-outs (graduates) from the system who (i) found
                             employment within one year of finishing training; and (ii) saw an increase in their real monthly earnings
                             measured one year after finishing training. To do so, ITIs would be equipped to provide COE training models
                             as well as conventional CTS training, leading to better qualified graduates entering the job market.



                             Outputs




                                                                                                                            Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Vocational Training (P099047)




      Some 400 ITIs’ workshops and laboratories were refurbished and provided new training equipment for
         CTS and COE training models
        Four ITOTs were established to provide basic level training. Originally, 10 ITWs were to be
         constructed for this purpose, but they were replaced by the same number of ITOTs during the first
         Level 2 restructuring. The number of ITOTs was reduced to 5 during the third restructuring and finally
         to 4 during the fourth restructuring. The ICR did not explain the causes or implications of the gradual
         decline in numbers.
        At project closing, 42 percent of project ITIs had signed a Memorandum of Understanding with local
         industry partners for improving the relevance of curricula, compared to a target of 50 percent and a
         baseline of 30 percent.
        72 basic and refresher modules for trainers to be delivered through the country’s distance education
         network were developed and ready for delivery, but not yet delivered, against a target of 25 and a
         baseline of 10. 20,000 ITI instructors were trained using the distance education network.
        71 percent of instructor vacancies were filled, against a target of 80 percent.
        The three central institutions – AHI, CSTRI, and NIMI – upgraded their capacity for curriculum
         development/revision and development of textbooks and teaching/training aids for COEs' basic
         training and advanced training modules.
        As part of an effort to keep up with shifting demand for trades, new CTS trades were introduced, such
         as auto mechanics, welder fabrication and fitting, and agro-processing, while others were phased out,
         such as stenography and hair/skin care.
        Examination processes and certification for all trainees across all courses offered by the National
         Council for Vocational Training (NCVT) were automated.
        19,400 new and current instructors were given refresher courses, against a target of 15,000 and a
         baseline of zero.
        5 policy studies were commissioned by the project implementation unit, equaling the target.
        5 innovation proposals were financed by the innovation fund, against a target of 10.
        57 percent of project ITIs had active private sector participation in their management committees,
         against a target of 100 percent.



Intermediate outcomes



67 percent of pass-outs (71 percent male, 76 percent female) from project ITIs exited with an NCVT
certificate, compared to a target of 73 percent (73 percent and 80 percent), and a baseline of 61 percent (62
percent and 74 percent).



Outcomes




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 14
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         IN: Vocational Training (P099047)



                      The most recent available data – a tracking study done in 2014 of 12,000 ITI graduates from 2012, thus
                      measuring the impact on pass-outs of improvements in the project-linked VT system over the first five years
                      of the project – provides the following results:



                            53 percent (55 percent male, 41 percent female) of pass-outs from project ITIs found employment
                             within one year of finishing training, compared to a target of 50 percent (52 percent, 48 percent) and a
                             baseline of 32 percent (33 percent, 19 percent).
                            Pass-outs from project ITIs had average monthly earnings of INR 4275 (male INR 4268, female INR
                             4397), compared to an original target of INR 3026 (INR 3093, INR 2451) and a 2007 baseline of INR
                             2421 (INR 2474, INR 1961).



                      While these results indicate substantial improvements in employability and earnings over the first five years of
                      the project, it is likely that the results also are influenced by the state of the economy. Over the years 2009-
                      2013, India had a period of strong economic growth that well may have influenced the outcomes of the
                      tracking study, and therefore the project at that point in time.



                      Moreover, further findings of the tracking study indicate that project results may have been trivial. While 61
                      percent of COE graduates from project ITIs and 67 percent of CTS graduates from project ITIs (the former
                      conducted broad-based multi-skilling courses, while the latter provide upgraded facilities) found employment
                      within the prescribed period, 69 percent of graduates from public ITIs outside the project found employment
                      within the same period. Similar discrepancies relate to earnings. Here it is unlikely that the results are
                      influenced by the economic cycle.



                      Rating
                      Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale


Results were not provided covering the entire project period. Findings from the 2014 tracking study likely were
primarily influenced by the economic cycle, and in any event, its results indicated that graduates of non-project
ITIs achieved similar or slightly better employment outcomes than those from project institutes.



Overall Efficacy Rating                                                       Primary reason
Modest                                                                        Insufficient evidence


                                                                                                                        Page 7 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: Vocational Training (P099047)




5. Efficiency


Cost-benefit analysis and rate of return calculations were undertaken at appraisal and in the ICR. Both
considered internal efficiency of ITIs, labor market outcomes and lifetime earnings, and (in the case of the
appraisal analysis) also sensitivity analysis. Appraisal rate of return calculations ranged between one and 18.4
percent applying a discount rate of 7 percent. A similar cost-benefit analysis conducted at the time of the ICR
yielded an internal rate of return of 9 percent, i.e. returns to improved ITI performance were moderate. A more
rigorous comparison between the various models – ITI/COE, ITI/CTS, and non-ITI training programs -- might
have been useful in view of the results of the tracking study described in the efficacy section. Considering the
long project implementation period – ten years – rate of return calculations might have been quite modest. Slow
implementation also affected project efficiency: initial start-up delays, persistent difficulties in filling instructor
vacancies, and reluctance to accept the center-of-excellence model (and its ultimate cancellation). Ultimately, a
five-and a-half-year project extended over ten years.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         100.00
 Appraisal                                                    9.70
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         100.00
 ICR Estimate                                                 9.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



Relevance of objectives is rated high, as the project was in line with the Bank’s CPF, and it reflected
government concerns about its VT programs. Efficacy is rated a weak modest, as outcomes in terms of
employability and earnings of graduates from the reformed system did not seem to be advantaged compared to
other ITI graduates. Efficiency is rated modest. These ratings indicate significant shortcomings and an overall
outcome rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory

                                                                                                         Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Vocational Training (P099047)




7. Risk to Development Outcome



Government policy is focused on providing vocational training that corresponds to the demands of the labor
market. To that end, the elimination of COEs in favor of traditional CTS training that corresponds less well to
the demands of the labor market could be seen as a move in a different direction. In part, this may have
been provoked by unfamiliarity with the COE among potential employers, but possibly also following the
results of the tracking study, which were such that they may have discouraged the authorities from pursuing
COE further. However, the government remains committed to VT reform, as indicated by its support for the
follow-up STRIVE project (see Section 2 on Changes). And the project has contributed to infrastructure
development and refurbishment of 400 ITIs, and to capacity for curriculum development, especially for new
trades.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  The project was strategically relevant and drew on the Bank’s experience from its five
  earlier technical/vocational education and training investments in India, as well as analytical work done in
  anticipation of VTIP. In particular, a pre-project tracer study in 2006 drew attention to modest
  employment outcomes of VT system graduates and focused the discussion on issues that subsequently
  would be addressed under VTIP. That said, the project was ambitious, attempting to cover all the main
  issues in VT in the country. This may in part have contributed to the delays in implementation, ultimately
  resulting in a ten-year project. The preparation process itself also manifested weaknesses, as listed in
  the ICR (pages 20 and 21): there were weaknesses in implementation readiness that would delay project
  startup, notably in the establishment of national- and state-level project implementation units, which
  would delay civil works that in turn delayed the introduction of necessary workshops and ultimately
  affected the quality of COE training. Likewise, the COE training model itself was not fully assessed,
  affecting basic training of trainees, nor was the need for social marketing of COEs sufficiently recognized
  as a means of facilitating employability of graduates. Overall, the difficulties that arose are surprising,
  considering that the project was the sixth of its kind that the Bank undertook in India.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Vocational Training (P099047)



 It is difficult to determine whether a five-year project that took ten years and four extensions to complete
 was adequately supervised. Project design may have been ambitious, and repeated delays should have
 raised concerns that a consistent rating of project performance as moderately satisfactory or satisfactory
 until the very last year prior to closing does not indicate. The downgradings came about when the new
 implementing agency failed to meet seemingly critical project requirements, such as an end-of-project
 tracer study, an asset audit, use of purchased equipment, and so forth.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 The arrangements for results monitoring included three outcome indicators and 17 output indicators. While
 all three outcome indicators were connected to the PDO, two indicators – employment and earnings – were
 legitimate outcome indicators directly influencing the PDO, while the third one – share of certified graduates
 – was an intermediate outcome indicator; while certification supported the pool of employable graduates, it
 did not directly influence employment outcomes. Output indicators were formulated to capture the
 contribution of project activities towards achieving PDO-level outcomes.



 Results analysis was to be further supported by a management information system (MIS) developed during
 the early years of project implementation, as well as tracer studies to collect outcome data. ITIs were to
 provide comprehensive information by submitting periodic progress reports on all project components and
 sub-components.



b. M&E Implementation


  Implementation included the collection of information on certified graduates, and graduate employment
  and earnings. Definitions for two indicators were adjusted during implementation: (i) the basis for
  calculating the share of graduates receiving NCVT certification was changed from “the percentage of
  trainees assessed” that received certificates, to “the percentage of trainees enrolled”; and the target for
  certified female graduates was reduced; and (ii) the calculation of graduates finding employment after




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Vocational Training (P099047)



  one year had initially incorrectly been based on graduates finding employment at any time, and was
  changed to the intended “within one year."



  The management information system was implemented with four modules – ITIs, apprenticeships,
  centrally funded institutes, and placement. The first two modules are functional, and the two remaining
  ones have been designed but were not yet functional at the time of the ICR (ICR, page 25).



  Two tracer studies were implemented and delivered results. A third planned study, on a sample of 2016
  graduates, did not take place.



c. M&E Utilization
  The MIS is currently being used to identify past trainees to issue certificates and provide online
  certificate validation. It is customized for MSDE’s use, but its use is reported to be expanding under the
  STRIVE Project (ICR, page 25). However, currently neither data flowing upward through the MIS nor
  downward towards the States seems to be used in decision making.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


   The ICR indicated an environmental category rating of "B", as both Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
   4.01) and Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) were triggered by the project. Activities under the project did
   not pose significant environmental risks, beyond civil works for creation/expansion/repair of buildings and
   pollution risks from overpopulated basic facilities. An Environmental Management Framework was
   developed, and a satisfactory implementation rating was maintained throughout the project. An Equity
   Assurance Plan was developed by the government, including a variety of actions targeted to
   disadvantaged/indigenous groups, with a satisfactory implementation rating maintained throughout the
   project




b. Fiduciary Compliance



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  IN: Vocational Training (P099047)



This section is an abridged version of the text in the ICR.



Financial management. Financial management performance of VTIP was consistently rated moderately
satisfactory, except during the period 2008-09 where it was downgraded to moderately
unsatisfactory. There were initial delays in submitting acceptable Interim Unaudited Financial Reports
(IUFRs) and funds release due to delays in the preparation and submission of IUFRs by some States, and
in releasing funds to the line department. Every fiscal year, there were significant delays by some States
and institutes in furnishing their audit report to the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.



 Review of audit reports in some States indicated the following: (a) records not produced for civil works; (b)
procurement in excess of required quantities; (c) non-utilization of funds and issue of incorrect utilization
certificates; (d) excess of expenditures incurred against the central share; (e) ineligible expenses; (f)
differences between reported and audited expenditure; and (g) physical verification of fixed assets and
stocks not conducted. As a consequence, some State expenditures were disallowed, resulting in lengthy
settlement processes, including delays in the submission by the corresponding State of the necessary
supporting documentation and requests to the national project implementation unit (NPIU) to recertify the
given expenditures so the claims could be then submitted to the Bank for reimbursement.



 By October 2017, about one year before the closing of the VTIP, the Bank team flagged the large amount
of undisbursed funds and requested the NPIU to budget eligible expenditures that could be implemented
before the closing date. At the time the VTIP closed, there was about US$27.58 million of undisbursed
funds, some of which might have to be used to reimburse for recertification currently in progress.



Procurement. The procurement performance of the VTIP was rated moderately satisfactory throughout the
implementation cycle except during the period 2009-10, where it was downgraded to moderately
unsatisfactory.



VTIP-related procurement was largely handled at the ITI level following a shopping procedure (contracts
up to 900,000 INRs) and at the State project implementation unit level following National Competitive
Bidding and shopping procedures. All concerned persons handling procurement across all implementing
agencies under VTIP underwent procurement training on Bank procurement procedures. Nevertheless,
contracts needing prior review by the Bank were slow to be issued because, after receiving the no-
objection of the Bank, the contracting process had to be reviewed and endorsed by the Expenditure
Finance Committee at the MOLE and subsequently, the MSDE. The Bank conducted post procurement
reviews on every alternate year beginning in 2008 on a 10 percent sample of contracts.




                                                                                                 Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Vocational Training (P099047)



   In mid-2015 the Bank team requested a VTIP asset audit. This study was contracted by the NPIU in the
   summer of 2018, and the findings indicated that 90 percent of newly constructed civil infrastructure
   was found to be suitable for intended use at present and in the future; only 52 percent of assets procured
   in the sampled ITIs were functional, while 22 percent of the assets were not being utilized; 19 percent of
   the procured assets were found to be nonfunctional due to lack of maintenance and non-continuous use of
   the asset; 51 percent of the procured assets were not in compliance with national or international relevant
   quality and safety standards; 78 percent of the assets under physical review were found to be compliant
   with NCVT requirements; out of total purchased assets, 68 percent are still being dedicated to the trades;
   and only 7 percent of the assets are insured.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.



d. Other
   None noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                  IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately          Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory      Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately          Moderately
Bank Performance
                                 Unsatisfactory      Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest              Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons



The following lessons are drawn from the ICR and edited.



Pilot models need to be assessed before scaling them up. Teams need to make sure that the
challenges of scaling up innovative pilots are well understood by the authorities as well as the
team. The COE model that was piloted by the MOLE during VTIP preparation and then underpinned



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: Vocational Training (P099047)



VTIP design was never sufficiently assessed before scaling up. Consequently, COE implementation
challenges were neither anticipated nor sufficiently addressed during implementation.



Project design must be dimensioned to country capacity. While sector challenges may be
many and diverse, task teams need to focus on approaches that are implementable within the time
frame of the project. VTIP attempted to address all the major challenges facing better employability
and earnings within a relatively short five years. As a result, the project stretched over ten years and
still came off with relatively modest results.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



The ICR provided a sufficiently detailed discussion of the background and rationale of the project to allow the
results to be assessed. At the same time, it could have been clearer in specifying project outputs, which often
remained vague and indicative; and in explaining how the revisions and other changes influenced the results
framework. On the other hand, its discussion of M&E was more thorough and hence more useful than often is
the case in ICRs.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 14
