     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021663

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P110371                                     IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                       Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-78180                                  30-Nov-2014                                       105,516,222.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Dec-2009                                 31-Mar-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            105,230,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              88,821,782.08                                              0.00

 Actual                                          88,821,782.08                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Victoria Alexeeva           Peter Nigel Freeman           Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P100589_TBL
 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P100589                                     IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project ( P100589 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-95549                                                                                          16694439.92

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Dec-2009

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)




                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                     0.00                                  18,450,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                  16,694,439.92

 Actual                                                  0.00                                  16,694,439.92




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) was “to promote environmentally sustainable transport nationally
   and to improve the usage of environment-friendly transport modes through demonstration projects in selected
   cities”. (Loan Agreement dated February 5, 2010, page 5)



   The PDO statement in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 6) was essentially the same; it clarified
   that it was to promote environmentally sustainable urban transport in India and to improve the usage of
   environmentally friendly transport modes in project cities.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  17-Nov-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Capacity Development Assistance for Urban Transport (appraisal US$7.8 million; actual
   US$4.37 million) was designed to provide technical assistance to the Ministry of Urban Development
   (MoUD) to improve national, state and local capacity to implement the National Urban Transport Policy. It
   included: (i) development of implementation strategies and plans to implement key urban transport reforms
   envisioned in the National Urban Transport Policy; (ii) piloting model urban transport databases; (iii)
   assisting cities in the identification and preparation of potential environmentally friendly urban transport
   investments; and (iv) developing a national/local government cooperative research program on sustainable

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)



  urban transport, aiming at finding local solutions for planning, operation, and management problems
  encountered by local practitioners.

  Component 2: City Demonstration Projects (appraisal US$336.8 million; actual US$311.3 million)
  supported design and implementation of demonstration projects in six selected cities (in five participating
  states) that would create models of sustainable transport solutions for other Indian cities to replicate. These
  projects would focus on four themes: (i) Public transport development; (ii) Non-motorized transport
  development; (iii) Pilot Intelligent Transport System (ITS); and (iv) Integrated land use and transport
  planning and transit-oriented development. The six cities, selected by the Government of India (GOI)
  through a competitive selection process, include Pune and Pimpri-Chinchwad (in Maharashtra), Naya
  Raipur (in Chhattisgarh), Jalandhar (in Punjab), Indore (in Madhya Pradesh), and Mysore (in Karnataka).



  Revisions under Components:



  In 2012, under Component 2: (i) the Pune City (in Maharashtra) was replaced by a new city Hubli-Dharwad
  (in Karnataka), due to the lack of progress under the former one; (ii) other works associated with
  implementation of the bus rapid transit system in Pimpri-Chinchwad, Government of Maharashtra, were
  cancelled.



  In 2015, a public bike sharing sub-project was added for Mysore as a new subcomponent under the City
  Demonstration Projects Component that would include bicycles, centralized control centre, docking stations
  and technical assistance for promoting sustainable urban transport in the city. Support to non-motorized
  transport (NMT) was expanded, from the funds committed to Jalandhar that was dropped at the time of
  project approval; the traffic signal priority was dropped from Indore’s Intelligent Transport System (ITS)
  scope, as it had been implemented through government own funds, and an Automatic Vehicle Location
  System (AVLS) was added.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost: The total project cost at closure was US$318.67 million, 8% lower than the appraised estimate
  of US$346.8 million.

  Financing: The project was financed through the blend of an IBRD loan of US$105.23 million and a Global
  Environment Facility (GEF) grant of US$20.3 million administered by the World Bank. The IBRD loan was to
  finance activities under Component 2 in three pilot cities: Pune, Pimpri-Chinchwad, and Naya Raipur. The
  GEF grant was to finance Component 1 and technical assistance activities in all six cities participating under
  Component 2. At closure, the IBRD loan disbursed at US$88.82 million and the GEF grant- at US$16.7
  million.

  Borrower contribution: The GoI contributed US$40.31 million as compared to its commitment of US$61.6
  million, including US$8.4 million from the Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) (PAD, page 7). The


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)



                       contribution for States was US$126.55, as compared to the estimated US$68.1 million. The cities
                       contributed US$46.3 million, as compared to the estimated US$93.3 million. Overall, the total contribution
                       from the Borrower was US$213.16 million, as compared to the estimated commitment of US$223.1 million.

                       Dates: The project was extended twice by a total of 3 years and four months- by one year in 2012 at the
                       time of inclusion of Hubli-Dharwad, and the second time by 28 months in 2015 due to delays in completion
                       of five of the six demonstration projects. Overall, the project was restructured five times during the
                       implementation period that included the revision in activities (described above in Section 2d), modification
                       of the results framework (see Section 9), and reallocation of the GEF grant between the project
                       implementing units (PIUs).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At appraisal, rapid urbanization in India was accompanied by growth in traffic volumes and congestion,
increased air pollution, and more traffic accidents. The increasing mode share by private
vehicles contributed to increasing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Only 20 of the 87 cities with over half
a million population had an organized public transport system; and if the trends continued, GHG emissions
would be 8-10 times higher by 2030. The institutional arrangements for urban transport management in
India were characterized by high fragmentation and often overlapping functions. Since 2006, the MoUD has
been working with a number of states and cities to develop an India-GEF-World Bank-UNDP Sustainable
Urban Transport Program (referred as the SUTP Program). The aim was to strengthen the national and
local governments capacity in urban transport planning and management in a more integrated and
comprehensive manner (PAD, pages 1-3). The project supported the implementation of India National
Urban Transport Policy (NUTP), particularly those aspects of the policy that emphasized: (a) priority to the
use of public transport; (b) priority to non-motorized transport; and (c) capacity building for developing and
implementing sustainable transport systems (at both national and local levels) (PDA, p.6).



The PDO remained consistent with the government strategic goals in support of urban transport defined in
the GoI’s 12th Five Year Plan and the WBG Country Partnership Framework in India (FY18–FY22), in
particular to help cities become more green, livable, productive, and resilient by investing in affordable and
sustainable public transport services, including mass rapid transit systems in large cities, as well as
improving management systems for controlling air pollution in select cities - as specified under one of the
WBG engagement focus areas of promoting resource-efficient growth (CPS, FY18-FY22).


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                                       Page 4 of 18
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To promote environmentally sustainable transport nationally.

               Rationale
               The theory of change was that capacity building, knowledge exchange and training program would lead to
               better understanding and ability to implement environmentally sustainable urban transport at the national
               level. The project team clarified that the activities focused on building capacity at the national, state and city
               level (looking beyond the demo cities at cities across India) with a focus on support to cities and states in
               areas of the reform (as part of the Guidance Document preparation) and preparation of sustainable urban
               transport projects and approaches (through LUTP training program).

               * A split-rating assessment is not applied as the original outcome indicator was revised for clarification and
               better measurement of the TA activities implemented by the project.

               Outputs

               7 guidance documents were developed for cities:

                     Guidance documents for setting up and operationalizing the Unified Metropolitan Transport Authority
                      (UMTA) and the Urban Transport Fund (UTF) (city specific support to Amravati, Bhopal, Hyderabad,
                      Kochi, Lucknow, Jaipur, Tiruchirapally)
                     Guidance documents for setting up and operationalizing Traffic Control Centers and National Urban
                      Transport Helpline (city specific support to Ahmedabad, Delhi, Guwahati, Mumbai)
                     Guidance documents for ToD, public bike sharing, and nonmotorized transport (city specific support to
                      Bhopal, Mumbai, Vadodara, Gurgaon, Aizawl and Vizag);
                     Model contracts and guidance documents for private operation of city buses (city specific support to
                      Jalandhar, Kochi, Mira Bhayandar).

               Training under the Leaders in Urban Transport Planning (LUTP) program was carried out and included the
               participation of 207 senior officials in the international offerings and a further 242 officials in the course
               organized in the India Chapter at Centre for Environmental Planning and Technology (CEPT) University
               (Ahmedabad). This represented a total of 449 officials across India covering over 47 cities and 29 states.



               Outcome

               As a result of the LUTP training program or the city-specific support under the guidance document
               preparation, the ICR reports that 16 environmentally friendly urban transport practices and approaches were
               adopted by the respective national, state, and city officials, as compared to the target of 6. This outcome
               indicator was modified from the original one, as it was difficult to measure and not fully representative of the
               activities proposed under the capacity building component. The ICR (Annex 7) reports the following results:


                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)




      7 projects and approaches initiated under LUTP program were adopted by the cities (based on a
       review of the LUTP achievements in 2017). These were (I) implementation of strategies to decongest
       Delhi Metro in peak hours (covering differential pricing, multiple interchange points); (ii) revitalizing city
       bus in Nagpur; (iii) Ccreating transit-oriented zones in Ahmedabad; (iv) policy guidelines for electric
       rickshaw; (v) improving pedestrian infrastructure in Aizawl; (vi) water metro system in Kochi; and (vii)
       driver training in Delhi Transport Corporation to reduce road fatalities (fatal accidents fell from 73 to 28
       between 2012 and 2018).
      4 cities proceeded with various reforms (3 on UMTA and 1 on ToD) based on the technical assistance
       provided as part of the city-specific support under guidance documents: (i) Kerala Metropolitan
       Transport Authority Act covering Kochi, Trivandrum, and Calicut passed by the Legislative Assembly
       of Kerala subject to suggestions by Select Committee; (ii) ToD policy issued for MRT investments in
       Madhya Pradesh.
      4 cities (Bhopal, Chandigarh, Jaipur, and Mira-Bhayandar) proceeded to implement city bus
       modernization programs under the approved GEF Efficient and Sustainable City Bus Services project
       (P132418) in line with the preparation support extended.
      MoHUA released a ToD Policy for MRT systems based on the ToD Guidance Document developed.
       This is applicable on all rail- and non-rail-based MRT projects with national government support.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the usage of environment-friendly transport modes through demonstration projects in selected
cities.

Rationale
The theory of change was that through investments in public and non-motorized transport in six cities would
improve the usage of environment-friendly transport modes, as evidenced by increase in their mode share
and decrease in GHG emission reduction in the selected cities.

Outputs

The originally selected cities were Pune and Pimpri-Chinchwad (in Maharashtra), Naya Raipur (in
Chhattisgarh), Jalandhar (in Punjab), Indore (in Madhya Pradesh), and Mysore (in Karnataka). The support in
Pune was dropped for slow progress, and the city of Hubli-Dharwad was added. Jalandhar was dropped
subsequent to negotiations and did not become part of the approved project (ICR, para 12).

1. In Pimri-Chinchwad,

      One BRT corridor was operational at project closure against the targeted two.




                                                                                                       Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)



2. In Naya Raipur,

      2 public transport corridors were built, and in operation between Naya Raipur and Raipur, as planned.
       One corridor was a BRT -Lite system and the other had an ordinary bus service. 68 km of footpath
       and cycle tracks were built in Naya Raipur. The target was 36km, and the ICR reports that the city
       used its own funds to build additional kms.

3. In Hubli-Dharwad,

      The BRT system was constructed as planned but with a delay. It began trial runs in October 2018,
       after project closure. Footpaths, foot-over-bridges and access at intersections were built.

4. In Mysore,

      The Intelligent Transport System (ITS) system was installed on city bus transport and is operational. It
       is utilized to improve the overall system performance 93% of its intended of revenue vehicle km of
       service, against the target of 80%.
      A public bike sharing system became operational in June 2017. It become the first citywide system to
       be launched in India. The ICR reports that the feedback was positive and it informed the design and
       launch of other systems in the country.

5. In Indore,

      The ITS system was installed on the BRT system as planned and is operational. It is utilized for 98%
       of its intended of revenue vehicle km of service, against the target of 80%.



Outcome

      In Pimpri-Chinchwad, the public transport mode share increased from 4.2% in 2009 to 8.8% in 2018,
       as compared to the target of 8%. The ICR (para 23) reports that roughly 28% of the shift was from
       personal modes. The shift from car users in the post BRT scenario shows an increasing trend from 3
       percent in 2016 to 8 percent in 2017. The user satisfaction is reported to have been improved. The
       percentage of women using the BRT has increased compared to the pre-BRT services (from 33
       percent to 36 percent on Corridor 2 and from 23 percent to 32 percent on Corridor 3) (the ICR, para
       30).
      In Naya Raipur, the public transport trip mode share between Raipur and Naya Raipur increased by
       42.4 % that exceeded the revised target of 40% but was slightly below the original target of 50%. The
       share of women passengers has grown from 26.2 percent to 28 percent. At appraisal, as clarified
       by the project team, the state capital of Naya Raipur was not functional and state headquarters
       continued to operate out of Raipur, the trips between Raipur and Naya Raipur were insignificant and
       public transport mode share negligible or zero.
      In Hubli-Dharwad, the public transport mode share data are not available as the Hubli-Dharwad BRT
       system became operational at project closure (the target was 33%). The ICR reports (page 14) that
       preliminary surveys suggest that 18 percent of the shift to BRTS is from personalized modes of which


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)



                             9 percent are car users. The user feedback is positive, and ratings are especially high with regard to
                             travel time savings, reliability, and facilities.
                            The reduction in Co2 emissions in the project cities was estimated at 312,000 tons, exceeding the
                             target of at least 128,000 tons lower that BAU forecasts CO2 emissions over 10 years.



                      Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale
The overall efficacy is substantial, as both objectives are assessed as substantially achieved.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial


5. Efficiency
Economic analysis

At appraisal, a formal cost-benefit analysis (CBA) was carried out for the two investment projects: a non-
motorized transport improvement project in Pune and the BRT corridor development project in Pimpri-
Chinchwad. The former was subsequently dropped from the project support. The economic analysis for Pimpri-
Chinchwad covered only two of the corridors and was limited by lack of data on general traffic volumes from
which the main benefits would be derived (reduction in road user costs and reduction in GHG). Based on
infrastructure investment of US$126.5 million and various assumptions about costs and benefits, the analysis
showed an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 24 percent and a net present value (NPV) of US$185
million. The EIRR of Hubli-Dharwad project that was added during implementation was estimated to be 29.5
percent with an NPV of US$448 million.

At closure, the overall EIRR of the Pimpri-Chinchwad, Naya Raipur, and Hubli-Dharwad projects was
estimated at 11.2 percent with an NPV of INR 19.3 billion or US$276 million. The ICR (page 15) reports that the
ex-post benefits were lower for several reasons, including cost increase by 15 percent in rupee terms (that
declined in U.S. dollar terms by roughly 9 percent owing to the rupee depreciation) and the fact that benefits had
not yet accrued by project closure in two of the major projects Hubli-Dharwad BRTS and Pimpri-Chinchwad
BRTS Corridor 4 that became operational after project closure.



Operational/ Administrative Efficiency




                                                                                                                       Page 8 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)



The project closing date was extended by 32 months. There were substantial implementation delays in the
project cities, in particular in Pimpri-Chinchwad, Hubli-Dharwad, and Naya Raipur. There were multiple causes
of delay, as specified by the ICR (para 35), including (a) protracted land acquisition and resettlement; (b) non-
familiarity of PIUs with World Bank procedures and weak technical capacity for planning and implementation; (c)
constant need for coordination with other key stakeholders and agencies; (d) works contractor nonperformance
owing to not only poor project management and cash flow issues but also non-familiarity with modern
construction designs and materials; (e) lack of familiarity with new concepts such as ITS among consultants,
vendors, and clients; and (f) wavering commitment and priority accorded to the project at the agency level with
changes in officials.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    37.00
 Appraisal                                                24.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    70.00
 ICR Estimate                                             11.20
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objectives is rated high. The project helped promote environmentally sustainable transport
nationally and improve the usage of environment-friendly transport modes through demonstration projects in
selected cities in a substantial way. The efficiency is assessed as modest due to lower economic rates of return
and operational inefficiencies. The overall project outcome rating is moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional. The LUTP training under the capacity-building component ensured that participants were from
across India and from diverse fields such as policy making, planning, public transport operations,
environment, and traffic enforcement. Being senior officials, they are in a good position to influence their
organizations and initiate environmentally friendly actions in their respective fields and move the
environmentally friendly urban transport agenda forward. The project focused on strengthening public sector

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)



institutions both by setting up new institutional structures to deliver higher-quality services and by
establishing a series of official guidelines on urban mobility institutions like Unified Metropolitan Transport
Authority (UMTA). The guidelines, published online and shared through prominent events like the Urban
Mobility of India series, supported the dissemination of such approaches across all states and to other
countries, in line with the new Lighthouse Program.



Financial. The risk of BRT infrastructure being underutilized arises from possible lack of capacity of the
transport agencies to adjust the network to fully avail of the BRT infrastructure or to assign sufficient number
of buses. This is more likely in situations where the financials are adverse, and the travel time benefits not as
obvious. In Pimpri-Chinchwad, the proper deployment of buses on Corridors 3 and 4 has been affected by
the financial issues being faced by PMPML and their limited fleet. The ICR (para 56) reports that the new
buses should have been available from April 2019.



Technological. The operational, planning, and resource management benefits of the ITS system in Mysore
and Indore are immediately evident and generally appreciated by the operating companies. The Mysore ITS
has further progressed and become the first to implement an open data policy. Many cities visited Mysore to
learn from their experience.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project team ensured that the adequate implementation arrangements and flexibility was built in the
  project design that involved multiple states and cities. The project included three significant infrastructure
  developments, two of which had substantial land acquisition and associated social safeguards. Expert
  NGOs were involved to support the project supervision. At appraisal, the Bank supplemented the IBRD
  resources with the GEF grant and worked together with the UNDP- GEF to assist GoI in preparation and
  implementation of the SUTP Program (PAD, p.11). The project team indicated that AusAid, DFID and
  KGGF trust funds played an important role in helping the team mobilize the international and domain
  expertise, and support study visits and knowledge exchanges, ensuring exposure to good practices,
  improved quality of designs and implementation of the project activities and therefore overall outcomes.



  The M&E was adequate, with some minor shortcomings (see Section 9). With regard to the safeguards’
  arrangements, as Pimpri-Chinchwad was included into the project toward the end of the preparation
  cycle, it suffered from a rushed Resettlement Action Plan and Environmental Management Plan
  preparation, and this proved to be problematic during project implementation, as discussed in
  Section (ICR, page 18). The main risks were adequately identified and the overall risk rating was
  assessed as substantial at appraisal, with fiduciary, governance and corruption risks rated
  substantial (PAD, page 16). The project team, however, underestimated the risks related to land


                                                                                                       Page 10 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)



  acquisition and resettlement as well as local weak capacity. The scheduled closing date was highly
  optimistic for such an ambitious project.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 A total of 22 supervision missions were carried out over the project life, or a mission about every four
 months. This ensured a regular dialogue and review, tracking of progress, and following up of
 commitments. The ICR reports (para 53) that the World Bank mobilized the support of experts to the cities
 on particular design, technical, or operational matters and also arranged study visits to maintain interest
 levels and to provide exposure to best practices. All implementation support missions paid strong attention
 to fiduciary and safeguard aspects.



 The team used the Steering Committee meetings effectively to take timely decisions with regard to
 dropping and inclusion of cities and demo projects, extensions, and raising issues with regard to NURM
 funding as well as coordination with central agencies such as Railways and Ministry of Road Transport and
 Highways.



 The completion of land acquisition and the associated settling of legal challenges caused extreme delays in
 Pimpri-Chinchwad and significant delay in Hubli-Dharwad. The issues were often exacerbated owing to
 outdated land records, large informal settlements, frequent litigation and court cases, and limitations in the
 capacity of city agencies (ICR, page 18). As reported by the ICR (para 53), safeguards non-compliances
 such as in Pimpri-Chinchwad and the frequent changes of officials in Indore were escalated to the highest
 levels in the state government. At closure, there were still pending issues in the implementation of
 mitigation measures under the environmental safeguards due to delays in civil works under the project and
 payment of compensation under the social safeguards that were mainly due non-availability of the people
 to receive compensation or lack of ownership documents (see Section 10). The project team subsequently
 confirmed that the issues were being addressed.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)




a. M&E Design
 The original results framework had two outcome indicators to measure the achievement of the two PDOs.
 The first outcome indicator, however, did not fully reflect the nature of capacity-building proposed under the
 first component. In particular, ‘the number of cities that develop an identifiable urban transport planning
 process (that is, managed by professional units of government, following certain procedures and guidance,
 and involving various level of analytical work) increases’ was unclear and difficult to measure. As clarified
 by the Restructuring Paper (2015), the capacity building activities were not specifically designed to help
 create organizations, develop systems and processes “to develop an identifiable urban transport planning
 process increases’. The second outcome indicator of a mode share in the project cities with BRT was
 appropriate, measurable, and attributable to the investments undertaken in the cities. The GEO indicator
 measured the GHG emission reduction resulting from the project investments in the cities.



 The first outcome indicator was subsequently revised to a more focused indicator, i.e., “the number of
 environmentally friendly urban transport practices and approaches provided by the project that are adopted
 by cities”. The target of 6, however, was rather conservative for a 9-year project implementation period.
 The outcome target of 50 percent public transport mode share for trips between Raipur and Naya Raipur
 was reduced by 10 percent as it was considered ambitious. A number of intermediate indicators were also
 revised or dropped to streamline the results framework and avoid duplication (RP, 2015). Overall, the
 intermediate indicators lacked the km length of the BRT corridors to track the implementation progress. The
 indicator of overall roads km was dropped.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (para 39) reports that almost all of the cities implemented comprehensive M&E studies over the
  project life. Baselines were established, and M&E reports were submitted at multiple stages, allowing
  tracking during the project life. The M&E studies sought to deepen the cities’ understanding of the project
  performance, users and nonusers in their city, perceptions and opinions, and areas in which
  improvements were needed.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (para 41) reports that the M&E process was used to track technical performance of the PBS
  and ITS in Mysore, which proved valuable when problems emerged with the on-bus units. In Naya
  Raipur, M&E was instrumental in evaluating the performance of the service, building new stations, and
  revising the service plan to reduce delays and improve travel time performance. In Pimpri-Chinchwad,
  the work was effectively used to make a stronger case for improved intersection designs and passenger
  access and addressing bus bunching issues through traffic signal phasing redesign.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   This was a Category B project that triggered three safeguards policies Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
   4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) (PAD, 22-23).



   Environmental Assessment. Some project activities were expected to have adverse impacts on
   environmental resources, mostly confined to the construction phase – increased noise and dust, reduced
   safety for road users and workers (PAD, Annex 10). The ICR (para 43) reports that while most of the BRT
   construction activities had been completed, there remain some mitigation measures which were still under
   implementation at project closure. These included installation of noise barriers on Corridor 4 in Pimpri-
   Chinchwad; and in Hubli-Dharwad, there were some delays in implementing the landscaping/plantations
   works on the median of the BRT corridor as well as the Green BRT Plan (initially prepared to respond to an
   NGO complaint but later helped the project integrate environmental aspects into project activities) and
   implementing the Rayapur tank mitigation works to increase storage capacity. At closure, the overall
   implementation of environmental safeguard measures was rated moderately satisfactory. According to the
   information received from the project team at the time of the IEG ICR Review (May 2019), in Hubli-
   Dharwad, the landscaping along the median was completed, and balance 2110 plantation of trees (of
   27510) was ongoing along the corridor. The Rayapur tank was deepened as per EMP specifications and
   residual stabilization and landscaping works were ongoing. The fabrication of the noise barrier on Corridor 4
   in Pimpri-Chinchwad progressed but the erection was slow owing to contractor resourcing issues.

   Physical Cultural Resources. The ICR does not discuss the implementation and compliance with
   this safeguard policy under this project, although there is a reference to resistance from religious
   trustees for relocation of affected worship structures that was one of the most challenging in Hubli-Dharwad
   BRTS (para 46). The project team subsequently informed that the impact to religious structures was
   supervised as part of Involuntary resettlement (OP 4.12), since these religious structures were mostly on
   private lands and were acquired as part of the land acquisition process. The trustees of these structures
   were paid compensation as part of land acquisition and were provided additional support for reconstruction
   of alternative structures in the adjacent areas or in-situ reconstruction in case of partial impacts. In cases
   where there was continued resistance (4 out of 17), the road width was compromised and construction of
   carriage width was limited to within available Right of Way (RoW), thus avoiding the impacts including one
   Muslim place of worship (Dargah).

   Involuntary Resettlement. Land acquisition related impacts include 75 ha of private land affecting more than
   11,000 landowners including physical displacement of 425 families. In addition, about 500 tenants and
   informal settlers were also affected. At the time of project appraisal, impacts were envisaged for only about
   1,200 persons in Pimpri-Chinchwad.

   The ICR (para 45) reports that the impacts in Naya Raipur were implemented in a compliant manner by
   providing alternative housing in a government scheme to four displaced families and allotting shops on


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)



  rental basis to three affected small keepers. In the case of Pimpri-Chinchwad, the impacts included private
  land acquisition from more than 10,000 landowners and displacement of 400 families including 144 informal
  settlers. The implementation of this subproject faced several challenges such as inordinate delays in
  resettlement, payment of compensation, prolonged court cases, longer stay of displaced families in transit
  camp, and land hand-over to contractors. The commitment and capacity of the Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal
  Corporation (PCMC) was an issue throughout the project implementation and the safeguards management
  for OP 4.12 remained Unsatisfactory or Moderately Unsatisfactory for a period of three years, during July
  2015–March 2018, due to non-compliances with payment of compensation and delays in shifting of
  displaced families. In the case of those affected by land acquisition, the compensation for about 80 percent
  of 10,000 affected landowners were deposited in the courts for want of ownership documents.

  In the case of Hubli-Dharwad, the impacts include land acquisition of 30 acres affecting 1,043 landowners
  and 500 tenants/informal settlers and displacement of 21 families. The key challenges encountered in this
  subproject included compensation rates for private lands, resistance from religious trustees for relocation of
  affected worship structures, and compensation for road margin areas. Relocation of affected workshop
  places was one of the most challenging under Hubli-Dharwad BRT system (para 46).

  The ICR (para 47) reports that there were few outstanding residual actions at the time of writing the ICR
  (February 2019), related to payment compensation to 7 landowners and resettlement of 9 informal families
  in Pimpri-Chinchwad and pending compensation payment to 33 landowners and resettlement assistance to
  7 tenants in Hubli-Dharwad. These delays are due to non-availability of the people to receive compensation
  or lack of ownership documents. The ICR states (para 47) that "the compliance with OP 4.12 was met with
  prolonged delays". According to the information received from the project team at the time of the IEG ICR
  Review (May 2019), the progress was as follows: in Pimpri-Chinchwad, the land acquisition compensation
  was pending in case of 5 land owners (out of 230) for want of ownership documents, and allotment of
  alternative houses was pending for 5 families (out of 401) for want of supporting documents or transfer of
  ownership to a legal heir or under advance stage of process. In case of Hubli, the compensation has been
  paid to all land owners except 131 (out of 1043) who have refused the offered compensation and
  approached the court for compensation review. Their compensation has been deposited in the court and
  would be paid as per court’s decision. The resettlement assistance payment in the case of 8 tenants (out of
  about 500) was no longer required, because the corridor improvement had been completed within available
  right of way.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The ICR (para 48) reports that the project’s overall performance on financial
  management aspects was consistently rated moderately satisfactory. Key challenges faced in the first few
  years of the project included (a) delay in entrustment of external audit of the PIAs with the Office of the
  Comptroller and Auditor General of India, (b) delays in transfer of funds from state treasuries to the bank
  accounts of the PIAs (especially in the case of Atal Indore City Transport Services Limited), (c) inadequate
  budget provisioning in the state government annual budgets, and (d) delays in receipt of counterpart
  funding (especially on contracts partly funded under the National Urban Renewal Mission scheme of the
  GoI). Submission of audit reports and interim unaudited financial reports of the PIAs by the PMU was
  largely on time throughout the project period.



                                                                                                  Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)




   The ICR (para 50) reports that there were two key FM issues that the project struggled with: (a) weak
   internal audit and (b) accounting of the advances sanctioned to individual PIAs. The project design
   envisaged constitution of an audit committee at MoUD for review of the internal audit reports for the PIAs.
   Several supervision missions throughout the project period found that the audit committee had not been
   convened regularly and/or internal auditors were not in place or when internal audits were conducted, their
   quality left much to be desired. There were gaps in the internal control processes adopted by the PIAs’
   timely extension of contracts. With respect to accounting of advances, since the World Bank systems
   maintained a single account for making advance disbursements across all PIAs, details of advances
   provided to each PIA had to be maintained manually leading to some instances of incorrect documentation
   of expenditure and inconsistencies in the reconciliation.



   Procurement. The ICR (para 51) reports that the procurement was carried out both at the center and state
   levels. The center-PMU also provided assistance to the PIAs in states, to help them understand and carry
   out procurement properly. Prior-review thresholds were kept low, and in addition, it was agreed that
   contracts above a defined value but below the agreed prior-review thresholds will be prior-reviewed by the
   PMU. This process enabled the project to expedite procurement. Despite this progress and strengthening
   of procurement processes, some weaknesses remained, as observed in the postprocurement review
   conducted in states. These included, in some cases, the delay in progress of works, contract award details
   not published in their website, no insurance in civil works, and delays in payment and accepting suo moto
   discount after bid opening, which is considered negotiation. These issues appeared to be due to a lack of
   awareness about procurement guidelines among officials handling procurement highlighting the need for
   regular training.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                  Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory             Satisfactory              ---

Quality of M&E                  Substantial              Substantial



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)



Quality of ICR                 ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG selected three lessons from the ICR, with some adaptation of the language:



      BRT projects need to establish comprehensive teams similar to metro projects. BRT
       systems are complex projects that are more than infrastructure design and contracting of civil
       works. They include operational dimensions such as bus service plan, design of operating
       procedures, traffic management, pedestrian access, safety processes, among other. They
       include land acquisition and safeguard management processes, communication, and
       consultation processes. The experience under this project was that the ‘BRT office’ tended to
       be on a small scale, reliant on units of the mother agencies for much of the technical support,
       and with a primary focus on civil works. The non- construction elements (i.e., land
       acquisition) as well as operations tended to continue to reside in other departments or
       agencies. This led to fragmentation in planning and delivery, gaps in communication and
       responsibilities, and understaffing in critical areas. BRT projects must be implemented
       through nodal entities and should be more substantial and multifunctional so that they have
       the capability to deal with all the issues in an integrated way.



      BRT and ITS only realize their true potential when there is the ability to utilize them.
       BRT infrastructure and ITS have great potential, but this potential can only be achieved when
       there is the business/service plan and the organizational capacity to utilize them well. To a
       large extent, the cities supported under this project only began to prepare themselves for the
       operational phase as the works were being completed, while they needed to do so several
       years earlier. The ITS in Mysore provides an excellent model of how it progressively used the
       data and functionality of the ITS to adjust its schedules and routes, to tackle a wide range of
       long-standing operational problems, and gradually incorporated the ITS into its processes
       throughout the organization. Ridership development requires greater effort. In Pimpri-
       Chinchwad, the weak capacity of PMPML and deteriorating fleet have led to a declining
       service on its operational BRT corridors despite a positive public response to the system.



      It is better to avoid two-stage and temporary resettlement in the land acquisition
       process. Under this project, the shifting of displaced families to transit housing for 18 months
       resulted in people living there for about six years due to inordinate delays in construction of
       alternative housing causing hardship to displaced families. Similarly, the three-month
       temporary displacement of shopkeepers in Hubli-Dharwad resulted in a 10-month wait for
       shopkeepers to bring them back to the original site due to delay in construction schedules.
       This suggests avoiding two-stage resettlement or temporary displacement and instead
       planning for permanent resettlement.


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  It would be useful to follow up on the results of this project and see to what extent the guidelines have been
  adopted and implemented.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is outcome-oriented and written in line with the guidelines. It provides a clear and candid analysis of
key factors that affected implementation, with a good level of detail. Lessons are based on project experience.
In the efficacy section, the ICR discusses technical assistance in detail but there is no discussion of outputs
under the infrastructure investment component, so it is not clear what outputs and investments were delivered
in the demonstration cities to support the achievement of the second objective. While the results framework
has the infrastructure-relevant intermediate indicators, there is no data related to km length of the BRT systems
and/or feeder roads if applicable, and other aspects such as ridership. The project team subsequently clarified
that the core indicator for length of roads constructed was dropped because the project did not finance road
construction other than the two grade separators on the BRT corridors in Pimpri-Chinchwad and so it was not
deemed to be a representative indicator. In both Hubli-Dharwad and Pimpri-Chinchwad the BRT corridor road
construction was financed through counterpart funds and no feeder roads were undertaken. It was felt that
ridership was an outcome of the project and since public transport mode share was already an indicator
capturing public transport ridership relative to other trips it was not separately included. The ridership
information was shared in Annex 7.



The ICR does not report the arrangements for resolving and completing pending safeguards issues after project
closure, and does not specifically mention the Physical Cultural Resources OP triggered under the project. The
project team subsequently provided the required information regarding the safeguards. Annex GHG Analysis is
well elaborated but there is no annex with details of the surveys referred to in the ICR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
IN: Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P110371)




                                                                                 Page 18 of 18
