     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021653

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P163830                                   Somalia Emergency Drought Response

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Eastern Africa                            Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2110,IDA-D2120                       29-Jun-2018                                           50,955,108.41

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 30-May-2017                               30-Sep-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        50,955,108.41                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Katharina Ferl             J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 1) and the Financing Agreement of June 2, 2017 (p.
   6) the objective of the project was “to address the immediate needs of the drought affected people within the
   territory of the Federal Republic of Somalia and support resilient recovery”. Both the PAD and the Financing



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)



   Agreement stated that the latter objective would be achieved through the provision of livelihood opportunities
   and the restoration of agricultural and pastoral production.”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   Component 1: Programmatic Support to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for
   Immediate Drought Response (appraisal estimate US$20 million, actual US$20.45 million): This
   component was to finance support to the ICRC’s efforts to distribute food and essential household items,
   especially in hard-to-reach insecure areas. In remote areas with depressed markets, the ICRC was to
   distribute food rations comprising of rice, beans, Corn Soya Blend (CSB) and oil per household for up to two
   months. In areas with functioning markets, the ICRC was to provide unconditional cash (US$80-100 per
   household/month) to households for purchasing food for up to three months to drought-affected people,
   particularly families of pregnant/lactating women and of children undergoing treatment for malnutrition.
   Other targeted vulnerable groups were to include internally displaced people (IDP) households, host
   communities and rural communities of pastoralists and agro-pastoralists that had suffered major (over 50
   percent) or complete losses of their crops and livestock. Furthermore, this component was to finance the
   scaling up the ongoing ICRC disease prevention efforts through water, sanitation and hygiene interventions
   in drought-affected populations and health facilities. Water interventions were to include repair and
   rehabilitation of existing boreholes in areas with populations under severe water stress. In addition, this
   component was to finance provisioning of emergency and primary health care for drought-affected
   populations at ICRC supported 25 fixed and 6 mobile health facilities, stabilization centers and cholera
   treatment centers in Kismayo and Baidoa. Finally, this component was to also finance the ICRC’s project
   management activities including conducting a beneficiary assessment to inform project design, monitoring
   and evaluation of ongoing and completed activities, technical designs for the rehabilitation of water
   infrastructure, supervision quality control and contract management of components, and support and
   strengthen existing grievance redressal system for beneficiaries.



   Component 2: Programmatic Support to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
   Nations (FAO) for Immediate Drought Response and Recovery (appraisal estimate US$30 million,
   actual US$30.5 million): This component was to support the scaling up of FAO’s Cash-for-Work programs
   which were to provide vulnerable households cash for immediate access to food water and assets and were
   to engage them for twelve weeks of paid work. Activities supported through the work were to include
   restoring water catchments, rehabilitating existing small secondary and tertiary irrigation canals,
   constructing contour bunds to control erosion, shoring up breaks in river embankment to decrease flooding,
   and rehabilitating water harvesting and storage infrastructure. Beneficiaries were to receive cash upon
   registration, equivalent to two weeks of paid labor. This front-loaded payment was to enable families to
   improve their food intake immediately and were to be on top of the 12 weeks of paid work. Households

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)



   unable to participate in work projects due to age, health, or other considerations were to receive
   unconditional cash. Furthermore, this component was to finance support the recovery of agricultural
   production systems and improve food access of riverine communities by supporting the scale up of FAO’s
   “Cash+” program. This program was to provide unconditional cash transfers and livelihood inputs for
   families to meet their immediate food needs while restoring their own food production (crop production or
   riverine fishing). This combination of assistance was to help farmers and agropastoralists to restore their
   productive asset base through provision of seeds and other inputs and prepare them for the next growing
   season. Also, this component was to support will support the scale up of FAO’s ongoing emergency
   livestock interventions across Somalia. Animals in target areas were to be vaccinated/treated against a
   variety of debilitating diseases and conditions that threaten livestock productivity, value, health and survival.
   Rangeland cubes were to be provided to improve the health of animals. Finally, this component was to
   support a range of activities that were to improve current and future drought response and famine
   prevention activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$50.0 million. Actual cost was US$50.96 million.



   Financing: The project was to be financed through a US$30 million IDA grant to the Food and Agriculture
   Organization of the United Nations (FAO) of which US$30.51 million was disbursed and a US$20 million
   IDA grant to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) of which US$20.45 million was
   disbursed.



   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower made no contributions.



   Dates: On May 30, 2017 the project was restructured to change the closing date from June 29, 2018 to
   September 30, 2018 to allow the FAO to re-program funding, scale up its ongoing response, and increase
   the expected number of beneficiaries gained due to cost-efficiency savings, exchange rate gains, and
   savings in the operational costs budgeted to the FAO.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale




                                                                                                       Page 3 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)



               In 2017, Somalia, a country with an existing fragile conflict environment with high levels of poverty,
               widespread internal and external displacement, deep communal tensions, and a nascent federal
               government, was at the brink of famine resulting primarily from severe drought. An estimated 6.7 million –
               half the population – were acutely food insecure and in urgent need of humanitarian assistance, mostly in
               remote rural areas. It was projected that in 2018 approximately 1.2 million children would be acutely
               malnourished. Furthermore, Somalia also faced an Acute Watery Diarrhea (AWD)/cholera outbreak in 12 of
               its 18 regions.



               The devastating impact of the drought and resulting crisis overwhelmed national response capacities in
               Somalia and in February 2017, the President of Somalia declared a “national disaster”.



               The project’s objectives to “address the immediate needs of drought affected people” and to “support
               resilient recovery” were in line with the government’s National Development Plan (NDP) which was
               implemented between 2017 and 2019 and aimed at alleviating poverty and building resilience by
               accelerating socio-economic transformation in a socially just and gender equitable manner. The most
               recent NDP for the period 2020 to 2024 is being finalized and one of its major themes is recovery and
               resilience building.



               Furthermore, the objectives of the project were in line with the World Bank-UN Horn of Africa Regional
               Initiative which focused under pillar one on the need to enhance the productive capacities and coping
               mechanisms of displaced populations, in a way that promotes social cohesion and mitigates tensions. Also,
               the project was in line with the Bank’s first Country Partnership Framework for Somalia (FY19-22) which
               stressed the need to strengthen the country’s disaster risk management and resilience to climate change.
               Finally, the objectives were also simple, achievable and, for the most part, measurable.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             To address the immediate needs of the drought affected people within the territory of the Federal Republic of
                             Somalia


                                                                                                                             Page 4 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)




Rationale


The project’s theory of change linked the distribution of food rations, cash grants, basic nutrition services, and
providing drought related health services with addressing the immediate needs of drought affected people.



Objective 1: To address the immediate needs of the drought affected people



Outputs: (based on information in Sections B and E in the ICR)

• 29,172 households received food rations, not achieving the target of 35,000 households.

• 42,315 households received cash grants, not achieving the target of 53,000 households.

• 9,544 Essential Household Item (EHI) kits were distributed, not achieving the target of 11,000 kits.

• 13,102 individuals participated in the cash for work program, surpassing the target range of 6,000 to 8,500
individuals.

• 31,159 pregnant/lactating women, and children under the age of five were reached with basic nutrition
services, surpassing the target of 22,000 women and children.



Outcomes:

• 201,465 individuals received drought-related health services, not achieving the target of 540,000
individuals. The ICR argued (paragraph 39) that one reason why the target for this objective was not met was
that the PAD targets were based on the estimated catchment area of the primary healthcare centers
supported by the ICRC, and not an estimate of the population likely to visit the centers. Also, the ICR stated
that it was possible that the target might not have been achieved due to improvements in food distribution,
inaccessibility of healthcare centers for beneficiaries due to insecurity in some areas, and the
overachievement of other activities such as providing nutritional services to pregnant/lactating women and
children under five, therefore may have decreased the demand for curative health services. There was,
however, no evidence to back up the various reasons given why there was such a large shortfall between the
target and the achievement

• 767,118 individuals benefited from improved food access, surpassing the target range of 474,600 to
632,800 individuals.

• 321,311 females had improved access to food surpassing the target range of 120,000 to 155,000
individuals.




                                                                                                    Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)



• 777,529 individuals benefited from improved access to water, surpassing the target of 656,000 individuals.

• Third-party monitoring of the FAO component showed the following results which supported the data
collected by FAO.

      The Food Consumption Score (FCS), which measured improved access to healthy quality food by
       beneficiaries, improved from 37.46 during the 2016/2017 drought to 77.8 in 2018 ICR, paragraph 54).
      The Household Dietary Diversity Score (HDDS), which measured the food quality, improved from 3.38
       during the 2016/2017 drought to 4.72 in 2018 (ICR, paragraph 54).
      The Coping Strategies Index (CSI) measures the extent to which households use harmful coping
       strategies when they do not have enough food or enough money to buy food; the result is reported by
       a numeric score. The CSI in target communities decreased from 18.30 during the 2016/17 drought to
       14.7 in 2018, indicating a positive development because households had to use fewer harmful coping
       strategies (ICR, paragraph 55).



Based on the results reported in the ICR this review concluded that the project was substantially successful in
achieving the first part of the PDO, namely to “address the immediate needs of drought affected people” in
Somalia in the 12 months between project approval in mid-2017 and its close in mid-2018.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

To support resilient recovery of the drought affected people within the territory of the Federal Republic of
Somalia . This was to be achieved through (a) provision of livelihood opportunities and (b) restoration of
agricultural and pastoral production.

Rationale


(a) Providing livelihood opportunities:



Outputs: (based on information in Sections B and E in the ICR)

• 33 water infrastructure facilities were rehabilitated such as restoring water catchments, rehabilitating
existing small secondary and tertiary irrigation canals, constructing contour bunds to control erosion, shoring
up breaks in river embankment to decrease flooding, and rehabilitating water harvesting and storage
infrastructure, almost achieving the target of 35 infrastructures.


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)



• 87 other infrastructure projects were rehabilitated through the cash for work program, achieving the target
range of 80 to 110 infrastructures.



Outcomes:

• 75 percent of households in the target communities experienced an increase in income based on increased
livestock and crop sales, surpassing the target of 70 percent.

• 222,738 households in the target communities benefited in terms of increased incomes because of
livestock vaccination and/or other veterinary treatment support, surpassing the target of 170,000 to 212,500
households.

• 56,366 households had increased access to additional livelihood earning opportunities, surpassing the
target range of 13,725 to 18,300 households.

• The project’s monitoring found that after receiving ICRC assistance, 84 percent of the total number of
assisted households consumed at least two meals per day compared with a target of 80 percent and
compared with 28 percent in the emergency needs assessment. Monitoring data also showed that, while
more than 60 percent of assisted households had relied on the purchase of food on credit and support from
family members as the main source of food upon displacement because of drought, this number decreased to
8 percent for assisted households after project interventions. 7 percent of beneficiaries shared the food
received from the ICRC including food purchased through multi-purpose cash grants.



(b) Restoring agricultural and pastoral production:



Outputs: (based on information in Sections B and E in the ICR)

• 8,909,498 livestock were vaccinated and/or treated for the effects of drought , surpassing the target range
of 6,375,00 to 8,500,000 livestock.

• 24,000 households benefited from nutrition support to livestock, surpassing the target range of 10,000 to
12,500 households.

• Communities and local partners were trained on Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) and Early Warning
Systems (EWS). The delivery of training was contracted to Somali universities. 271 people were trained (150
in Puntland, 61 in Somaliland and 60 in Mogadishu). This output was not included in the Results Framework
in the PAD.



Outcomes:



                                                                                                 Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)



• An impact assessment prepared for the ICRC component showed the following results:

      In 2017, 28,341 households were supported through the treatment of 1,055,087 head of livestock.
         Since then, mortality has decreased from at least 50 to less than 10 percent. It was estimated that
         approximately 40 percent of treated animals survived death due to these treatments. While the
         assessment in July 2017 showed an average mortality rate of 63 percent, it was only 9 percent during
         the post-treatment monitoring at the beginning of 2018. The ICR (paragraph 60) noted the conclusion
         from the impact assessment that that 40 percent of animals (422,035) survived due to the project.
         Assigning a monetary value to the livestock saved resulted in an estimated value of US$1,206 per
         household. It is clear from Annex 4 in the ICR that "treatment" included a range of activities aimed at
         supplementary feeding and vaccination of livestock which would both have been crucial for inclusion
         in this project.
        The Tropical Livestock Unit (TLU), which measured the total mass of various livestock species owned
         by a household as a single figure, increased from 0.95 during the 2016/17 drought to 3.75 in 2018.
        Before project implementation the SMART (Standardized Monitoring and Assessment of Relief and
         Transition) nutrition survey conducted in the target IDP settlements Abu Sharow and Towfeeq of
         Baidoa showed a Severe Acute Malnutrition of 5.4 percent. This rate decreased to 1.5 percent during
         the first quarter of 2018. SMART is an inter-agency initiative launched in 2002 to reform and
         harmonize assessments for humanitarian interventions.
        An assessment at the end of the 2017 Gu (April to June – the main wet season) showed that only 19
         percent of households in the target areas were able to cultivate their land within the Gu season.
         However, 83 percent of households that were supported ahead of the Deyr (September to November)
         season were able to cultivate an average area of 2 hectares per household. Also, a total of 17 percent
         of assisted households used the cash grant to cover primarily essential food expenditures and cover
         debts from the previous two seasons.
        Also, 92 percent of the assisted households invested part of the cash grants received to buy small
         ruminants. In fact, an average of 62 percent of the grant was used to buy livestock while the
         remaining grant was used to buy essential food items, water and fodder. While the ownership of small
         ruminants was 4.4 per household in July-August 2017 (soon after project approval), it increased to
         19.8 by February 2018.
        Maize yields by beneficiaries was 1.09 tons per hectare while it was only 0.6 tons per hectare for non-
         beneficiaries. Beneficiary sorghum farmers achieved 1.03 tons per hectare while non-beneficiary
         farmers achieved 0.65 tons per hectare. Beneficiary cowpea growers achieved 0.68 tons per hectare
         while non-beneficiary farmers achieved 0.6 tons per hectare. While there was no evidence to confirm
         the yield gains for beneficiary compared with non-beneficiary farmers in the ICR, the Bank project
         team provided a Third-Party Technical Report for SEDRP which confirmed the veracity of claims on
         yields made in the ICR .



This review concluded that the project was highly successful in providing farm households in drought-affected
areas in Somalia with support for a resilient recovery from the impact of drought.



Rating


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 22
                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                        Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)



                      High


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale


The achievement of Objective 1 was substantial based on highly successful achievement of the project's core
PDO s but a significant shortfall compare with the target in the delivery of health services. On the other hand the
project's second objective was highly successful in providing farm households in drought-affected areas in
Somalia with support for a resilient recovery from the impact of drought.. On balance this review rated
the project's efficacy as high..



Overall Efficacy Rating
High


      5. Efficiency


Economic Efficiency



The PAD (page 98) conducted a benefit-cost analysis for some of proposed project activities using the following
assumptions (i) valuation of costs and benefits based on market and shadow prices; (ii) a 15-year appraisal
period and; (iii) a 6 percent discount rate. It estimated project benefits arising from (i) saving human lives; (ii)
reducing the incidence of malnutrition; (iii) reducing expenditures on drugs and medical care; (iv) enhancing the
quality of life of the population; (v) saving livestock; (vi) enhancing the quality of the livestock; and (vii)
enhancing productive assets for agro-pastoralists through rehabilitation. The net present value (NPV) of these
interventions was estimated at US$180 million against a project cost of US$28.3 million.



Assessment by this review: This review’s assessment is that the discount rate of 6% (based, according to the
Bank task team, on World Bank guidelines) is well below any reasonable estimate of the opportunity cost of
capital in Somalia. On the other hand, the guidance provided by Bank management in 2016 on the discount
rate to be used for economic analysis is that rates can range from 2% to 10%.corresponding to expected per
capita growth rates in a country's economy of 1% to 5%.



In line with the ICR, this review will assess the efficiency of three of the project’s activities for which data were
available.


                                                                                                          Page 9 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)




(a) Meeting Food Security Needs. The PAD stated under “meeting urgent food security needs” (FAO's
distribution of food and essential household items, especially in hard-to-reach insecure areas) that “570,000
beneficiaries will be provided with at least two meals per day for a period ranging between one to three months,
until they can cover their needs independently and are less vulnerable to drought. According to the PAD
this intervention would remain economically feasible with a minimum of 55,100 beneficiaries or at a maximum
cost of US$143.7 million” (Annex 3, paragraph 3). Neither the PAD nor the ICR provided the basis for this
conclusion.



In contrast, the ICR’s analysis of the food distribution program concluded that “The average amount of benefit
across the in-kind and cash benefits was estimated at US$20 per beneficiary. The total net present value of this
intervention was estimated at US$1.6 million and the internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated at 13%” (Annex
4, paragraph 3). The Bank task team advised IEG that the benefits of this program were composed of two
streams namely, “the value in terms of saved lives and the value in terms of reduced expenditures on drugs and
medical care”. The value of human lives saved per pastoralist was assumed to be US$500 per year which was
almost the same as the estimated GDP per capita for Somalia in 2017.



Assessment by this review: While the assumed value of a pastoralists life is always contestable, it is
surprisingly very conservative for the analysis in the ICR when one considers the burden of responsibilities of
pastoralists families. On the other hand it is acknowledged that assessments of the value of lives varies and in
this case the Bank's task team made the assumption that the productive capability per life lost for a
pastoralist/agro-pastoralist was US$500, on average, per year. The number of lives which would otherwise have
been lost was multiplied by the productive capability per year in order to estimate the value of saved lives per
year. The team assumed that this benefit would accrue over a period of 15 years.



(b) Cash for Work for Immediate Food Needs and Water Infrastructure Rehabilitation. For another activity
providing “cash-for-work for immediate food needs and water infrastructure rehabilitation” the PAD estimated
benefits as lives saved, the impact of reduced malnutrition on productivity, the value of rehabilitation of
productive assets, the higher quality of life, and reduced expenditures of individuals on drugs and medical care.
The PAD (paragraph 6) stated that approximately 12,900 people were expected to benefit from the cash-for-
work program, with an estimated average benefit of US$132 per month over 3.5 months. According to the PAD
the intervention would remain economically feasible with a minimum of 9,700 beneficiaries or at a maximum cost
of US$8.5 million although the PAD provided no definition of “economically feasible”.



However, the Bank project team advised IEG, that the actual cost of this program was US$5.454 million. The
ICR (Annex 4, paragraph 4) stated that average cash for work cost (US$265 per capita) and the unconditional
cash transfers (US$138 per capita) together with details of the resulting infrastructure works. It was estimated
that the net present value of this activity was US$12 million and the IRR was estimated at 36% but without
further information on the benefit and cost streams.


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)




Assessment by this review: As noted already this review considers the discount rate of 6% to calculate the
NPV as too low. Nevertheless it is in line with the latest guidance from Bank management.



(c) Restoration of Pastoral Livelihoods. The PAD estimated (without evidence) that this activity would remain
economically feasible at a maximum cost of US$56.0 million assuming 2.9 million sheep and goats were
vaccinated against common diseases as well as being provided with emergency supportive treatment, including
the provision of multivitamins, deworming, ecto-parasite control and antibiotic treatments; and restocking of goat
and sheep. The estimated cost at appraisal for this activity was US$8.3 million.



The ICR stated that this activity included community animal health workers training, vaccination of sheep and
goats against Contagious Caprine Pleural Pneumonia (CCPP), emergency supportive treatment to common
infectious conditions, and vector control intervention in the riverine areas of South and Central Somalia during
and after heavy rains (Annex 4, paragraph 5). Among these activities, the ICR reported that the vaccination
against CCPP (a serious and contagious disease in goats) covered 8.9 million animals. While this was
undoubtedly the major part of this set of activities aimed at restoring pastoralist livelihoods, the ICR concluded
(without providing any evidence) that “The net present value of this intervention was estimated to be largely
positive and the internal rate of return was estimated to be much in excess of the discount rate of 6% assumed
in the cost-benefit analysis” (Annex 4, paragraph 5). Following an IEG request for more information the Bank's
task team advised that the NPV for this intervention was estimated at US$258 million which the team stated was
a very high NPV because the average vaccination costs were 44 cents per head and benefits were based on an
average selling price of US$53 per head in local and export markets. It should be noted, however, that this
analysis (based on the information from the Bank task team) did not cover cattle and camels which, although
small in numbers, were significant in terms of value. The Bank task team subsequently revised the economic
analysis to include the disease vector control treatment of cattle and camels, and estimated the NPV at US$297
million and the IRR at 4,163%.



Assessment by this review: On the basis of the additional information provided by the Bank project team this
review questioned whether the substantial costs of marketing the sheep and goats that survived the drought and
CCPP because of vaccinations and other "treatments" should be accounted for in estimating the value added
from their sale which would reduce the NPV for this activity. The task team responded that marketing costs
should not be taken into account.



Cost Effectiveness and Operational Efficiency



According to the ICR (Table 4) the unit costs for the FAO for delivering the three activities discussed above were
relatively close to comparable activities that FAO had implemented in the region. The ICR also noted that the
project’s efficiency was boosted by the economies of scale under its cash for work (paragraph 43) and

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)



agriculture/pastoral activities. It was more challenging to make an assessment of the efficiency with which the
activities under the responsibility of ICRC were implemented due to the lack of fully harmonized or comparable
data set for conducting a comparative analysis between ICRC’s activities in Somalia and ICRC’s portfolio in
other countries. Nevertheless, the ICRC-managed activities were completed within the intended timeline, while
the FAO-managed activities required a three-month extension which benefited the strengthening of the M&E
system. According to the ICR (paragraph 45) the project met its original disbursement schedule throughout
implementation.



Project Administrative Costs



As the ICR noted (paragraph 68) this project was prepared under exceptional circumstances in five weeks to
respond to a famine in a high- risk, dynamic, and volatile country context. The Somali authorities agreed that
FAO and ICRC implement the project using a design based on some of their ongoing programs which gave
them access to remote and insecure areas in Somalia. The reported actual cost of US$3.31 million for FAO
(ICR, Annex 3) was 10.9% of the actual cost for programs FAO was responsible for. For ICRC the
administrative fee was established in the grant agreement at 6.5% of the estimated cost of the proposed ICRC-
managed operations (US20 million). On average the total administrative costs for the project were close to 9%
of actual total project costs.



Conclusion. It was difficult to assess the efficiency of programs designed to distribute food and provide
emergency services in a poor country such as Somalia with its harsh terrain and where insecurity was a major
problem. While many project costs could be measured, assessing the value of the project’s short and long-term
benefits was challenging. This review has strong reservations about the validity of the two rates of return
reported in Annex 4 of the ICR for the FAO-managed food security program (13%) and the ICRC-managed cash
for work program (36%). Nevertheless, the economic rates of return for the food security and cash for work
activities could be much higher than reported in the ICR if the value of pastoralists' lives (valued in the ICR over
15 years at the average GDP per capita) is merely doubled above that level. In addition, evidence of FAO’s
activities suggest acceptable cost effectiveness and according to the ICR the ICRC was diligent in its
management of project funds. The average project administrative cost was on the high side but, in this review's
judgment,realistic in the Somalia context.



Despite some concerns about the analysis of efficiency in the ICR, this review rates the project’s efficiency
as “Substantial”.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



The relevance of both the project's objective and its efficacy has been rated High. On the other hand
efficiency was rated Substantial. Overall there were no material shortcomings in this project's
achievements. The project's outcome is therefore rated Highly Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



According to the ICR (paragraph 125) the government continues to be committed to build resilience and
reduce the risks of climate change-related shocks and political instability as outlined in the Somalia National
Development Plan (FY2017-2019). Also, the Bank continues to support the government in its efforts to
strengthen its disaster risk management and resilience to climate change as outlined in the Bank’s most
recent Country Partnership Framework for Somalia (FY2019-2022). The project strengthened the capacity
of FAO-managed institutional mechanisms such as the Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit (FSNAU)
and the Somalia Water and Land Information Management (SWALIM). Also, in 2018, the government of
Somalia, the Bank, the European Union and the United Nations developed a joint partnership called “Drought
Impact Needs Assessment” (DINA), the first comprehensive damages, losses, and needs assessment of the
Somalia drought. Based on this assessment, the government developed a Resilience and Recovery
Framework (RRF) to support the country from early drought recovery to longer-term resilience and disaster
preparedness by identifying resilience building priorities and proposing a financing approach and institutional
arrangements. However, the ICR (paragraph 125) stated that further investments will be needed to sustain
the progress of some of the project activities such as improving the capacity of water catchment
management committees, establishing regulatory frameworks for watershed and waste management, and
maintaining water infrastructure in order to continue resilience building.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  The Bank team prepared the project within five weeks given the emergency situation in Somalia.
  According to the ICR (paragraph 113) the project’s design built on lessons learned from natural disasters
  such as the devastating 2011 Horn of Africa drought, and was based on ICRC and FAO’s ongoing
  programs in the country. The Bank team closely collaborated with FAO and ICRC and took their
  international experience from such disasters into account when designing the project. The Bank team
  included members from several global practices and cross-cutting solution areas as well as headquarters
  and field-based staff. A rapid and remote needs assessment was conducted during project preparation
  and relevant risk factors were identified. Political, governance and fiduciary risks were rated as high.
  According to the PAD (p. 36) lack of government presence, a volatile security situation, and the ongoing
  anti-terror campaign restricted access and the delivery of support services. Also, the nature of project
  interventions, namely targeting criteria and geographical coverage, were also considered politically
  sensitive. The project addressed these challenges by designing a grievance redress mechanism of the
  supported partners to identify perceived bias in access or delivery in the affected communities. Also, the
  project set up an informal apex-level group – with the World Bank Somalia Country Representative, the
  ICRC Head of Delegation, and the FAO Country Representative – to coordinate on the overall progress
  for their respective activities. Under this arrangement, regular coordination was maintained with
  Somalia’s Ministry of Humanitarian and Disaster Management to align with the overall drought response
  and recovery program led by the Government. This system of informal coordination was put in place and
  utilized during the project as and when needed.



  Also, the project’s fiduciary risk was rated high at appraisal. Mitigation measures included: (i)
  strengthening of the existing beneficiaries identification and enrolment systems through use of biometric
  systems as a way of identifying beneficiaries at enrolment and payments checkpoints; (ii) strengthening
  the existing framework agreements with third party Payment Service Providers (PSP) to facilitate delivery
  of payments and services, in particular practical measures to minimize liquidity challenges; (iii)
  deployment of Third Party Review arrangements complemented by field based community monitors–
  centrally managed through FAO for ease of coordination; and (iv) allocation of requisite funding to
  strengthen the existing FAO and ICRC Internal Risk Management Frameworks.



  The project’s Results Framework in the PAD was adequate and built on some of the existing
  performance indicators used under the ICRC and FAO programs.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)




b. Quality of supervision


 According to the ICR (paragraph 116) the Bank worked closely with the ICRC and FAO throughout project
 implementation and conducted three implementation support missions. The ICR stated that setting specific
 goals, developing short-term action plans, and deadlines was critical for maintaining implementation
 momentum. Also, the Bank team provided timely and consistent support in financial management,
 safeguards, procurements, and in addressing any implementation bottlenecks. According to the ICR
 (paragraph 117) the Bank’s financial management staff and technical staff worked closely together which
 allowed the team to make quick financial management decisions throughout the project’s design and
 implementation. Also, the project benefited from support at headquarters and the field. The ICR (p. 119)
 stated that the project benefited from its flexibility in design such as being able to reprogram funds for FAO
 through a three-month-no-cost extension and ICRC’s use of US$1 million for prospective financing of
 resilience-building activities.



 The ICR (paragraph 121) stated that the Bank’s collaboration with the ICRC required intense learning from
 each other and addressing institutional differences in critical areas such as procurement, financial
 management, and expenditure and results monitoring. The ICRC’s centralized Geneva based system for
 these areas required the Bank to coordinate with both the ICRC Geneva and its field office in Somalia.
 Also, the ICRC could not use third-party review to assess impact of project activities at the field level due to
 sensitivity issues of giving a third-party access to beneficiaries. According to the ICR (paragraph 119) the
 envisioned regular collaboration between the Bank’s country representative, the ICRC’s head of
 delegation, FAO country representative and Somalia’s minister of humanitarian affairs and disaster
 management to discuss implementation progress did not materialize due to the ICRC’s rules of strict
 independence and neutrality. However, the Bank team collaborated with each institution separately to
 ensure alignment of project implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 The project’s theory of change and how key activities and outputs would lead to intended outcomes
 was reflected in the Results Framework and presented in detail for each component in Tables 1 and

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)



2 . Also, the objective of the project was clearly specified and all outcomes of the PDO statement were
encompassed by the selected indicators.



The ICR (paragraph 84) stated that the project’s Results Framework was built on some of the existing
performance indicators used under the ICRC and FAO programs. The project’s M&E was also supported
by progressive impact validation through third-party validation of outcomes.



Both, the ICRC and FAO were responsible for their M&E program of the project and for issuing quarterly
updates on the overall progress of project implementation. Given the project design’s flexible programmatic
approach to adjust to changing circumstances, some of the indicators in the Results Framework had target
ranges.



ICRC Component:



According to the ICR (paragraph 87) the Risk Monitoring Unit (RMU) within the ICRC was responsible for
conducting verification activities through its own staff and locally hired consultants. Activities were related to
Economic Security and focused on procedures, communication regarding entitlements, verification of post-
distribution monitoring and existence of beneficiaries. The RMU also consisted of two call centers which
were based in Nairobi and in Mogadishu and addressed concerns raised by beneficiaries. Furthermore,
the RMU also involved local communities to define who to include on the registration lists. Also, local
communities participated in the process of cleaning up the registration list, verification processes before the
delivery of the assistance, and dissemination of the toll-free number to reach the ICRC. According to the
ICR (paragraph 89) this process allowed beneficiaries to provide feedback, make complaints or ask
questions during and after the beneficiary registration process, during and after the assistance delivery and
during the post-distribution monitoring.



The post-distribution monitoring was conducted by the ICRC and Somali Red Crescent Society and
assessed the selection and verification processes, use of assistance provided, short-term outcomes,
services delivered and levels of satisfaction, and accountability and feedback.



FAO Component:



According to the ICR (paragraph 97) targeting processes such as complying with the pre-determined
selectin criteria and to the numbers of beneficiaries included were verified by an independent research and
consultant organization and FAO. Verification activities included random checks such as phone calls and

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)



 household visits on 30 percent of the beneficiaries. In addition, focus group discussions and key informant
 interviews with community elders and leaders were conducted. Furthermore, field observations and
 interviews with beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries confirmed that target beneficiaries met the defined
 selection criteria and received project interventions.



b. M&E Implementation


  ICRC component:



  According to the ICR (paragraph 95) data were collected across the economic security (EcoSec),
  water/sanitation, and health sectors and included in the ICRC’s Planning and Monitoring Tool (PMT) and
  program-specific databases. M&E activities included continuous collecting, measuring, recording, and
  analyzing data of all activities being implemented and of progress being made. Different monitoring
  approaches were implemented such as pre-distribution verification, on-the-spot distribution and activity
  performance monitoring, and post-distribution/activity monitoring. Health and nutrition data were
  compared to standard indicators at primary healthcare and stabilization centers supported by the ICRC.



  The project ensured that Economic security assistance reached the intended beneficiaries by
  implementing the following process: (i) clear vulnerability and selection criteria were established; (ii) the
  ICRC field staff undertook initial beneficiary selection; (iii) cash transfers were verified by RMU; and (iv)
  cash was provided through mobile phones.



  According to the ICR (paragraph 98) the initial 100 percent verification process resulted in 30 percent of
  individuals being taken off the registration list. For the EcoSec drought response, a 100 percent post-
  registration verification was conducted prior to transferring the cash for beneficiaries who were to receive
  benefits. The process included matching the registered name and location to the registered phone
  number.



  FAO component:



  The ICR (paragraph 100) stated that M&E activities were conducted by 12 M&E field monitors and third-
  party independent monitors. In addition, a performance tracking officer was in charge of monitoring
  project activities and coordinating with FAO implementing sectors. Achieved outputs were verified against
  planned outputs and information was updated in the Results Framework. Under the FAO component a
  vulnerability impact assessment, post-distribution assessment, livestock impact assessment, and crop


                                                                                                      Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)



  yield assessment were conducted. Qualitative data was gathered through drought situation monitoring,
  focus group discussions, key informant interviews, and direct field observations.



  An independent research and consultancy conducted the third-party technical review through verifying
  activities, tracking implementation, measuring the results achieved, monitoring social and environmental
  sustainability of activities in line with the Bank’s and FAO’s agreed on environmental and social
  management plan. Also, a consultancy conducted several studies and prepared reports to measure
  progress towards the PDO. Furthermore, verification missions identified potential non-compliance issues
  which are currently being reviewed by the FAO office of the inspector general.



c. M&E Utilization


  According to the ICR (paragraph 105) M&E data were shared on a quarterly basis and used to adapt
  project activities. The Bank team stated (April 19 ,2019) that the utilization of M&E data to inform project
  decision making remained one of the key focus of the Bank task team during the entire course of
  implementation. For example, despite some initial delays, the FAO component was completed with a
  marginal 3-month extension of time, through the strengthened process monitoring and management
  system introduced under the project in the working of the FAO. Also, the ICRC and FAO worked closely
  with the World Bank to quickly absorb project resources and improve their transactional efficiency. As a
  result, both the ICRC and FAO calibrated process monitoring systems to identify processing delays and
  course-correct, which will benefit future programming.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


   According to the ICR (paragraph 108) the usual Bank fiduciary safeguards that would normally applied were
   formally waved. The Bank team relied on the ICRC’s organizational systems, procedures, and respective
   internal controls. The Bank team had to understand the ICRC’s financial and cost accounting systems in
   depth given that the retroactive financing portion of the project required that all the expenditures had to be
   verified before a refund would be submitted to the ICRC. The ICR (paragraph 108) stated that the Bank
   team conducted a detailed review of the ICRC budgeting, cost allocation mechanisms, revenue/expenditure
   recoding and financial and cost accounting systems globally, regionally and specific field delegation offices
   such as in Somalia. During a financial management assessment, it was agreed that the project audit would




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)



  be conducted for the ICRC. In addition, Agreed Upon Procedures (AUP) for project expenses were
  undertaken to ensure the application of the grant proceeds.



  Since FAO is part of the United Nations family, the project conducted audits in compliance with FAO’s
  financial regulations and the financial management framework agreement between the Bank and the United
  Nations.



  According to the ICR (paragraph 108) the project did not detect any ineligible expenses and the ICRC had a
  robust system for tracking expenses. The ICR (paragraph109) stated that, although FAO’s internal approval
  and reporting system was slow in responding to the Bank’s financial management requirements,
  compliance was verified throughout project implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


  Financial Management:



  According to the ICR (paragraph 108) the usual Bank fiduciary safeguards that would normally applied
  were formally waved. The Bank team relied on the ICRC’s organizational systems, procedures, and
  respective internal controls. The Bank team had to understand the ICRC’s financial and cost accounting
  systems in depth given that the retroactive financing portion of the project required that all the expenditures
  had to be verified before a refund would be submitted to the ICRC. The ICR (paragraph 108) stated that
  the Bank team conducted a detailed review of the ICRC budgeting, cost allocation mechanisms,
  revenue/expenditure recoding and financial and cost accounting systems globally, regionally and specific
  field delegation offices such as in Somalia. During a financial management assessment, it was agreed that
  the project audit would be conducted for the ICRC. In addition, Agreed Upon Procedures (AUP) for project
  expenses were undertaken to ensure the application of the grant proceeds.



  Since FAO is part of the United Nations family, the project conducted audits in compliance with FAO’s
  financial regulations and the financial management framework agreement between the Bank and the
  United Nations.



  According to the ICR (paragraph 108) the project did not detect any ineligible expenses and the ICRC had
  a robust system for tracking expenses. The ICR (paragraph109) stated that, although FAO’s internal


                                                                                                   Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)



   approval and reporting system was slow in responding to the Bank’s financial management requirements,
   compliance was verified throughout project implementation.



   Procurement:



   According to the ICR (paragraph 110), due to the emergency situation and the need to act fast, the Bank
   agreed that the FAO and the ICRC use their own procurement procedures or “Alternative Procurement
   Arrangements (APA)” as outlined under Section III F in the Bank’s” Policy Procurement in IPF and other
   operational procurement matters”. The Bank conducted procurement assessments for both organizations
   which found that the procurement rules and regulations were generally consistent with the Bank’s core
   procurement principles and governance requirements set out in the procurement policy. The Bank’s board
   granted waivers of the application of the anti-corruption guidelines for the FAO and a partial application of
   the anti-corruption guidelines for the ICRC.



   The ICR (paragraph 111) stated that due to the fact that the ICRC received retroactive financing all
   activities such as works, goods, non-consulting services and consultant’s services had to be post-reviewed
   by the Bank on a sample basis. Also, service providers were subject to the Bank’s sanction list. The Bank
   team conducted the post-review in the ICRC offices in Nairobi and Geneva. The ICR (paragraph 111)
   stated that the Bank team faced the challenge of support documents being filed in the two different offices.
   However, this issue was resolved adequately.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  High                  High

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial

                                                                                                    Page 20 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)




12. Lessons



The ICR provides a large number of lessons derived from the project. They are classified into two
groups, namely (a) Bank Engagement and Design and Implementation of Operations in
FCV/Complex Emergencies, and (b) Third Party Implementation and Direct Engagement with
Partners in Complex Emergencies. It is acknowledged in the ICR that “The Project Results
Framework was derivative of, and built upon, some of the existing performance indicators being
used under the ICRC and FAO programs” (paragraph 84) and hence some of the lessons from this
project will inevitably be based on lessons learned by ICRC and FAO from their work in FCV
countries. On the other hand, many of the lessons listed were not lessons but issues to be
considered in similar future projects with no lesson emerging.



While the ICR also makes recommendations, ICR Reviews do not consider or make
recommendations. Hence the following will focus on lessons adapted by this review from among
those listed in the ICR which IEG assessed were the most important.



    1. For emergency situations it is vital to have simple and measurable project
       objectives. This project had simple and measurable objectives. The ICR draws attention to
       the fact that “The Results Framework indicators, during the course of implementation, were
       proven to be adequate in measuring the substantive quantitative and qualitative dimensions
       of the PDO related to ‘provision of immediate support’ and ensuring resilient recovery”
       (paragraph 84). A supplementary lesson here is that simple lessons need not be simplistic.
    2. Flexible funding approaches by the Bank are critical to provide the basis for
       emergency assistance projects as problems emerge. Even though this project was
       based on existing programs by the ICRC and FAO, the project’s design included fewer but
       broader activities and the targets for some of the indicators included in the Results
       Framework had ranges. Also, the project allowed for the re-allocation of resources across
       sub-components. All these features ensured that the project had a much-needed flexibility
       to finance actions to address evolving emergencies and provided attractive basis for
       collaboration with third parties.
    3. The Bank’s ability to address complex emergency situations in an FCV environment is
       enhanced through collaborative project implementation by third parties when the
       Bank’s traditional approach is not adequate. Due to Somalia’s IDA non-accrual status,
       the Bank, the ICRC and FAO engaged in an innovative partnership with the Bank providing
       direct IDA-funding to these organizations. This required the Bank to be flexible, tolerant of
       differing organizational systems, willing to find common ground, and open to institutional
       cross-learning in order that this project could be implemented. The lesson is that for all such
       collaboration reconciling organizational differences and agreeing to norms-of-practice that
       translate into specific actions at the operational level will be required in advance to ensure
       the efficacy and efficiency of such partnerships. This collaboration was further deepened in
       this project by progressive impact validation through third-party validation of outcomes, which

                                                                                                  Page 21 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Somalia Emergency Drought Response (P163830)



         was beyond the scope of the original results framework, which contributed significantly to
         improving the robustness of both the “monitoring” and “evaluation” functions compared with
         that envisaged under the Project’s M&E regime.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



The ICR provided a very good overview of project preparation and implementation of an innovative project the
Bank had never implemented before. The ICR described in detail what the collaboration with the ICRC and
FAO looked like and pointed out challenges and how they were overcome. The ICR was also concise, internally
consistent, outcome driven and followed OPCS guidelines.

On the other hand, while the ICR included some economic analysis of the project's efficiency, the ICR made
almost no attempt to assess the analysis in the PAD, the assumptions made for the analysis when completed
were in most cases either not transparent, or not stated at all creating considerable difficulties to assess the
validity of the project's efficiency analysis in a draft of this review. Subsequently the Bank task team provided

The ICR included some useful lessons applicable to similar operations in the Bank. On the other hand the ICR
contained many other lessons which reflected implementation bottlenecks relevant only to this project
which were not applicable to similar operations.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 22 of 22
