     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Albania Competitiveness DPL(P155605)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0021677

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P155605                                    Albania Competitiveness DPL

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Albania                                    Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-86890                                 31-Jan-2018                                       77,723,593.33

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Jan-2017                                31-Jan-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           70,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            70,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        77,723,593.33                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Fernando Manibog               Christopher David Nelson       IEGFP (Unit 3)
 Krishnamani



2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives

   The objective of the Development Policy Lending (DPL) operation, as stated in the Program Document (PD,
   page v), was:

   "To enhance Albania's competitiveness by improving the investment regime, making it easier to do
   business and facilitating trade".



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Albania Competitiveness DPL(P155605)



   This ICR Review will assess the achievement of the project’s over-arching goal of enhancing Albania’s
   competitiveness in terms of the following three specific project development objectives (PDOs), which
   correspond directly with the DPL’s three policy pillars (presented immediately below):
   PDO1: to improve the investment regime.
   PDO 2: to make it easier to do business.
   PDO 3: to facilitate trade.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas

   This project was initially designed as a programmatic two operation series. However, this decision was later
   reversed to a stand-alone single tranche operation, endorsed by the Regional Operations Committee
   decision on October 21, 2016. According to the clarifications provided by the team, the decision to cancel the
   second operation was due to a combination of factors, including uncertainties linked with the upcoming
   elections in 2017 and lending envelope space.

   The DPL pursued reforms under three policy pillars, which are the DPL’s specific objectives as indicated
   above. (PD, page 2). There were nine prior actions, as shown below under their respective policy pillars.

   Pillar one. Attracting and retaining investment. This pillar supported reforms aimed at developing
   a comprehensive investment regime and creating an Investor Grievance Mechanism for settling investor-
   state disputes. There were two prior actions. First, the Council of Ministers adopts an investment policy
   statement, outlining the government’s action plan for developing an investment law, that was compatible with
   international best practices. And second, the Ministry of Economic Development, Tourism and Trade
   establishes the secretariat for addressing investor grievances.


   Pillar two. Making it easier to do business. This pillar pursued reforms aimed at making it easier to set-up
   and operate business through reforms in the areas of getting permissions for construction, electricity
   connections, and business licensing, and establishing a national quality infrastructure (market surveillance
   system for non-food consumer products). There were four prior actions. First, the Ministry of Urban
   Development adopts a decision on Territorial Planning and Development, outlining guidelines for new
   construction permits and introduces the new online platform for issuing construction permits. Second, the
   Energy Regulatory Entity adopts electricity regulation on new connections to the distribution network. Third,
   the Parliament enacts the law for merging the National Registration Center and the National Licensing
   Center. And fourth, the Council of Ministers adopts a decision establishing a Market Surveillance
   Inspectorate and issuance of an order by the Prime Minister approving the organizational structure of the
   Market Surveillance Inspectorate.

   Pillar three. Facilitating trade. This pillar aimed at making it easier to trade across borders through
   introducing risk management for food products, mainstreaming border clearance process and reforms at the
   main trade gateway (the Durres port). There were three prior actions. First, the Director General of the

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Albania Competitiveness DPL(P155605)



   National Food Agency adopts the decision introducing the risk management policy for food products.
   Second, the Customs Director General adopts the instruction on local clearance for border clearance. And
   three, the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure and the Ministry of Finance adopted a joint instruction on
   port regulation, aimed at reducing the number of free freight storage at Durres port.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates

   Operation cost. The cost at appraisal was US$70.00 million equivalent. The actual cost was US$77.72
   million equivalent. The difference between the appraisal cost and actual cost was due to the appreciation of
   Euro relative to the US$.

   Financing. The operation was financed by a Euro-denominated IBRD loan amounting to Euros 65.80
   million (US$70.00 million equivalent). The amount disbursed was US$77.72 million equivalent. The team
   clarified that the difference between the appraisal estimate and actual disbursements in US$ was due to the
   appreciation of the Euro relative to the US$ during implementation.

   Dates. The operation was approved on January 31, 2017 and closed as scheduled on January 31, 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives


  The program objectives were relevant to country conditions at appraisal and at completion. Albania is a small,
  open economy and growth in the years before appraisal was mainly demand-driven (primarily construction
  activities) and fueled by remittances from workers employed abroad. Since the end of 2013, the government
  had undertaken several reforms, which enabled the country to attain candidate status for European Union
  (EU) in June 2014 (ICR, paragraph 2). Albania's export structure is concentrated, both in terms of commodity
  composition (minerals account for 50% of exports) and in terms of destination (five countries accounted
  for 70% of exports and Italy alone accounted for 50%). Although Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) was growing
  in absolute terms before appraisal, the growth rate of FDI was modest and Albania lagged behind some top
  regional performers benefitting from EU integration (such as Bulgaria and Hungary). The operation's
  objectives were important in the country context, as discussed below.

  The program objectives were highly relevant to the government strategy. The objectives were consistent with
  the government's National Economic Reform Program (NERP) of 2016-2018. This program was aligned with
  Albania's EU accession plans and identified priority structural reforms for generating sustained medium-term
  growth. This program was subsequently reaffirmed in the NERP of 2018-2020. The objectives were consistent
  with the government priorities articulated in the Doing Business Action Plan for 2014-2016, the Business



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Albania Competitiveness DPL(P155605)



  Investment Development Strategy for 2014-2020 and the National Strategy for Development and Integration
  for 2015-2020 (ICR, paragraph 16).

  The objectives were highly relevant to the priorities outlined in the Bank's Country Partnership Framework
  (CPF) for 2015-2019. The objectives directly contributed to the second focus area of the CPF: creating
  conditions for accelerated private sector growth. The ICR (paragraph 31) notes that preparation of a new CPF
  has not yet started, but accelerating growth and expanding employment, underpinned by improved
  competitiveness, is expected to be one of the main themes.



  Rating
  High

b. Relevance of Design


  Albania's macroeconomic framework, at the time preparation of this DPL operation was generally satisfactory
  (Program Document, paragraph 10). Real Gross Domestic Project (GDP) grew by 3.1% in the first half of
  2016, as compared to 1.8% and 2.8% in 2014 and 2015 respectively. The growth rate was demand-
  driven, with private investment and consumption, contributing 1.7 and 1.2 percentage points respectively
  to GDP growth. The rebound in growth, was despite weak growth in the euro area and Albania's high
  exposure to neighboring countries (Greece and Italy). The annual average inflation at 1.9% in July 2016 was
  lower than the target band, due to lower oil and food prices (Program Document, paragraph 14). The current
  account deficit, mainly financed through Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), was projected to increase to 13% of
  GDP in 2016 (from 11.7% in 2015). Though FDI was above 7% of GDP in 2015. it decreased by 23% in
  the first half of 2016. The eighth review of Albania's Extended Fund Facility (EFF) arrangement, conducted
  by the International Monetary Fund on August 2016 (for a three year EFF arrangement for supporting the
  government's reform program approved on February 28, 2014), concluded that all the performance criteria
  had been met with comfortable margin and that good progress had been made on the structural reform
  agenda (Program Document, paragraphs 39 and 40).

  There is a logical causal relationship between the prior actions (discussed in section 2b) and intended
  achievement of objectives. Adopting an investment policy statement that was compatible with international
  best practices and establishing a mechanism for setting investors grievances are relevant for attracting
  investments. Adopting new guidelines, for issuing construction permits and introducing a new online platform
  for issuing permits, electricity connections, business licensing processes and establishing a Market
  Surveillance Inspectorate, contribute to achieving the objective of making it easier to do business. Adopting
  guidelines for streamlining border clearance processes, introducing risk management for food products and
  reforms at the Durres Port help to facilitate trade across borders. The pillars were complementary and
  mutually reinforcing on addressing some of the key constraints to competitiveness of the economy.




                                                                                                  Page 4 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Albania Competitiveness DPL(P155605)



       There were however shortcomings in design. Some prior actions were weak and inadequate to achieve the
       intended objectives and there were no appropriate prior actions for some intended objectives. For instance, it
       is not clear whether the prior actions pertaining to attracting investments were the most critical ones for
       supporting the path to institutional reform, given that the prior actions were mainly administrative statements
       with weak or uncertain institutional depth. There was no prior action for the objective of retaining investment.
       Furthermore, there were issues of attribution of outcomes, given that the outcomes pertaining to
       the objectives of reducing the cost of doing business, relied almost exclusively on the Distance to Frontier
       methodology of the Bank’s Doing Business indicators (discussed in section 4).

       The stand-alone operation was unrealistic in terms of the time frame. The operation was initially prepared as
       a programmatic two operation series. Many of the prior actions in the first phase, were to focus on the less
       ambitious upstream policy reform phase (such as, enactment of laws, adoption of decrees and byelaws) and
       the follow-up operation was to support implementation of institutional reforms. The original design was
       reversed and limited to a stand-alone operation by the Regional Operations Committee, due to a combination
       of external reasons (the upcoming elections in 2017 and uncertainty as to whether the new government
       would continue to support the reforms) and internal reasons (issues with the lending envelope). The design
       change necessitated adjustments to the policy matrix and some interventions proved to have less impact
       than originally anticipated. Further, some planned results could not be met as their achievement required
       follow up institutional reforms, which were to be supported through the abandoned second operation in the
       series (discussed in section 4).



       Rating
       Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To attract and retain investment.

    Rationale

    This policy pillar supported reforms aimed at providing a transparent investment regime that provided equal
    treatment to domestic and foreign investors and establishing a mechanism for settling investor-state disputes
    and thereby increasing transparency in handling investor grievances.

    Attracting investment. The prior action supported legislation pertaining to a single Unified Investment
    Law, in line with international best practices. The ICR (paragraph 37) reports that when the DPL was


                                                                                                          Page 5 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Albania Competitiveness DPL(P155605)



    prepared, there were two investment laws: (i) the Law on Foreign Investment amended in 2010. This
    law lacked clarity in areas, pertaining to compensation for expropriation and nationalization, transfers
    and dispute settlement: and (ii) the Law on Strategic Investment that was adopted in May 2015 as a
    transitory law, with a termination date of December 31, 2018. An Investment Policy Statement was adopted
    by the Council of Ministers, which included key principles of a single Unified Investment Law and the road
    map for adopting it by the end of 2018. The ICR notes that due to political changes and related delays,
    the law was not adopted as of March 2019. According to the clarifications provided by the team, the draft of
    the new law to date has been sent for public consultations and the law is expected to be in force by the end
    of 2019.

    There was one outcome target, i.e., to increase in the number of investment leads generated annually by the
    Albanian Investment Development Agency (AIDA) (ICR, paragraph 39). The number of ‘investment leads’
    increased to 28 in 2018 (as compared to 16 at the baseline in 2015), exceeding the target of 18. Neither the
    Program Document nor the ICR define or give specific paramaters to “investment leads”.

    Retaining investment. This pillar supported creation of an Investment Grievance Mechanism (IGM) for
    settling investor-state disputes. There was no prior action specified for this objective. The ICR (paragraph
    38) notes that the Ministry of Economic Development, Tourism, Trade and Entrepreneurship (MEDTTE),
    adopted a decision to establish IGM in the Albanian Investment Development Agency. However, due
    to subsequent management changes at AIDA and changes in ministries, the IGM is not operational to
    date. The ICR notes that an informal mechanism similar to IGM was set up however under the Minister of
    State for Entrepreneurs, and that this mechanism was helping investors with three types of issues (tax,
    infrastructure and customs), when this operation closed. The intended outcome increases in the amount of
    investment retained due to the IGM was not realized, as the formal IGM was not operational.

    In summary, of the two targets, only one was partly realized. Efficacy of this objective is rated as modest.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     To make it easier to do business.

    Rationale

    This pillar addressed issues pertaining to reducing the cost of setting and doing business. Specifically, the
    pillar aimed at reducing the time for fulfilling the administrative requirements associated with getting

                                                                                                         Page 6 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Albania Competitiveness DPL(P155605)



construction permits, electricity connections and business licensing, using the Distance to Frontier (DTF)
methodology of the Bank’s Doing Business (DB) indicators. (The DTF illustrates the distance to the "frontier",
which represents the best performance on each DB topic across all economies since 2005. An economy's
distance to frontier is indicated on a scale from 0 to 100, where 0 represents the lowest performance and
100 the frontier. An improvement in score through time would indicate the economy is improving). This pillar
also addressed issues pertaining to expediting the process of administrative inspections for non-food
consumer product groups.

Permissions for construction activities. As a prior action, the Ministry of Urban Development issued a
decision (number 734), relating to implementing the Law on Territorial Planning for issuing construction
permits (prior action). The key provisions of this decision included (ICR, footnote 2, page 12), clarification of
the responsibilities of municipalities and the National Territorial Planning for issuing construction permits,
introducing a one-stop for construction permits, setting time limits for municipal and other agency reviews of
building permit applications, mandatory submission of electronic applications and introducing requirements
for the agencies involved in processing construction permits. Guidelines for end-users were made available
on a dedicated website of the Ministry of Urban Development by December 31,2016. The ICR (paragraph
41) reports that other reforms were implemented to support the processing of construction permits. For
example, municipalities needed up to date plans for implementing the new process of issuing permits. Out of
60 municipalities, 34 had up dated plans, 10 had finalized drafting the new plans and 16 were drafting plans,
when the operation closed. The ICR notes that the number of constructions steadily increased over the
years, from 170 in 2015, to 455 in 2016, 819 in 2017 and 1194 in 208.

The expected outcome from this prior action was improvement in Albania's score on the Distance to Frontier
(DTF) of the Bank's Doing Business (DB) report. Albania's score on DTF on dealing with construction permits
improved marginally from 56.76 in 2015 to 57.01 in 2018. This was significantly short of the target of 66.
(According to the clarifications provided by the team, there were changes in the DB methodology through
time and this made it difficult to ascertain the extent to which this DPL contributed to the marginal
improvement in outcome through time).

Permissions for electricity connections. A new regulation on new electricity connections to the
Distribution System, was enacted on October 10, 2016, by the Board of the Energy Regulatory Authority, as
a prior action. This regulation streamlined procedures, introduced time limits for processing new applications,
required licensed operators to execute the works and entrusted the responsibility of supervision and testing
of final works to the electricity distribution company to improve the quality control of connections. According
to the DB report, the time needed for getting an electricity connection decreased from 177 days in 2016 to
134 days in 2018. The system average interruption index decreased from 112 days in DB 2016 report to 77
in DB 2018. It is not clear the extent to which the decrease in time could be solely attributed to the new
regulation. The expected outcome from this policy action was Albania's DTF score on Getting Electricity.
Albania's DTF score improved from 43.7 at the baseline in 2015 to 57.7. This was a much better score than
the target of 48.




                                                                                                      Page 7 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Albania Competitiveness DPL(P155605)



    Business licensing. The legislation for merging the National Registration Center and the National Licensing
    Center into a single National Business Center was enacted as a prior action on December 14, 2015.
    This center was functional on April 2016. This reform on authorizations, licenses and permits was part of the
    Government's broader deregulation reform, aimed at reducing red tape and increasing the efficiency of the
    institutions offering services to citizens and entrepreneurs. The expected outcome from this policy action
    was Albania's score on the overall Business DTF. Albania's score on the overall business DTF improved
    from 60.57 at the baseline in 2015 to 69.51, slightly short of the target of 70.

    Inspection of Non-food Consumer Product Groups. The Market Surveillance Inspectorate (MSI) was
    established to oversee the implementation of rules that created fair market competition, as a prior action on
    2016. The inspectorate had the mandate to perform processes such as inspections, laboratory testing and
    imposing sanctions on non-compliant businesses (Program Document, paragraph 68). The expected
    outcome from this policy action was the number of inspections initiated by MSI. Five inspections were
    initiated by MSI of the following non-food consumer product groups (toys, elevators, textiles, detergents and
    some appliances) in 2018. This exceeded the target of two.

    In summary, the expected outcome of inspection of non-food consumer product groups, was exceeded. The
    targets pertaining to permission for construction activities was not met. The expected outcomes of three
    policy actions relied on the Albania's scores on DTF through time. It is difficult to ascertain the extent to
    which the policy reforms contributed to realizing the outcomes, given that as the ICR (footnote 1, page 8)
    notes, an improvement in DTF scores could conceptually be due to multiple reasons such as, an
    improvement in the policy area, a decline in the best country's performance (that is, frontier). While
    attribution is difficult, given that the targets for three indicators were for the most part realized, efficacy of this
    objective is rated as substantial.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective

     To facilitate trade.

    Rationale

    This pillar aimed at trade facilitation reforms in general and facilitating cross-border trade in
    particular. Specifically, the pillars aimed at establishing a risk management policy by border agencies for
    physical inspections of internationally-traded agribusiness goods, streamlining border clearance processes
    for rewarding compliant traders and improving the operational efficiency of the Durres port.



                                                                                                               Page 8 of 15
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Albania Competitiveness DPL(P155605)



    Introducing risk management for food products. As a prior action, risk management policy was adopted
    by the National Food Agency (NFA) in 2016, This policy aimed at reducing the number of physical
    inspections and laboratory testing requirement for internationally-traded agribusiness goods and products of
    animal origin (Prior action). The ICR (paragraph 46) notes that although the policy was adopted by the NFA,
    there were delays in amending the law introducing the risk-based approach. The existing law still mandated
    physical inspection of all goods. Given that all imported agribusiness goods were still subject to physical
    inspections in 2018 as at the baseline in 2015, the expected outcome was not realized (target of 90% of
    imported cargo subject to physical inspections).

    Streamlining border clearance processes. As a prior action, the legislation pertaining to local customs
    clearance was enacted by the Directorate General of Customs on April 2016. This legislation was intended
    to expedite the clearance of imported goods, through enabling the importers or their authorized agents
    at approved locations. This legislation specified, the criteria relating to local customs clearance of imported
    goods, the procedural actions to be taken from the moment goods arrive at the border until they are released
    and the duties of the economic operator. The expected outcome of this policy action was the increase in the
    annual value of imports under local clearance procedures, when the operation closed. The annual value of
    imports under local clearance procedures increased steadily from US$ 9.00 million at the baseline in 2015,
    to US$12.00 million in 2016, to US$110.00 million in 2017 and to US$147.00 million when the operation
    closed in 2018. This exceeded the target of US$70.00 million in 2018 (ICR, paragraph 49).

    Reforms at the Durres Port. As a prior action, the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure and the Ministry
    of Finance jointly issued the legislation on September 16, 2015, pertaining to reducing the number of free
    freight storage days at the Durres port (the time allowed for free storage of cargo. This legislation was
    intended to improve the operational efficiency of the port through minimizing the already limited operational
    space at the port, reducing port congestion and aiding in reducing port dwell times. The expected outcome of
    this reform was 20 percent in cargo dwell time at the port (from nine days at the baseline to seven days in
    2018. The ICR (paragraph 49) notes that the expected outcome could not be verified, as the data for
    monitoring this indicator was not provided by the port authorities.

    In sum, of the three indicators, one indicator pertaining to the annual value of imports under local clearance
    procedures was realized. The second indicator pertaining to the percentage of cargo subject to physical
    inspections was not realized and the third indicator, pertaining to reduction in cargo dwell time could not be
    verified, for lack of data. Given that only one of the three indicators were realized, efficacy of this objective is
    rated as modest.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




                                                                                                             Page 9 of 15
           Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
           Albania Competitiveness DPL(P155605)



5. Outcome


The relevance of the program’s objectives is rated high, but that of design modest. Some prior actions were
weak and inadequate to achieve the intended objectives and some results could not be realized because of the
abandoned second operation. Efficacy of the second objective - to making it easier to do business - is rated as
substantial, as the indicators were realized, for the most part. Efficacy of the first and third objectives- attracting
and retaining investment and facilitating trade is rated as modest, since outcomes fell short of expectations.
Overall, shortcomings are considered significant, and outcome is assessed as moderately unsatisfactory.


a.     Outcome Rating
       Moderately Unsatisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating


Institutional risk. The ICR (page 17) notes that despite the delays following the 2017 elections which
contributed to non-realization of some of the outcomes, the Government has continued to work on all the areas
supported by this operation. According to the ICR (paragraph 57), the new Unified Investment Law is law is
expected to be adopted in Autumn 2019. Information subsequently provided by the team clarified that the draft
of the Law has now been completed and sent for public consultations to date. Further evidence the
implementation of these reforms will continue is provided by the fact that these reforms were aligned with
Albania's strategic objective of EU accession, a priority for the country.

Weak achievements in most areas supported by the operation also present a risk to the operation’s
sustainability.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
       Modest

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

     Several analytical works underpinned the series. These included:

       • An ongoing technical assistance.
       • The International Finance Corporations (IFCs) investment climate and agribusiness competitiveness
       project and the IFC's Trade Facilitation Advisory project.


                                                                                                         Page 10 of 15
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Albania Competitiveness DPL(P155605)



    • The Government's Doing Business Working Group on Doing Business related reform.
    • Analytical work by other partners (the United States Agency for International Development (USAID)
    and the German Development Agency (GIZ) (Program Document, pages 18-20).
    • Technical notes prepared in late 2015 and early 2016 for shaping policy decisions (such as on the
    Strategic Investment Law, the Investor Grievance Mechanism, on priorities of Doing Business related
    reforms and construction permits) (ICR, paragraph 60).



  The operation was prepared by a team which included staff from the Bank and from IFC, in consultation
  with private sector development stakeholders and key development partners (including the European
  Community Delegation, the United States Agency for International Development, the European Bank for
  Reconstruction and Development and the German Development Agency (GIZ). (ICR, paragraph
  21). Several risks were identified at appraisal including substantial risks associated with political and
  governance, macroeconomic risks associated with spillovers from weaker euro area growth
  and weak capacity of the implementing agencies. Mitigation measures incorporated at design
  included, public outreach and communication strategy by the government to garner public support for its
  reform efforts, focusing on areas where there was strong commitment for reforms and technical assistance
  to strengthen implementation capacity (ICR, paragraph 21). Appropriate arrangements were made at
  appraisal for safeguards compliance (discussed in section 10).

  There were major shortcomings in quality-at-entry. As indicated in section 3b, some prior actions were
  weak and inadequate to achieve the intended objectives and there were no appropriate prior actions for
  some objectives. The stand-alone operation was unrealistic in terms of the time frame. As a result, some
  interventions proved to be less impactful than originally anticipated and some planned results could not be
  met as their achievement required follow up prior actions, which were to be supported through the
  abandoned second operation in the series (discussed in section 4). There were shortcomings in M&E
  (discussed in section 9).

  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  The ICR (paragraph 62) reports that bank supervisions took place on a regular basis (with five missions
  from July 2015 to October 2016) (ICR, paragraph 62). The supervision included visits by technical teams in
  2015 and 2016. The ICR notes that some team members were based in the country and this aided in
  engagement with the country team. The team coordinated efforts between the different institutions and
  agencies implementing the operations. The team was proactive in addressing emerging problems during
  implementation. For instance, according to the information provided by the team, the Bank team worked
  with the Albanian Investment Development Agency, when there were management changes and this aided
  in ensuring continuity. The team also aided implementation by preparing technical notes on different
  topics.


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Albania Competitiveness DPL(P155605)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance

  The ICR (paragraph 64) notes that the government had overall ownership as the project objectives were
  in line with Albania's EU accession framework priorities. Although many ministries and agencies were
  involved in the reforms supported by the project, there was good coordination. The ICR also notes that
  the capacity to implement was appropriate overall and where capacity was not sufficient or there were
  knowledge gaps, the counterparts were very receptive to the technical assistance and advisory support
  provided by the Bank.

  However, significant delays by the government on some of the prior actions (such as introduction of the
  new unified investment law, investment of the Investor Grievance Mechanism and introduction of risk-
  based approach in the National Food Agency), contributed to the reduced impact of the project.



  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance

  The government implemented the program. There is no separate assessment of implementing agency
  performance.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


                                                                                                Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Albania Competitiveness DPL(P155605)




  M&E were to be based on the legislative and economic data provided by the authorities. Most of the
  indicators were quantitative outcome indicators and baseline data and target values were provided for the
  indicators.
  Many of the indicators pertaining to the policy area on making it easier to do business, relied on the Bank's
  Doing Business (DB) Distance to Frontier (DTF) measurements. This raised attribution issues, especially
  given the methodological changes in DB indicators through time. The ICR (paragraph 23) notes that DB
  indicators had large visibility in the country and in that sense were a good tool to motivate the authorities to
  push for reforms. While this needs to be taken into account, it would have been appropriate to use indicators
  with more granularity, to better monitor the performance of the supported interventions.



b. M&E Implementation

  The ICR (paragraph 24) notes that during implementation, the relevant ministries and agencies tracked the
  results that were relevant to their mandate. For instance, the customs administration tracked data
  on imports of companies that were authorized for Local Clearance. One issue with the indicators was that
  some reforms were not fully implemented and thus the indicators were not met by default. For example,
  investor grievance mechanism was not operationalized, so the indicator to measure its results could not be
  monitored.



c. M&E Utilization

  The ICR provides no indication that the indicators were used for purposes other than monitoring
  performance of this operation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects

  Environmental issues. An environmental assessment was conducted at appraisal (Program Document,
  paragraph 31). Most of the prior actions were not expected to have environmental impacts, as the operation
  supported mainly regulatory reforms, with no direct link to physical infrastructure. The ICR does not report on
  any environmental impacts from this operation.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Albania Competitiveness DPL(P155605)




b. Fiduciary Compliance

No issues with fiduciary compliance are reported in the ICR.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
    ---


d. Other
    ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   The operation presents
                                                                                   significant shortcomings in the
                              Moderately              Moderately                   form of modest design
Outcome
                              Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory               relevance and modest efficacy
                                                                                   ratings on two out of three
                                                                                   objectives.
Risk to Development
                              Modest                  Modest                       ---
Outcome
                                                                                   There were major
                              Moderately              Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                   shortcomings in Quality at
                              Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   Entry.
                              Moderately
Borrower Performance                                  Moderately Satisfactory      ---
                              Satisfactory
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                  ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons


The most important lessons in the ICR are the following (with some adaptation of language).

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Albania Competitiveness DPL(P155605)




(1) Finding the right balance between supporting upstream and downstream activities is important for
capturing the full benefits of reforms. In this operation, most of the supported reforms were on upstream
activities (adopting by-laws and decisions). To fully capture the benefit of reforms, it is important to consider the
impact of downstream activities, which require more time.

(2) The Doing Business Distance to Frontier (DTF) indicators for the results framework either needs to
be refined or supplemented with other indicators to address attributional issues. In this operation, the
DTF indicators were used mainly because they had large visibility in the country and hence considered to be a
good tool to motivate the authorities to push for reforms. Notwithstanding this benefit, it would have been useful
to complement this indicator, with more granularity for addressing attributional issues.

(3) Supervision and dedicated technical assistance resources are required for supporting progress on
reforms, especially in areas of weak capacity. In this operation, the team prepared several technical notes,
and this aided in informing and advancing the policy dialogue.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR is well-written and provides a concise narrative. It also candidly discusses the issues at preparation
(from an operation which was initially prepared as a programmatic two series operations and later reversed to
a stand-alone operation). It also candidly discusses the methodological issues with the chosen indicators in the
operation. The ICR is consistent with the guidelines.

The ICR provides no information on whether there were safeguards or financial management issues during
implementation.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 15 of 15
