     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PG: Rural Communications Project (P107782)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021643

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P107782                                    PG: Rural Communications Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Papua New Guinea                           Digital Development


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)             Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-47910                                  31-Aug-2015                                       14,095,014.76

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Jul-2010                                31-Aug-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              15,000,000.00                                          0.00

 Revised Commitment                               15,000,000.00                                          0.00

 Actual                                           14,095,014.76                                          0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo         Kavita Mathur                 Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Financing Agreement on page 5, the objective of the project was "to improve access to
   telecommunications infrastructure and services in rural and remote areas of the Recipient's territory". The
   statement of the project development objective (PDO) on page 7 of the project appraisal document (PAD) was
   identical in substance, and was not revised during project implementation.




                                                                                                Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PG: Rural Communications Project (P107782)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components, each of which had minor revisions during the August 11, 2014
   restructuring.

   Component 1: Technical Assistance for National ICT Authority (NICTA) (cost at appraisal US$1.0
   million, revised cost US$1.6 million, and actual cost US$1.30 million). This component aimed to
   develop regulations and procedures, prepare Universal Access Service (UAS) demonstration projects and
   provide advisory services as delineated below:

   (a) Development of UAS Regulations and Operational Procedures: Project resources were to support:
   (i) the preparation of regulations and procedures for the Act including the accounting and reporting
   procedures for the financial management of the UAS Fund; (ii) the establishment and operation of the UAS
   Secretariat and carrying out of a study tour to countries that have practical experience in the financing of
   universal access systems; and (iii) the upgrading the Recipient’s existing radio spectrum management
   software into a geographic information system for the UAS Secretariat.

   (b) UAS-financed Projects Preparation and Verification: Project resources were intended to fund
   technical assistance needed to oversee the implementation of the demonstration projects, and to prepare
   new UAS projects, including demand analysis, preparation of projects for financing by the UAS Fund,
   financial modeling and preparation of tender documentation.

   (c) Regulatory Advisory Assistance: Project resources were to support: (i) the provision of technical
   assistance needed to strengthen the competitiveness of the telecommunications market for the medium-
   term and to address emerging challenges in the sector including, inter alia: studies on spectrum
   management, licensing implementation, next-generation regulatory issues such as passive infrastructure-
   sharing, number portability, quality of service, and additional competition in wholesale markets; and (ii)
   carrying out of study visits and training exchanges with other regulators, particularly those implementing
   universal service programs.

   Revisions to Component 1: Additional budget was allocated to reflect the additional demand for regulatory
   advisory services.

   Component 2: UAS Demonstration Projects (cost at appraisal US$13.5 million, revised cost US$12.1
   million, actual cost US$11.8 million). This component intended to support the initiation and completion of
   demonstration projects as follows: (i) carrying out two demonstration projects for telecommunications
   network expansion in two geographically distinct locations, namely Chimbu and East Sepik.; and
   (ii) carrying out demonstration project for the establishment of internet service in about sixty district centers
   in major geographic regions of the Recipient’s territory for operation of internet cafés by subcontractors.


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PG: Rural Communications Project (P107782)



  Revisions to Component 2: The scope of the UAS demonstration project for internet access was changed
  from public access point (internet cafe) to mobile network upgrade and the original budget was reduced.
  This was mainly because of the developments in Papua New Guinea's (PNG) 's ICT sector since project
  preparation.

  Component 3: Project Management (cost at appraisal US$0.5 million, revised cost US$1.30 million,
  and actual cost of about US$1.00 million). This component aimed to strengthen the capacity of the
  Department of Communication and Information (DCI) through the provision of advisory services, training
  and support for project coordination, procurement, financial management, telecommunications technical
  support and supervision.

  Revisions to Component 3. This component was split in two sub-components as follows: (i) Technical
  Assistance for DCI, and (ii) Project Management. This split was done because the advisory service for ICT
  policy development remained with DCI, while the official project management was transferred from DCI to
  the National ICT Authority (NICTA), with the relevant resources. The budget was increased to reflect
  additional demand for policy advisory services.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost: The appraisal estimate was US$15.0 million, and the actual project cost amounted to US$14.1
  million.

  Financing: The project was funded by an IDA credit, with appraisal amount of US$15.0 million, and the
  actual amount of US$14.1 million.

  Co-financing: The project was cofinanced by the Asian Development Bank, US$9.7 million.

  A number of external partners supported the project activities by providing technical capacity building and
  analytical work. These partners included the Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID), the
  Asia-Pacific Telecommunity, the International Telecommunications Union, the Pacific Islands Forum
  Secretariat, the Pacific Islands Telecommunications Association, the Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility,
  and the South Pacific Commission. This was through parallel financing.

  Borrower Contribution: There was no planned borrower contribution, and none occurred during
  implementation.

  Dates: The project was approved on July 22, 2010, and made effective on March 7, 2011. The project was
  closed on August 31, 2018, three years after the original closing date.

  The project was restructured three times:

  (i) on June 17, 2013 to incorporate changes in the Results Framework, in the components and cost, and in
  the disbursements arrangements;

  (ii) on August 11, 2014 changes were made regarding the Implementing Agency, the Results
  Framework, the project's components and cost, the credit closing date, the reallocation between



                                                                                                 Page 3 of 14
                                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                        PG: Rural Communications Project (P107782)



                                      disbursement categories, the fiduciary and institutional arrangements, the
                                      procurement, and the implementation schedule; and

                                      (iii) on August 14, 2017 to integrate further changes in the results framework, in the credit closing date, and
                                      in the implementation schedule.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               Alignment with the country’s priorities. The 2050 Government’s Vision aims greater attention to rural
               and balanced regional development through effective service delivery. Under this vision, the target was to
               increase communication access from 10 percent to 100 percent of the population (PNG Vision 2050, p.8).
               The Government’s Medium-Term Development Strategy 2005-10, which provided the guiding framework for
               the Government’s expenditure program, identified more affordable, reliable, and readily‐available
               information and communications technology (ICT) infrastructure and services as necessary tools for
               economic growth and social development. The above strategic priorities were consistent with the project's
               objective of improving access to telecommunications infrastructure and services in rural and remote areas
               of the country.

               Alignment with the Bank’s strategy. The current FY 2013-16 World Bank Country Partnership Strategy (
               CPS) for PNG was extended by two years to align it with the Medium‐term Development Strategy,
               and included this project as the anchor for Pillar 1 of the CPS which aimed at increasing coverage of rural
               areas through mobile networks and enabling increased use of ICT for transparency and accountability in
               monitoring basic service delivery.

               While there was a consistency between the project activities, the Government's priorities and the World
               Bank's strategy for the country, the scope of the project and other implementation modalities (the PIU and
               the required technical capacity) were refined during implementation through the three project
               restructurings. Overall, the project's objectives at closure were substantially relevant.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective


                                                                                                                                        Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PG: Rural Communications Project (P107782)



To improve access to telecommunications infrastructure and services in rural and remote areas of the
Recipient's territory.

Rationale
Theory of change. The theory of change is sound and illustrates logical links between the project's
activities, outputs, and desired outcomes. For instance, project activities such as the establishment of 2G and
3G cell towers, UAS demonstration projects for the provision of voice and internet services in rural areas, and
the technical assistance for developing UAS regulations and supporting NICTA with regulatory assistance
(spectrum management, licensing implementation, infrastructure sharing, quality of service, and additional
competition in wholesale markets) were causally linked to improved PNG access to telecommunications
infrastructure and services in rural and remote areas.

Key project outputs and outcomes are delineated below:

Outputs:

(i) The project helped to establish 2G cell towers in 59 sites (greenfield sites) and 3G cell towers in 120 sites
(upgraded from 2G to 3G) in the four regions of PNG;

(ii) Two UAS demonstration projects for the provision of voice and internet service in rural areas were
supported under the UAS scheme with the least‐cost subsidy mechanism. The first UAS demonstration
project for voice service installed mobile base stations in 59 sites across PNG, and the second UAS
demonstration project for a mobile network upgrade provided mobile internet coverage to 1.12 million people
who previously did not have internet access;

(iii) The percentage of 89 district centers with Internet access reached 92 percent, against a target of 70
percent, and a baseline of 0; and the target of successful demonstration projects undertaken by UAS
Secretariat reached the number of 3, against a target of 1, and a baseline of 0;

(iv) The staff from NICTA and the Department of Communication and Information (DCI) benefited from
training programs in areas including spectrum management, e‐Government, and cyber-security; and

(v) On the contrary, two targets were missed as follows: (a) the UAS fund was not operational at project
closure; and (b) the target for the intermediate results indicator "impact on telecom sector of World
bank technical assistance" was not met, reaching the composite score: 3 (medium impact) against the target
of 5 (high impact).

Outcomes:

The access to telecommunications infrastructure was substantially achieved:

      The average distance to the closest telephone in the provinces targeted by the Project reached 1
       kilometer against a target of 5, and a baseline of 80 km;

      The percentage of the population in PNG with access to telecommunications services at project
       closure was 95 percent against a target of 70 percent, and a baseline of 20 percent;



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 14
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         PG: Rural Communications Project (P107782)




                            the target for direct project beneficiaries was more than doubled, reaching the number of 86,764,
                             against a target of 36,900; (d) the target of indirect project beneficiaries was largely exceeded,
                             reaching the number of 1,410,701 against a target of 265,000;

                            The target of indirect female project beneficiaries was also exceeded, reaching the number of 705,350
                             against a target of 132,500; (d) the number of subscribers per 100 inhabitants for mobile cellular
                             telephone subscriptions was exceeded, reaching 65 percent against a target of 60 percent;

                            The target of increase in internet usage in rural district centers was exceeded, reaching 50 percent,
                             against a target of 30 percent; and

                            The ICR reports (para 25) that according to international research, mobile internet penetration (3G
                             and 4G) in PNG had grown rapidly over the last 10 years and growth in internet access was being
                             driven primarily by mobile Internet, rather than fixed internet access via computers. This observation
                             supports the conclusion that there was an increase in the level of connectivity in PNG, with likely
                             contribution from this project.

                      Outcome attribution

                      Because the growth in mobile internet came mainly from commercially viable urban areas, and given the
                      notable private investments in the UAS demonstration project, it is difficult to attribute PNG’s growth in mobile
                      internet exclusively to the Project. However, the ICR estimated the direct contribution of the UAS
                      demonstration projects for mobile network upgrade (ICR para 26). Based on NICTA data, the number of new
                      3G subscribers at the project sites implemented under the UAS demonstration projects for mobile network
                      upgrade increased from 12,283 in September 2017 to 36,992 in June 2018 . During the same period, the
                      number of 3G subscribers at the country‐level for Digicel and Telikom increased (from 1,247,000 to
                      1,459,750). Therefore, the direct contribution of the UAS demonstration project for mobile internet was 11.6
                      percent. Finally, while difficult to quantify precisely, the contribution of the Government and external partners
                      in providing TA and analytical work was also significant.



                      Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale
As above.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                                         Page 6 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PG: Rural Communications Project (P107782)



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency

At appraisal, it was expected that more significant economic benefits would come from the UAS Demonstration
Projects financed under Component 2. To assess these benefits, a financial and economic model was
developed to estimate the total subsidy needed to achieve the targets of the project objective, along with the
economic benefits that these targets would create in the economy. The model estimated the potential demand
and determined whether a one-time subsidy would be required for private operators to be attracted to these
locations for the long term. In relation to the component 2, the subsidy was estimated at US$ 5.7 million, while
the economic internal rate of return was estimated at 36%, and the NPV at US$3.04 million.

The ICR did not use the same model to update the economic analysis conducted at appraisal on the grounds
that a number of changes were incorporated during the restructurings, making it impossible to replicate the
original economic feasibility analyses. The changes were: (i) the extension of the geographic scope of the
demonstration UAS project from two regions to all four regions of PNG (June 2013), (ii) the provision of broader
internet access through the change of connectivity method from internet cafes in 60 district centers to mobile
broadband (August 2014), and (iii) the revisions to the project components.

The ICR assessed economic benefits that could be quantified, and concluded that the project costs appear to be
negligible compared to the broad economic benefits achieved from the project activities over the period 2014-
2040 (ICR para 33). As an illustration, the ICR indicates that under the business as usual scenario, the
contribution of the ICT sector to GDP would increase from an estimated $465 million in 2014 to $1.3 billion in
2040, employment would increase from about 7,000 to 20,000 jobs, and government revenue from the ICT
sector from less than $130 million to about $360 million. While useful, this contribution comes from the entire
ICT sector, and not from the completed project.

This review considers that the changes brought in during restructurings were important factors to justify the
update of the economic and financial analysis undertaken at the 2014 restructuring using the appraisal model.
Results from the updated analysis could have provided a better picture of benefits expected from the revised
project compared to those computed in the context of the original project. Such an approach could have been a
better comparison of the economic and financial performance (in terms of NPV and IRR) between the original
and the revised projects.

Administrative Efficiency

During the initial period of implementation, the project management was poor. In 2017, the function for project
management was transferred from DCI to NICTA, which improved project management. Also, there were
significant delays in procurement. The project’s closing date was extended (twice) for a total of three years. The
low implementation efficiency was due to the Government’s lack of technical capacity, which is a major obstacle
for the future UAS project implementation.

Overall, the project efficiency is rated as modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PG: Rural Communications Project (P107782)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                  36.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's relevance of objectives was substantial, as there was a congruence between the country's
priorities and the Bank's strategies in that country. The project's efficacy was substantial as most of the outcome
indicators for access to telecommunications infrastructure and services were achieved or exceeded. Efficiency
was modest, resulting in an overall moderately satisfactory outcome rating.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

This review concurs with the following risks to the development outcome identified in the ICR:

      Risks linked to Government ownership/commitment: NICTA’s implementation capacity to
       manage the UAS fund depends upon human capacity and an appropriate regulatory framework being
       in place. As the rules and regulations were unapproved by the Government at project closure,
       sustainability of investments made under the project could be compromised by the possibility of policy
       reversals by the Government;

      Institutional risks: While the risk associated with the institutional change is estimated to be low, the
       risk arising from the weak implementation capacity is considered substantial;

      Financial risks: Even though the UAS demonstration projects were completed, the original goal of
       the UAS fund was to benefit the underdeveloped areas through the continued expansion of the UAS
       scheme. The goal could not be achieved without operationalizing the fund. In that regard, the
       Government of PNG needs to make efforts substantial efforts to ensure that the UAS fund is
       operational;




                                                                                                      Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PG: Rural Communications Project (P107782)



     Social risks: The vandalism on the existing towers was constantly observed, reflecting a level of
       social dissatisfaction. Therefore there is a substantial risk regarding the physical sustainability of the
       telecommunications towers; and

     Risks related to the private sector role: The sustainability of the telecommunications infrastructure
       and its efficiency will depend upon a strong private investment response. By the project closure, that
       response was not established yet, and remains a major risk to the achieved outcome.

On balance, the risk to development outcome is moderate.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was designed by a Bank's team of experienced ICT specialists who relied on innovative
  international experience. The team mobilized a grant which contributed significantly to the preparatory
  activities. The project design was comprehensive and strategically thought through, with appropriate
  implementation arrangements in place. The risks were identified, and associated mitigation measures
  envisioned, including technical assistance, training, and financial support for consultancies. Moreover,
  lessons from similar projects revealed the importance of the preparation of proper fund management, and
  the need to avoid accumulation of funds without adequate policies and disbursing procedures in
  place. The key lesson that inspired the project design was the importance of ensuring that UAS projects
  are properly identified and managed by a responsible institution so that funds collected are disbursed in a
  timely manner.

  In hindsight, the scope of the project components was not well calibrated, the implementation
  arrangements were not optimal, and the results framework could have been improved. It took two
  restructurings to come up with an appropriate final project scope and results framework, and adequate
  implementation arrangements. On balance, quality of entry is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Progress during the initial stages of implementation was slow due to poor project management and weak
 capacity of the implementing agency (DCI), particularly in procurement and financial management. DCI
 lacked the capacity to implement the Project, and the remedy consisted in transferring the project
 management to NICTA through a level 2 restructuring in 2014. Despite this action, project management did
 not improve because of various political and administrative factors. The Bank team provided sustained
 implementation support to the Project, notably through 11 formal implementation support missions between
 the project’s approval and the closing date and made efforts to resolve delays in implementation. For
 instance, the team mobilized two additional technical experts, when the second restructuring was

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PG: Rural Communications Project (P107782)



 implemented and the project management was transferred to NICTA to accelerate project implementation.
 In addition, three technical consultants between November 2012 and May 2013 provided in-country
 support to process critical procurement packages. Comprehensive aide‐memoires were prepared after
 each mission and a total of 13 ISRs were filed at project closing. However, fiduciary management was an
 issue throughout the period of project implementation. The Bank team did not take any actions to
 strengthen the financial management capacity.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the project performance indicators were well defined and measurable, with clear guidelines on
 yearly targets, collection frequency and instruments (Annex 3 of the PAD). NICTA was responsible for
 collecting the data required to monitor and evaluate the outcome and results of the Project, supported
 by technical assistance for capacity building provided by the World Bank team. However, some indicators
 could have been strengthened, including (i) the gender disaggregated indicator, and (ii) the indicator to
 gauge results arising from the technical assistance.



b. M&E Implementation
  Following the changes in the project scope during the two restructurings in 2013 and 2014, some
  indicators had to be modified. Thereafter, the PIU reporting against the performance indicators was
  generally effective. However, NICTA lacked a mechanism to obtain crucial data from telecommunications
  operators, including historical mobile subscriber data. From 2015 onwards, NICTA worked with private
  operators to generate project performance data, and to make corrective actions as needed. Following
  the project extension, the project team could have set more ambitious targets.



c. M&E Utilization
  The data and information collected during implementation helped the PIU to assess progress and adjust
  the scope of project interventions and the result framework. The M&E mechanism was used to obtain
  data from telecommunications operators, and adequate systems were eventually set up and indicators
  were systematically monitored by the PIU in collaboration with private operators and relevant
  stakeholders.




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PG: Rural Communications Project (P107782)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was classified as a Category B at appraisal and triggered two safeguard policies (OP4.01
   Environmental Assessment, and OP4.10 Indigenous Peoples), because of limited expected environment
   impact from the construction of telecommunications network infrastructure and modifications to existing
   buildings and premises whereby cable work would take place. The Department of Communication and
   Information prepared Environmental and Social Assessments (ESA) and an Environmental and Social
   Management Framework (ESMF), which were deemed to cover not only this project but also provide a
   framework for future UAS-funded projects.

   During implementation, there were no significant safeguards issues. Some minor grievances were recorded
   in relation to installation of some of the telecommunications towers. There was an administrative
   misunderstanding between NICTA and the Conservation and Environment Protection Authority over the
   need for Environmental Permits for the erection of Digicel’s towers. This issue was resolved when it was
   determined that installation of communications towers was not a prescribed activity under the
   Environment Regulation 2002, and that permits were not required under the Environment Act 2000. The
   Bank recommended that for future activities NICTA might consider a best practice approach and prepare a
   Code of Environmental Practice to safeguard environmental and social issues for tower installations. There
   were also disputes between owners of customary lands over the allocation of compensation fund lease
   payments among the landowner groups. The disputes resulted in some minor vandalism at tower sites, but
   were settled by Digicel. The grievances were minor and that they were settled by Digicel before the project
   closure (ICR para 56). It is not clear why the involuntary resettlement safeguard was not triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management

   Although an accounting officer was a requirement for the PIU, the officer was never hired, and the PIU
   relied on the services of a financial management consultant. The submission of required financial
   management documents experienced long delays throughout project implementation. Since the project
   effectiveness until the year 2014, financial management rating varied from MU to MS. The June 2018
   ISR assessed the financial management performance as Moderately Unsatisfactory as NICTA’s audits for
   2015 and 2016 and quarterly Interim Financial Review reports for Q4 2017 and Q1 2018 remained
   overdue. The ICR reports (para 58) that the March 2017 Financial Management Implementation Review
   Report stated that no accounting information was taken up in the books of account of NICTA (ICR para
   58). Overall, the FM capacity was weak throughout the period of project implementation; and the Bank did
   not take any substantive actions to strengthen it.

   Procurement


                                                                                                Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PG: Rural Communications Project (P107782)



   The performance in project procurement varied from Moderately Satisfactory to Unsatisfactory throughout
   the period of project implementation. The Unsatisfactory rating in August 2016 was related to poor
   procurement planning and implementation. A procurement advisor was hired in 2015 to support NICTA
   with the implementation of delayed procurement activities, but proved ineffective. The procurement
   performance rating was upgraded to Moderately Satisfactory in May 2018 as all planned procurement
   activities were completed and previously identified delays were addressed, following the Bank's team
   support to help close the project's accounts.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR did not find unintended impacts.



d. Other
   The ICR did not find any other impacts.



11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                             Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                                                                              Project design and
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   implementation had significant
                                                                              shortcomings
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identified a number of lessons, which are rephrased and summarized below:

      Weaknesses in institutional capacity should be addressed early to ensure smooth
       implementation of the project. The project’s experience shows that the weak capacity of
       the PIU in procurement and financial management and the limited institutional capacity in the
       management of the UAS fund caused significant delays in the project launching. NICTA had
       to hire dedicated consultants/staff and an independent verification agency to support the
       project implementation.

      Improvement in rural connectivity can benefit from targeted partnership between
       the private sector and the UAS demonstration projects. Despite the challenges

                                                                                                Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PG: Rural Communications Project (P107782)



         experienced during implementation, the project team was successful in improving the
         connectivity for rural people and the rural economy through working with the private sector in
         upgrading and modernizing the existing telecommunications infrastructure and supporting
         the supporting telecenters.

        Financial sustainability of rural communication infrastructure is uncertain, and may
         require subsidies or tower sharing to properly manage the infrastructure. The
         operation and maintenance costs of rural communication are higher in comparison
         to communication sites in urban areas. This is primarily due to the poor access conditions of
         the sites.

        For communications infrastructure structure to achieve desired impacts in rural areas,
         enabling services and fair market competition is needed. To realize the communications
         potential, reliable electricity service is a prerequisite. Given the low purchasing power in rural
         areas, the subscribers need to have the purchasing power to buy phones. Moreover, there is
         a need to promote healthy competition in the market to ensure users benefit from lower costs
         and better services.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written, and provides a comprehensive review of the project design and implementation. A
reconstructed theory of change outlines a detailed results chain, which could have been strengthened. Other
aspects of the ICR that could have been improved include: (i) the economic analysis of the project, because the
reasons provided to explain the lack of an updated economic analysis using the original methodology are not
convincing, (ii) the Bank performance rating was overestimated given the weaknesses that affected the project
design and implementation. Other performance ratings reflect the evidence provided in the ICR and are
consistent with the ICR guidelines. The lessons learned are sound and were derived from the project
implementation experience. The ICR quality is rated as substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
PG: Rural Communications Project (P107782)




                                                                          Page 14 of 14
