     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021684

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P126440                                    RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Rwanda                                     Agriculture


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-50640,IDA-54030                        30-Oct-2017                                         90,522,713.22

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 01-Mar-2012                                30-Oct-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            80,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             95,900,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         90,522,713.22                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   This project was the third and final phase of an Adaptable Program Loan (APL) supporting the Rural Sector in
   Rwanda since 2001.




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



   The Project Development Objective (PDO) stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 4) and the
   PDO in the Financing Agreement (p. 5) were identical and aimed to:



   "(i) Increase the agricultural productivity of organized farmers in the marshlands and hillsides of sub-
   watersheds targeted for development in an environmentally sustainable manner; and (ii) Strengthen
   the participation of women and men beneficiaries in market-based value chains."




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by three components:

   1. Infrastructure for Marshland, Hillside and Commodity Chain Development (appraisal Cost US$65.4
   million, actual cost: US$74.5 million). This component aimed to expand irrigation in cultivated
   marshlands through rehabilitation and development; promote sustainable land management practices on
   associated hillsides; and improve economic infrastructure in support of commodity chain development. The
   component has three sub-components:

   1.1. Marshland Rehabilitation and Development. The sub-component would finance rehabilitation and
   development of selected irrigation schemes in marshlands totaling 6,000 ha with high potential for
   commercialized agricultural production. It would finance preliminary, detailed feasibility and participatory
   design studies (some of which have already been completed or are on-going), construction and construction
   supervision. Investments would be demand-driven and a clear selection framework would be applied.

   1.2. Sustainable Land Management on Hillsides. This sub-component would aim at the development of
   economically interesting sustainable land management (SLM) on the hillsides. Drawing from and adapting
   the successful approaches of the LWH as well as the best practices developed under first and second
   phases, the project would finance investments in improving productivity on 17,000 ha of those hillsides
   directly adjacent to the marshland irrigation schemes to be developed by the Project. Activities supported by
   the Project would include: promotion of sustainable land management on hillsides immediately adjacent to
   the marshlands where irrigation investments would be done, using the 3:1 area ratio used in phase 2; and
   (b) promotion of cost-effective soil moisture retaining technologies on these hillsides for agricultural
   production.




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



  1.3. Rural Investments for Economic Infrastructure. This sub-component would invest in the
  construction of economic infrastructure for developed marshlands and hillsides to support the integration of
  organized farmers in diversified value chains. These commercial infrastructure investments would support
  the economic activities handled by cooperatives or small farmer groups. A Community-Driven Development
  (CDD) approach would be used and be directly linked to business plans developed by cooperatives with
  support from sub-component 2.3. Selection criteria have been developed to help prioritize the hillside
  cooperatives that could best benefit from similar investments.



  2. Capacity for Marshland, Hillside and Commodity Chain Development (appraisal cost: US$7.5
  million, actual cost: US$5.4 million). This component aimed to provide multi level capacity needed to
  maximize beneficiary gains from the infrastructure investments and to ensure the sustainability of Project
  objectives beyond the life of the APL. It includes three sub-components:

  2.1. Capacity Building for Farmer Organizations and Cooperatives. This sub-component would support
  group formation where necessary (e.g., hillsides), and would strengthen Water User Associations (WUAs)
  and cooperatives to improve their governance and management capacity to deliver quality services to their
  members.

  2.2. Capacity Building for Improved Production Technologies. This sub-component would support
  activities to improve production and productivity in the marshlands and hillsides adjacent to marshlands. In
  line with Government policy for extension and in collaboration with Rwanda Agricultural Board (RAB), the
  Project would support the upscaling of the Farmers Field Schools (FFS). The FFS approach builds capacity
  and empowers farmers to use improved and economically viable practices for sustainable soil, water and
  pest management with a view of increasing agricultural productivity and profitability.

  2.3. Capacity Building for Value Chain Development. This sub-component would aim at building the
  capacity of farmers for value chain development through enhancing their understanding of agribusiness
  principles. This sub-component would build the capacity of farmers for market-oriented farming at three
  levels: the producer, cooperative and the agribusiness center level including half bulk markets.

  3. Project Coordination and Support (appraisal cost US$5.5 million, actual cost: US$10.5 million).
  This component would finance the implementation and management of the project activities. This
  component covered Project management costs, such as staff salaries, equipment, operational expenses, as
  well as implementation of environment and social safeguards and of monitoring and evaluation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total cost of the project was estimated at appraisal to be US$85.00 million. The actual
  cost reported by the ICR Annex 3 was US$90.40million which represented about 113% of the appraisal
  estimate.



  Financing. The project was financed through an IDA Credit worth US$80.00 million. The project received
  an additional IDA Credit worth US$15.9 million. The total disbursed amount according to the ICR (p. 2) was


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



   US$90.52 million including US$76.01 million from the original loan and US$14.51 million from the additional
   financing.



   Borrower Contribution. The Government of Rwanda was expected to provide US$5.00 million of
   counterpart funds mainly for the payment of resettlement costs. The ICR did not provide details on the
   actual Government contribution.



   Dates. The project was approved on March 1, 2012 and became effective on June 20, 2012. The Mid-Term
   Review was conducted on November 2, 2015, about three years and five months into implementation, no
   date was set in the PAD for the MTR. The project closed on October 30, 2018 compared to an original
   closing date on October 30, 2017. The closing date was extended by 12 months to allow enough time to
   implement the project activities after receiving additional financing in 2014.

   The project was restructured twice, both level 2 restructurings.

         The first was on April 3, 2014, when the amount disbursed was 46% of the budget (the Restructuring
          Paper did not give an exact amount), following the processing of an additional IDA credit to the
          Republic of Rwanda in the amount of US$ 15.9 million. Three changes were made: (i) the Project
          closing date was extended by 12 months, through October 30, 2018; (ii) the results framework
          was revised to increase the targets for four indicators to reflect the additional resources available;
          and (iii) resources were reallocated across disbursement categories.
         The second restructuring was on December 5, 2017, when the amount disbursed was US$89.83
          million, in order to reflect a transfer of the Project implementation responsibilities from the Ministry of
          Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) to the Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources
          Development Board (RAB). "The transfer was part of a Government-wide reform aiming at
          increasing the efficiency of public administration, by focusing the role of line ministries on policy-
          making and monitoring, while tasking designated agencies with the implementation of policies and
          programs (ICR, p. 10, para 19)."




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The agricultural sector in Rwanda accounts for about 36% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), 80% of
employment, and in 2010, 45% of foreign exchange earnings. It also provides 90% of the country’s food
needs. Key challenges facing the agriculture sector include: (i) a binding land constraint that rules out
expanding land area for agricultural growth, (ii) small average land holdings (0.3 ha); (iii) poor water
management (uneven rainfall and ensuing variability in production) resulting from very low levels of
irrigation (15,000 ha nationwide); (iv) the need for greater (public and private) capacity from the district to


                                                                                                        Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



the national levels and the weak extension services for farmers; and (v) limited commercial orientation
constrained by poor access to output and financial markets (PAD, p. 1, para 2).

A. Relevance of the Objectives of Phase 3.

At project appraisal, objectives were in line with the Government’s strategic planning for the agriculture
sector. The project started at the transition between Rwanda’s Strategic Plan for the Transformation of
Agriculture Phase II (PSTA II), covering 2009-12, and the Plan’s third phase, PSTA III, covering 2013-17.
Objectives were in line with PSTA III which explicitly outlined a vision for agriculture development based on
intensification and commercialization, which were also the two pillars driving the project. Objective were
also in line with the Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Rwanda for FY09-12. Specifically, it
was designed to contribute to its Outcome 1.1. (sustainably raising agricultural production, particularly of
food crops). The CAS reflected two strategic themes: (a) promote economic transformation and growth, and
(b) reduce social vulnerability. Agriculture production, with an emphasis on sustainable approaches, was
one of the four components of the CAS’s first strategic theme. Objectives were also in line with the World
Bank’s Africa Strategy, “Africa’s Future and the World Bank’s Support to It” (March 2011). It supported
competitiveness and employment, vulnerability and resilience, and governance and public sector capacity.



At project completion, objectives continued to be in line with the Government vision and strategy reflected in
the Rwanda’s Vision 2050. The National Strategy for Transformation 2017-24 lays out the economic, social
and governance pillars that would support achieving Vision 2050; through increasing agriculture productivity
and production, as well as sustainably exploiting natural resources remain key objectives of the economic
transformation. Objectives were also in line with PSTA IV which coincided with the time of project
completion. PSTA IV continues and accelerates changes begun under PSTA III to enhance productivity and
profitability and encourage private investment. Objectives were also in line with the Bank's Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS, FY14-18) for Rwanda. The CPS included three themes, and agriculture was a
key focus sector under the second theme. The CPS (p. 32, para 87) was explicit in stating that intensifying
agricultural productivity would remain central in the IDA program, and that investments would equally
facilitate transition to more commercial farming practices. The CPS (p. 33, para 90) also stated that IFC
would focus on improving advisory services on horticulture in Rwanda and agri-business investments, thus
complementing and reinforcing the effects of the project interventions.



The PAD (p.4) described the project beneficiaries as "female and male farmers in the selected marshlands
and adjacent hillsides, as well as community members receiving project support in small groups for value
chain activities, either upstream or downstream."

The first part of the PDO was clear and focused. However, using the term "women and men beneficiaries"
in the second part of the PDO implied a target group although according to the PAD there was none.

Based on the above-mentioned information, relevance of objectives is rated Substantial.



B. Relevance of the Program Objectives.


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



               The long-term programmatic objective of the Rural Sector Support Project (RSSP) APL series (2001 to
               2019) was "to help the Government of Rwanda achieve its strategic goal of unlocking rural growth in order
               to increase incomes and reduce poverty" (PAD, p. 5, para 11). Relevance of objectives of phase 1
               (P064965) and phase 2 (P105176) of the program were both rated High by IEG.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             PDO1: to increase the agricultural productivity of organized farmers in the marshlands and hillsides of sub-
                             watersheds targeted for development in an environmentally sustainable manner.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The theory of change is a theory about the relationships between activities, outputs from
                             those activities and the final outcome. In this case change was facilitated by a critical element such as the
                             continued capacity of water user associations (WUAs) to effectively provide services to their users, while
                             being able to recover their water fees, and the ability of cooperatives and other aggregators to find market
                             outlets for their farmers’ produce.

                             Activities and expected outputs. The project was designed to focus on improving agribusiness and
                             marketing skills among its beneficiaries, improving quality and reducing post-harvest losses through better
                             post-harvest technology and handling. These activities were expected to result in training lead farmers and
                             extension agents on improved farming methods and post harvest handling. Also, post-harvest infrastructure
                             would be built and equipment provided through project support. Irrigation infrastructure would be rehabilitated
                             and small-scale irrigation technologies provided to beneficiaries, and Water User Associations would be set
                             up, trained and formally registered.

                             Expected outcomes. Farmers were expected to adopt sustainable land management practices which would
                             lead to developing hillside areas sustainably. Farmers would also adopt improved production technologies
                             and cooperatives would produce certified seeds in areas with improved irrigation and drainage. These
                             activities combined would lead to increasing productivity in marshland and adjacent hillside areas in an
                             environmentally sustainable manner.

                             Expected long term outcomes. Sustainable management of rural natural resources and greater income
                             diversification in rural communities.



                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



Based on the above, the causal links in the theory of change are evident, and the suggested activities were
relevant and adequate to achieve the PDO.



Outputs

The information below was reported in the ICR (Annex 3) except when otherwise referenced.

Sustainable Land Management activities:

      4,117,720 agro-forestry trees planted for soil erosion control. 1,657,192 trees planted for ecosystem
         rehabilitation.
        149,000 trees and 184,440 shrubs planted as part of the silt trap zone for dam protection.
        9,312 ha benefited from improvements through radical terracing (ICR, p. 12, para 28).
         2,676.8 ha were covered with forest, while 3,283 ha of embankment were protected with grasses and
         another 2,398 with agroforestry trees (ICR, p. 13, para 29).
         1,172 ha of marginal land in the marshlands and hillsides were brought into productive use (ICR, p.
         13, para 29).
        29,780 beneficiaries (of which 14,579 women) were trained in sustainable land management
         practices.
        10,464 farmers trained in compost making

Improving Irrigation and Drainage services:

      70,932 male beneficiaries were provided with improved drainage and irrigation services compared to a
       baseline of: 33,473, original target of: 63,473 and a revised target of: 64,973. Also, 30,707 female
       beneficiaries were provided with improved drainage and irrigation services compared to a baseline of:
       13,389 original target of: 25,389 and a revised target of: 26,019.
      6 new small dams/reservoirs built and 3 sites developed with river weirs
      17 new WUAs were set up and the project strengthened the capacity of 42 WUAs (target: 38). 1,923
       water users (farmers) were trained.

Improving Productivity and Yields:

      1,936 lead farmers (hillsides) and 60 lead farmers (marshlands) trained in seed production
      19 rice varieties tested in 9 marshlands
      25 farmer field school plots set up in the marshlands, and 2,500 farmers trained on various issues
       including pest and disease control as well as rice harvesting
      850 farmer field school plots set up in the hillsides
      2,180 lead farmers trained on lead farmer extension approach
      28 co-operatives were involved in certified seed production compared to a baseline of: 7 and a target
       of: 17.




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



Outcome



This outcome is assessed through three elements: (a) increasing the agricultural productivity in irrigated
marshlands, (b) increasing the agricultural productivity in the marshlands and hillsides of sub-watersheds,
and (c) promoting environmental sustainability.

(a) Agricultural productivity in irrigated marshlands.

      The evidence provided in the ICR showed that agricultural productivity in irrigated marshlands
       increased by 208% from a baseline of US$662 per ha to US$2,865 per ha exceeding the end target of
       US$1,375. Taking the 30% devaluation in the Rwandan currency from 2012 to 2019 into account, the
       end-of-Project value for marshland productivity would be US$ 1,955/ha, which was 3 times more than
       the baseline.
      Rice, the main crop cultivated in the irrigated marshlands, saw yields increase by 25% from about 4
       tons/ha, at baseline, to about 5 tons/ha at project closing. While the national average was 3 tons/ha at
       appraisal and 3.4 tons/ha at project closing. These increments in productivity/yields resulted
       from 4,103 ha that were newly developed, and 3,194 ha were rehabilitated. Also, through more
       reliable irrigation water availability to areas previously deprived of water, benefiting nearly 71,000
       users.
      In addition, the use of better quality certified seeds where according to the ICR (p. 12, para 27) the
       use of improved seeds increased from 5% in 2013 to 80% in 2018. The project-supported farmers
       field schools enabled beneficiaries to improve their knowledge and skills and provided them with
       relevant training to use better technology and/or management practices.

(b) Agricultural productivity in the marshlands and hillsides of sub-watersheds.

      The ICR (p. 11 table 1) reported that the agricultural productivity in non-irrigated marshlands and
       hillsides of sub-watersheds increased by 109% form a baseline of US$470 per ha to US$1,133 per ha
       by project completion, exceeding the target of US$1,038 per ha.
      Yields of different crops cultivated in the hillsides also increased between the start of the Project and
       its closing, for example, in the project areas maize yield increased from 1.5 tons/ha to 3.5 tons/ha,
       against a national average of 1.8 tons/ha; bush beans from 0.3 tons/ha to 1.3 tons/ha, against a
       national average of 0.8 tons/ha; climbing beans from 0.8 tons/ha to 2.6 tons/ha, against a national
       average of 1.0 tons/ha, and Irish potatoes from 3 tons/ha to 21 tons/ha, against a national average of
       8.6 tons/ha (ICR, pages 12 & 13, para 28).
      These improvements were a result of activities promoted and supported by the project including:
       improved land management practices, adoption of improved technologies and practices and better
       farmers’ knowledge and skills through training and farmer field schools.

(c) Promoting environmental sustainability.

      The project promoted a number of sustainable land management practices and rain water harvesting
       technologies including: grass strips, contour bunding and improved radical terracing; pasture
       improvement through trees and grass planting; dam and canal buffer zone protection; afforestation of


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



       critical hillside ecosystems unsuitable for intensive agriculture and animal production and shallow
       soils, and construction of bench terraces and ditches for soil erosion control.
      Also, other techniques such as liming and organic materials application were introduced, while crop
       rotation, double cropping and contour cultivation and mulching were encouraged. According to the
       ICR (page 11, table 1), the share of farmers adopting sustainable land management practices, both in
       the hillsides and in the marshlands, increased to 95.5% for women and 96.5% for men from a baseline
       of 32% and 36% for women and men, respectively, and against a target of 90% for both.
      Further, to curb soil erosion the Government adopted an environmentally-friendly zero grazing policy.
       This was possible after the project supported the protection of embankments with grasses, and the
       areas planted agroforestry trees were used for fodder production for livestock (ICR, p. 13, para 29).
       It is plausible to assume that marshlands were better protected against soil erosion as a result of
       infrastructure and better water management supported by the project, despite the lack of evidence on
       this point in the ICR.

Based on the above-reported information, the evidence provided points to the success of the project in
increasing agricultural productivity of organized farmers in both the marshlands and hillsides of sub-
watersheds targeted for development. There is also evidence that this was done in an environmentally
sustainable manner. However, more time is needed to assess the environmental impact of the project
activities since benefits are slow to materialize.

This review concludes that the efficacy of the achievement of this objective is Substantial.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO2: to strengthen the participation of women and men beneficiaries in market-based value chains.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The theory of change is a theory about the relationships in this project between activities,
outputs from those activities and the final outcome. In this case change is facilitated by a critical element such
as the ability of cooperatives and other aggregators to enable the market integration of women and men in
targeted marshland and hillside areas by intensifying production, promoting diversification into agricultural
value addition or upstream markets, and expanding access to markets.

Activities and expected outputs. The project would support mobilization and formation of new cooperatives.
Also, the project will support training of farmers in business planning and agribusiness development. These
activities would result in more produce sold through cooperatives, and the trained cooperatives would have
better access to finance.


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



Expected outcomes. Project-supported co-operatives were expected to see their revenues increase by more
than 50% which is a sign of increased share of commercialized output, and increased participation of targeted
beneficiaries in market-based value chains. Also, more women and men beneficiaries would participate in up-
stream and down-stream value chain activities.

Expected long term outcomes. Greater professionalization in agriculture and greater income diversification
in rural communities.



Outputs

The information below was reported in the ICR (Annex 3) except when otherwise referenced.

Development of Market-Based Value Chains.

      21 storage facilities, 62 rice drying grounds and 9 maize dryers and collection centers were built.
      4,100 palettes, 18 moisture meters, 30 weighing machines, 16 combined maize threshers and
       winnowers, 11 maize shelters, 25 collapsible dryers distributed or built for demonstration.
      The Project facilitated the setting up of 3,382 Self-Help Groups (SHGs), each counting 20 to 30
       members; the SHGs were further organized into 355 zones, and then into 51 cooperatives, 15 in the
       hillsides and 36 in the marshlands (ICR, p. 13, para 30).
      40 cooperatives (baseline: 6, target: 30) out of 51 were implementing projects with funding from
       commercial banks or other financial institutions at project closing.
      1,117 farmers (54% women) received refresher training on post-harvest and handling,
       entrepreneurship and business plans.

Participation of Women and Men in Markets

      9,695 farmers (of which 4,957 women) were trained on community mobilization and cooperative/group
       governance.
      31 study tours were organized for 1,047 beneficiaries (33% women) on how to improve coop
       management, crop production and marketing, access and use of financial services, women’s
       empowerment, business creation.



Outcome



      To strengthen the participation of women and men beneficiaries in market-based value chains, the
       project supported capacity building activities, including group formation and mobilization of farmers as
       well as activities to improve post-harvest handling and marketing. As a result of these activities,
       women and men farmers improved their skills to market their products and improved their ability to
       attract funding. The share of commercialized agricultural products, both in the marshlands and in the


                                                                                                 Page 10 of 22
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



                             hillsides, as well as the number of beneficiaries linked to upstream and downstream value chain
                             activities increased.
                            The ICR (p. 11, Table 1) reported that the share of commercialized agricultural products in
                             marshlands (measured as total value of crops sold over total value of crops produced) increased from
                             a baseline of 43% (women), 45% (men) to end target of 93% for both exceeding the target of 90%.
                            Also, the share of commercialized agricultural products in hillsides (measured as total value of crops
                             sold over total value of crops produced) increased from a baseline of 43% (women) 45% (men) to an
                             end target of 78% (women) and 79% (men) compared to target of 60% for both. Also, by project
                             completion, 33,973 project beneficiaries were involved in up- and downstream value chain activities
                             compared to target of 6,206 and a baseline of 896.
                            While there is ample evidence reported in the ICR on the participation of women and men in different
                             activities, there was no reference in the ICR to the relative importance of these activities to either
                             women or men. Therefore, while the PDO refers clearly to women and men, this review looked at
                             women and men as an aggregate due to the absence of any information in the ICR on the relative
                             importance of activities to each gender.

                      Based on the above-mentioned information, efficacy of this objective is rated Substantial.




                      Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale
PDO1: to increase the agricultural productivity of organized farmers in the marshlands and hillsides of
sub-watersheds targeted for development in an environmentally sustainable manner. Substantial.

The evidence provided point to the success of the project in increasing agricultural productivity of organized
farmers in both the marshlands and hillsides of sub-watersheds targeted for development. There is also evidence
that this was done in an environmentally sustainable manner. However, more time is needed to assess the
environmental impact.



PDO2: to strengthen the participation of women and men beneficiaries in market-based value chains.
Substantial.




                                                                                                                     Page 11 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



 As a result of project support, the share of commercialized agricultural products for women and men farmers,
both in the marshlands and in the hillsides, as well as the number of beneficiaries linked to upstream and
downstream value chain activities increased exceeding their end of project targets.



Overall efficacy of the project is rated Substantial.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial


5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)



ex ante

      The ex-ante EFA in the PAD estimated an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 55% for
       marshlands, 785% for hillsides and 112% for the entire project when using a stochastic model. The
       stochastic variables consisted of: capital investment costs on marshlands and hillsides; crop yields; crop
       output prices; labor unit costs; planting materials and unit costs; fertilizer use and unit costs (manure,
       NPK inorganic fertilizer, and urea); crop chemical costs; rice transport unit costs; irrigation operation and
       management costs; economic price of carbon sequestration; and capital and operating costs for
       infrastructure investments.
      For an assumed pro0ject life of 21 years and a discount rate of 12% the financial net present value
       (FNPV) and economic net present value (ENPV) were estimated to be US$218 million and US$228
       million, respectively for the entire project. An estimated 15,878 ha (5,769 ha of marshland and 10,109 ha
       of hillsides) were foreseen to benefit from the project.



ex post



      The ex-post EFA in the ICR estimated a Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 96% and an EIRR of
       88%, and a Financial Net Present Value (FNPV) of US$1.3 billion and an Economic Net Present Value
       (ENPV) of US$1.5 billion for the entire project. The financial and economic benefit-cost ratios (BCRs)
       were estimated to be 14.9 and 14.1, respectively.
      The number of actual area benefited by the project was 15,560 ha which was close to the above-
       mentioned planned area of 15,878 ha. The assumed adoption rate for new farming practices and
       technologies was about 40%. The ICR (p. 14, para 34) noted that the low adoption rate assumed for the


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



       analysis in the ICR was expected to be surpassed given the "broad nature of the program within the
       Rwandan context."
      The analysis used the FAO EX-ACT tool to estimate total CO2 emissions reductions. The
       reduction equaled 443,149 tons over a twenty-year period. Environmental carbon reduction benefits as a
       percentage of total benefits equaled 4.5%, 21% and 35% for market, low and high shadow prices for
       carbon, respectively. This analysis used the World Bank Guidance notes on shadow price of carbon
       (September, 2017).
      A sensitivity analysis assessed the impact of the main risks for the project results and the adverse
       situations that may arise in terms of benefits and costs, without environmental benefits. The analysis
       reported in the ICR revealed, inter alia, that under a severe scenario, using a technology adoption rate of
       40%, assuming that cost overruns are 20%, benefits and output prices decrease by 20% and input prices
       increase by 20%, the EIRR would be 65% and (assuming a discount rate of 17%) the BCR would be 8.6
       (ICR, Annex 4, paragraph 9).



Administrative and Institutional efficiency



The project closed on October 30, 2018 compared to an original closing date on October 30, 2017. The closing
date was extended by 12 months to allow for enough time to implement the project activities after receiving
additional financing in 2014. During the first few years of the project, there were some delays in the completion
of design studies, which impacted on the planned dam and irrigation construction works. There were also some
procurement related delays that stemmed from the lack of capacity of local contractors to undertake contracts to
construct dams and irrigation works, lack of realistic procurement plan, low efficiency of internal tender
committee and inadequate contract monitoring (ICR, p. 23, para 72). The actual cost of Project Coordination and
Support (component 3) was US$10.5 million or 190% of the appraisal estimate of US$5.5 million. In a
communication with IEG, the World Bank project team explained that several factors contributed to a cost
increase relative to appraisal: first the project received additional financing of US$15.9 million, which allowed
scaling up its activities and geographic scope (note that the Single Project Implementation Unit had district level
as well as central level staff); second, the project got a 1 year extension; and third the pay scale for Government
projects was revised upwards relatively early during project implementation, to address SPIU staff turnover. As
a result, the project’s coordination and support costs increased from 6.5% of the total project cost at appraisal to
11.6% of actual total project costs at completion.



Based on the above-mentioned information, efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)




                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
Appraisal                                                 112.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
ICR Estimate                                              88.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives and overall Efficacy are both rated Substantial. The evidence provided in the ICR point
to the success of the project in increasing agricultural productivity of organized farmers in both the marshlands
and hillsides of sub-watersheds targeted for development. There is also evidence that this was done in an
environmentally sustainable manner. However, more time will be needed to assess the environmental impact.
Also, as a result of project support, the share of commercialized agricultural products, both in the marshlands
and in the hillsides, as well as the number of beneficiaries linked to upstream and downstream value chain
activities (involving women as well as men) increased exceeding their end of project targets. Efficiency is rated
Substantial.

Based on a Substantial rating for each of Relevance, Efficacy and Efficiency, Outcome is rated Satisfactory.



Overall Program Outcome.

The outcomes of the first phase and second phases of the program were rated by IEG as Satisfactory and
Highly Satisfactory, respectively. These ratings combined with a Satisfactory outcome rating for the third and
last phase confirm the success of the program in achieving its stated objectives which were to: help the
Government of Rwanda achieve its strategic goal of unlocking rural growth in order to increase incomes and
reduce poverty.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (p. 24, para 78) rated the risk to development outcome (RDO) as low. The following points were
discussed in the ICR with potential impact on RDO:

      Financial sustainability of farmer organizations. 51 cooperatives were registered with the Rwanda
       Cooperative Agency (RCA) and all of them received the needed skill training regarding governance,
       financial management and agribusiness. However, cooperatives established late in the
       implementation cycle (including most in the hillsides) would require additional capacity building for 2-3

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



       years before achieving financial sustainability. Some cooperatives had limited resources to pay their
       staff and cover operational costs. Continuing the efforts to link with potential buyers, such as Africa
       Improved Food (AIF), Rwanda Grain and Cereals Corporation (RGCC) would help address these
       concerns.
      Sustainability of irrigation infrastructure. A tripartite Irrigation Management Transfer Agreement
       (IMTAs) was signed between WUAs, the districts and the Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources
       Development Board for all the project-financed irrigation infrastructure. The IMTAs detailed
       responsibilities among the different agencies for the management of the irrigation infrastructure as
       well as water cost recovery charges. At project closing, cost recovery for the irrigated
       areas reached about 95%. Collected water use fees for each scheme were composed of operation
       and maintenance of an irrigation scheme, reserve fund for major water infrastructure repairs and an
       irrigation trust fund for contribution to other government irrigation programs. WUAs as well as
       districts noted the need for additional engineering and other skills required for system
       maintenance. WUAs would further benefit from continuing capacity building regarding the operation
       and maintenance of project-developed irrigation infrastructure. The ICR (p. 24, para 80) noted
       that capacity building efforts would be supported through the on-going Sustainable Agriculture
       Intensification and Food Security Project.
      Environmental sustainability. The implementation of irrigation and drainage systems allowed the
       exploitation of marshlands and contributed among other things to improve rice-cropping
       intensification. To improve environmental sustainability, the project put in place buffer zones to
       handle the drainage water. Continued monitoring of water quality in the buffer zones is important to
       ensure that levels of pollutants are kept in check.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        It is noteworthy that this project was the third and final phase of an Adaptable Program Loan
          (APL) supporting the Rural Sector in Rwanda since 2001.
         Apart from the reference to "women and men" in the second part of the PDO, objectives were
          clear and focused and in-line with the Government priorities for the agricultural sector.
         Design was double focused on increasing productivity and commercialization of marshland and
          adjacent hillside agriculture. Design benefitted from the experience and lessons learned from
          phase 1 and 2 of the program. Four key lessons were reflected in the design of the third phase: (i)
          improving farmers’ business skills through the promotion of participatory value chain approaches,
          (ii) enhancing farmers’ capacity for the operation and maintenance through close coordination
          between the infrastructure development and capacity building, (iii) providing adequate resources
          for the capacity building activities, and (iv) establishing adequate budget with higher contingencies
          to reduce the risk of cost over-runs during project implementation.


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



        Six risks were identified at appraisal, three were rated moderate and three were rated low.
         While currency depreciation risk may have been underestimated, "it was well managed using
         project contingency funds and did not affect the project outcomes (ICR, p. 23, para 75)."
        According to the ICR (p. 23, para 75) the project had clear institutional arrangements and an
         adequate financial management system in place.
        M&E suffered from minor design shortcomings, but overall the M&E system was sound (see
         section 9 for more details).
        Based on the above-mentioned information, Quality at Entry is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted regular missions to support the project. However, the ICR did not report the exact
 number of supervision mission conducted. According to the ICR (p. 23, para 76) the Bank missions had
 adequate resources and included relevant expertise to assess progress along all project components and
 activities. Mission also included a specialist to cover the implementation of environmental and social
 safeguards aspects of the project. The project supervision missions were frequently combined with the
 supervision of the Land Husbandry, Water Harvesting and Hillside Irrigation project. This facilitated
 efficiency gains and synergies between both projects (ICR, p. 23, para 76). The Mid-Term Review (MTR)
 flagged the need for a budget reallocation between components, and the currency exchange loss-which
 was resolved by tapping into the project's contingency funds (ICR, p. 23, para 76). The project team
 dropped the activity that aimed to develop irrigation with shallow groundwater after detailed studies
 revealed that it was an unfeasible approach in the selected sites. In a further communication, the project
 team explained that "at appraisal it was decided that this technology was going to be piloted on only 200-
 300 ha out of the targeted 6,000 ha (later 7,000 ha) of irrigated area supported by the project. However, the
 feasibility studies were completed by project MTR, and showed that on some sites there wasn’t enough
 ground water to allow the use of the shallow aquifer technology (technically not feasible), while on other
 sites it was too expensive to use (economically not feasible). The government and the Bank agreed, at
 project MTR, to drop this technology for these reasons. Given the initial small footprint of this technology,
 the decision did not have any significant impact on either component costs or on the ability to meet
 irrigation specific targets."

 The project's FM system was adequate throughout implementation (see section 10 for more details).

 Based on the above-mentioned information, Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 With Quality at Entry and Quality of Supervision both rated Satisfactory, overall, the Bank Performance is
 rated Satisfactory despite some minor shortcomings regarding the M&E framework.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD did not include a Theory of Change which was not required at that time of appraisal. Nonetheless,
 the ICR (pages 6 & 7) included a detailed Theory of Change that reflected the key assumptions and the
 relation between the project inputs, outputs and expected outcomes.

 The M&E system for phase 3 was built on that of phase 2, and was fully aligned with the Ministry of
 Agriculture and Animal Resources M&E system. The M&E units of phase 3 and that of the Land
 Husbandry, Water Harvesting and Hillside Irrigation project were merged to streamline processes and to
 increase efficiency at project and sector levels. The merged unit benefited from the extensive experience of
 Rural Sector Support Project on one hand and from the specific experience of Land Husbandry, Water
 Harvesting and Hillside Irrigation project working on the hillsides on the other.

 The achievements of the PDO were to be assessed through four PDO level indicators. These were relevant
 and measurable and included baselines at the appraisal stage. However, the ICR (p. 20, para 58) reported
 that "there were some methodological shortcomings primarily in the definition of the indicators for
 agricultural productivity in irrigated marshlands and non-irrigated hillsides." These were resolved during
 implementation.

  The Results Framework also included ten intermediate outcome indicators to assess the achievements
 under the project's components. These indicators were linked to the project activities, measurable and had
 baselines where relevant.

 Overall M&E design was sound and benefitted from the experience built under the previous two phases of
 the program.




b. M&E Implementation
  The Project relied on several data collection methods. For example, production and marketing related
  data were collected through Project cooperatives’ seasonal reports, complemented by bi-annual surveys.
  Validation of data collected from cooperatives was done through field visits in a sample of plots.
  Infrastructure and land husbandry related data was collected by district level M&E specialists and
  triangulated with contractors’ reports.




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



  Overall, monitoring of progress across all project components was detailed and timely (ICR, p. 20, para
  59). Except for adjusting targets upwards following the additional financing, there were no changes in
  indicators or M&E methodology during project implementation.

  Using the same M&E unit to monitor both projects (Rural Sector Support Project 3 and the Land
  Husbandry, Water Harvesting and Hillside Irrigation project) was efficient since both projects relied on the
  same guidelines and M&E manuals as well as the same data collection process.




c. M&E Utilization
   The monitored indicators generated time series and comparisons across the project beneficiaries and
  sites, which according to the ICR (p. 20, para59) were solid and reliable. Beneficiary surveys were
  extensively used (biannually, for several indicators). According to the ICR (p. 21, para 61) the
  information generated by the project’s M&E system was routinely used for operational decisions
  throughout project implementation; it was also readily available for review and action during World Bank
  missions." The data generated by the project's M&E system was also used in the preparing the ICR.



  Overall, the Quality of M&E is rated Substantial. Design was sound with some minor shortcomings
  regarding definition of indicators, implementation was timely and generated detailed data, and utilization
  benefitted from the generated data to inform operational decisions.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was categorized as an Environmental Screening Category B – Partial Assessment. At the
   appraisal stage, the project triggered the following six safeguard policies: OP 4.01- Environmental
   Assessment, OP 4.04 – Natural Habitats, OP 4.09 – Pest Management, OP 4.11 – Physical Cultural
   Resources, OP 4.37 – Safety of Dams, and OP 7.50 – International Waterways. Environmental impacts
   were likely to be short term, site-specific, non-sensitive or irreversible, and in every case, mitigation
   measures could be designed to reduce the negative impacts. An Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF) was prepared by the implementation team based on the earlier ESMF prepared for the
   phase 2 project. The project team also updated the phase 2 Pest Management Plan (PMP) to cover the
   project's focus on a wider range of crops. The updated ESMF and PMP were reviewed by the Bank and
   found to be satisfactory. Both the ESMF and PMP were disclosed in the World Bank InfoShop (on
   November 28, 2011). According to the ICR (p. 22, para 66) "awareness raising campaigns and safeguards
   training was conducted for all implementation partners, before implementation of sub-projects began."



                                                                                                   Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



  The project later triggered the policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) and consequently 16
  Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) were prepared. There were 4,737 Project Affected Households (PAHs),
  of which 2 required relocation and were compensated in cash; there were 171 vulnerable project affected
  persons (PAPs) who were offered additional assistance. According to the ICR (p. 22, para 68) "all the
  project affected households (PAHs) were compensated as per the Rwanda expropriation law and World
  Bank policy on involuntary resettlement." The total compensation amount used for the project affected
  households was US$0.88 million. In total, 113.9 ha of private land were acquired for the project activities.
  The Project established and operationalized Grievance Redress Committees (GRCs) in all subproject sites.
  Ninety two common grievances were recorded, and all were resolved (ICR, p. 22, para 70).

  The ICR did not include an explicit statement of compliance with the triggered safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. According to the ICR (p. 22, para 71) the financial management (FM) system for
  the project was adequate. The FM benefitted from low staff turnover as this helped build and maintain
  capacity within the implementation unit. The quality of the financial reports improved overtime, and reports
  were submitted on time to the Bank with unqualified audit opinion on financial statement. The ICR (p. 23,
  paras 71) also reported that FM was rated satisfactory throughout the implementation period.



  Procurement. Procurement suffered from delays during the first few years of the project. This impacted
  the planned construction of some works. Initial procurement delays stemmed from "non-responsive bids
  due to lack of capacity of local contractors to (undertake contracts for the construction of) dams and
  irrigation (works), lack of realistic procurement plan, low efficiency of internal tender committee and
  inadequate contract monitoring function" (ICR, p. 23, para 72). Procurement benefitted from the support of
  the Bank procurement specialist. The implementation unit also worked with the Bank team to improve
  procurement performance by following the Bank's recommendations. Procurement function improved
  starting mid-2015. Procurement operations were carried out in accordance with the Bank's procurement
  rules and guidelines (ICR, p. 23, para 72). In 2017, the procurement unit suffered from understaffing and
  procurement rating was downgraded to moderately satisfactory. That said, the ICR (p. 23, para 73)
  reported that despite the staffing issue, the existing staff managed to handle the work load because the
  project was approaching its closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Positive.



                                                                                                  Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



   Supplemental income and environmental benefits from composting. The Project introduced
   composting and trained farmers accordingly mainly to improve soil fertility on the hillsides. Farmers
   grouped in SHGs collected a total income of about US$588,454 from the surplus of compost sold. This
   benefited mostly landless rural dwellers. At the same time, composting helped combat climate change by
   sequestering carbon, through converting waste materials into organic fertilizers.

   Strengthening of the rice milling industry in Rwanda. By increasing rice production throughout the
   country and by better organizing its harvest and collection, the project has greatly contributed to the
   strengthening of the rice milling industry in Rwanda. With demand growing over the years and the project
   helping boost the rice supply, the rice milling sector has grown considerably, to employ thousands of
   traders and millers. This shows the maturity of the institutions that were supported by the project, and the
   potential for future sustainability.




d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included three lessons. The following are emphasized with some adaptation of language:

      Important impacts can be achieved when a strategically relevant program/approach is
       continued and perfected over time. The project experience emphasized the importance of
       continuity and strategic articulation. This is what happened during the three phases of the
       project, which built one upon another. Despite its difficult start, the first phase managed to
       turn around and provide valuable lessons and direction to the next two phases. The
       Government’s long-term vision for the agriculture sector, articulated in the Vision documents
       and in the successive Strategic Plans for the Transformation of Agriculture (PSTA)
       generations, was equally a determining success factor. It enabled pursuing a coherent policy
       in the sector and government commitment to stay on course, across over a decade of the
       program interventions, under a stable regulatory and institutional environment.
      Successful agriculture-food value chain development requires the following elements:
       sensitization, technology dissemination, aggregation, value chain partnerships,

                                                                                                    Page 20 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)



        complementary infrastructure, and soft-skill development. The project focused on
        sensitization, demonstration plots and farmer field schools to demonstrate the achievable
        benefits. This facilitated technology dissemination which ensured both a reduction in the
        input costs and high adoption rates among producers. Aggregation of farmer
        organizations empowered small agricultural producers to establish themselves up-and down-
        stream along their respective value chains. Through supporting a holistic approach to value
        chain development, the project ensured that no gaps were left on the path from farm to
        market.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  An assessment will be useful to further validate the impact and sustainability of the three-phase program of
  agricultural transformation. An assessment would also be useful, inter alia, in generating relevant lessons on
  what worked.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written. It provided thorough coverage on the project activities and candidly reported on
shortcomings. Discussion of outcomes was logical and relied on what the project achieved on the ground. The
ICR included a detailed ex post EFA that provided a good justification for the feasibility of the project
investments. The ICR also included several data rich annexes that helped document the project achievements
and implementation experience. A weakness was the absence of any explicit statements regarding compliance
of project management with World Bank safeguards.



Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 21 of 22
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)




                                                                                Page 22 of 22
