     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Health SWAP (FY10) (P074091)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0021651

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P074091                                     KE-Health SWAP (FY10)

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Kenya                                       Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-47710,IDA-50340,IDA-53670,TF-          31-Mar-2015                                           207,736,708.00
 16027,TF-90490

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Jun-2010                                30-Jun-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                      21,218,875.00

 Revised Commitment                            213,399,748.57                                      20,950,827.83

 Actual                                        207,757,255.96                                      20,950,827.83




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Behrens                      IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The original Project Development Objective (PDO) for the Health Sector Support Project (HSSP) set out in the
   Financing Agreement (page 5) was to support Kenya’s National Health Sector Strategic Plan 2005-2012 (“the
   Program”) and improve: "(i) the delivery of essential health services in the Recipient’s territory, especially for
   the poor; and (ii) the effectiveness of planning, financing, and procurement of pharmaceuticals and medical
   supplies."


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Health SWAP (FY10) (P074091)




   At a November 2011 restructuring and Additional Financing (AF), the PDO was revised: "improve: (i) the
   delivery of essential health services in the Recipient’s territory, especially the poor and the drought affected
   populations; and (ii) the effectiveness of planning, financing, and procurement of pharmaceuticals and
   medical supplies."



   At a December 2013 restructuring and AF, the PDO was revised again: "improve (i) the delivery of quality
   essential health and nutrition services and utilization by women and children among the poor and drought
   affected populations; and (ii) the effectiveness of planning, financing, procurement of pharmaceuticals and
   medical supplies.”



   At both restructurings/AFs, the original thrust of the PDO was maintained while targets were revised upwards
   and refined, essentially increasing quality and expanding coverage of project activities, and recognizing the
   need for focusing more on drought-affected populations (part of the country was struck by a severe drought
   early during project implementation). The formulation of the PDO was revised accordingly. At the PDO
   remained materially the same and the project's scope was increased in accordance with AF, a split rating will
   not be performed. Assessment of efficacy will be based on the following objectives, consistent across the
   project's lifetime:



   Objective 1: to improve the delivery and utilization of quality essential health and nutrition services for the
   poor and drought-affected populations, especially women and children.



   Objective 2: to improve the effectiveness of planning, financing, and procurement of pharmaceutical and
   medical supplies.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  30-Nov-2011

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    KE-Health SWAP (FY10) (P074091)



d. Components
  The project had two components:


  Component 1. Effective and transparent implementation of the Kenya Essential Package for Health
  (KEPH) through Health Services Support Fund (HSSF) grants and performance strengthening
  (estimated cost at appraisal US$ 46 million; actual cost US$109.66 million) consisted of two
  subcomponents: (i) a project-funded HSSF for financing the implementation of the KEPH at community
  levels; and (ii) activities to strengthen governance and stewardship functions in the delivery of essential
  health services.



  Sub-component 1.1, Health Sector Services Fund, included (i) the provision of direct cash transfers
  through HSSP to sub-district and community-level health services for them to implement the KEPH. This
  was to ensure the availability of sufficient resources to implement each facility's Annual Operational Plan for
  addressing preventive, promotive, and curative services; and (ii) capacity building in the management of
  health facilities. The arrangement was to support the government’s policy to delegate responsibility for
  health service provision to the community level.


  Sub-component 1.2, Health sector governance and stewardship, addressed governance and
  stewardship functions of the two health ministries -- the Ministry of Medical Services (MOMS) and the
  Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) -- for enhanced service delivery. Activities included: (i) the phased
  implementation of health financing reforms through selective pilots, capacity building, and evaluations,
  focusing on approaches for reaching the poor with health insurance coverage; (ii) support for the KEPH
  referral system through capacity building for district hospitals; (iii) health care waste management; (iv)
  strengthening sector governance by improving the management information systems (MIS) and monitoring
  and evaluation (M&E) in the two ministries, monitoring procurement and carrying out performance audits,
  and training of staff in World Bank procurement and financial management procedures.


  Component 2. Availability of essential health commodities and supply chain management
  reform (estimated cost at appraisal US$54 million; actual cost US$98.10 million) consisted of two sub-
  components: availability of essential health commodities, and supply chain management reform.


  Sub-component 2.1, Commodities, was aimed at ensuring availability of medicines and medical supplies,
  and consequently enhancing quality of care provided at the lower levels of the public health system. A
  reliable and steady supply of essential medicines and medical supplies (EMMS) to front-line rural health
  facilities (levels 2 and 3) was to be established through the build-up of a reasonable buffer stock of these
  commodities at the medical supplies authority (KEMSA), as well as reforms of the supply chain system.
  The project was also to support reforms in the flow of funds from the Ministry of Finance, the definition of
  the EMMS list, the billing system of the KEMSA to cover distribution costs, capacity development, and
  development of supplementary commodity services for hospitals.


  Sub-component 2.2, Strengthening governance and institutional reforms to enhance the efficiency


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Health SWAP (FY10) (P074091)



   and transparency of KEMSA, was to support the procurement of EMMS commodities and the reform
   process, strengthening KEMSA and the health ministries in the key functions of planning, procuring, and
   managing critical commodities, in conjunction with other development partners.



   At the 2011 restructuring, a new activity was added to the first component to.deliver health and nutrition
   services to populations affected by the drought, and the second component was revised to scale up the
   supply of essential health and nutrition commodities for drought-affected areas.


   At the 2013 restructuring, Component 1 was again revised to scale up support to the HSSF, to
   introduce results-based financing (RBF) in health facilities in arid and semi-arid areas, to implement free
   maternity services, and to launch a first phase of a program of health insurance subsidies for the poor.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project costs and financing. Total project cost at appraisal was estimated at US$100 million equivalent,
   financed with an IDA Credit. The project was implemented under a Sector-Wide Approach (SWAp)
   arrangement, with several donors operating under a Joint Program of Work and Financing specified in a
   Joint Financing Agreement (JFA) (ICR, page 44). During a first Level 1 restructuring approved by the
   Executive Directors on November 30, 2011, additional financing of US$56.8 million was provided from the
   IDA Crisis Response Window. A second Level 1 restructuring was approved by the Executive Directors on
   December 3, 2013, providing an additional US$41 million from a multi-donor trust fund. Actual
   disbursements at project closing were US$207.76 million.



   Borrower contribution. None



   Dates. The project was approved on June 29, 2010, and became effective on September 30, 2010. The
   original closing date was March 31, 2015, but it was extended twice – a first time at the December 2013
   restructuring from March 31, 2015, to December 31, 2016; and a second time during a Level 2 restructuring
   in October 2016, extending the closing date to June 30, 2018, to allow completion of project activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Project objectives were highly relevant to the country situation, and to government and Bank strategy. A
generally well-performing economy had hit a down-turn at the time of the international economic crisis,
which roughly coincided with project preparation. Despite the overall positive economic performance,

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      KE-Health SWAP (FY10) (P074091)



               health outcomes, in particular child and maternal health outcomes, had been lagging. This lag reflected
               systemic challenges at lower levels of the system, where mainly the poor seek care. These
               challenges included shortfalls in overall public financing and the allocation of resources between different
               levels in the system to the disadvantage of the lower levels of the system. Government policy reflected in
               the Letter of Sector Policy that underlies the project included a series of reforms to address the challenges:
               nationwide provision of essential services based on standard norms promoting the delivery of quality
               services (the KEPH); financing policy; human resource management; supply chain management; and a
               community strategy to empower communities to participate in shaping the provision of health services. The
               project addressed two reform areas – direct financing of frontline health services; and procurement and
               supply chain management. This aligned with two of the three domains of engagement in the Bank’s
               Country Partnership Strategy for Kenya FY14-FY18, which remains relevant. It accords with Outcome 5 of
               Domain 2 in the strategy, human resource development for shared prosperity; and with all three outcomes
               in Domain 3: better provision of health and sanitation services by counties, adequate systems to monitor
               performance of services delivered by counties, and heightened transparency and accountability in the use
               of public resources, particularly at the county level.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the delivery and utilization of quality essential health and nutrition services for the poor and
                             drought-affected populations, especially women and children.

                             Rationale
                             The objective was to be achieved by the provision of HSSF grants to all primary health care facilities that met
                             core staffing needs and financial management requirements for effective delivery of the KEPH. To meet
                             those requirements, capacity building was provided to county health teams in financial and health facility
                             management.



                             Outputs


                             Delivery of KEPH was improved by the following:


                             • People with access to a basic package of health and nutrition health services reached 47 million - practically
                             the whole population - compared to an original target of 30.5 million.

                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE-Health SWAP (FY10) (P074091)



• Facility management committees were activated as indicated by 83 percent of such committees having
quarterly meetings, compared to a target of 90 percent and baselines of 27 percent (level 2 facilities) and 34
percent (level 3 facilities).
• A total of 19,300 health workers were trained, compared to an original target of 35,000.
• A regular flow of funds to counties and health facilities was ensured by the HSSF.
• Planning and procurement of medicines and medical supplies was improved (part of Objective 2).
• RBF was introduced on a pilot basis in 21 arid and semi-arid counties, including 1,800 health facilities.


Outcomes


The number of outpatient visits to health facilities offering KEPH increased from 25.9 million at the start of the
project to 50.9 million at project completion, against an original target 29.3 million. However, the ICR (page
17) also reported on the preliminary findings of the 2018 Household Health Expenditure and Utilization
Survey. That survey, comparing with the results of a 2013 survey, indicates that per capita utilization rates
remained flat between the two periods, as did the total number of visits at 9.1 million, vastly below the facility-
recorded numbers. The ICR did not explain this apparent discrepancy. Female outpatient visits totaled 34.4
million (target 16.1 million, baseline 14.2 million).


The ICR (page 18) stated that the provision of HSSF grants increased annual operational budgets for lower-
level health facilities (amounts were not specified); improved efficiency of spending, reducing irregular use of
funds from 21 percent to 5 percent of facilities; and increased proper book-keeping from 53 percent to 78
percent of facilities. A government agency evaluation (cited in the ICR, page 18) noted that the quality of
service, including the quality of care, staff motivation, and patient satisfaction, also increased, but supporting
data were not provided. However, with the decentralization of health operations and devolution of
responsibilities to counties, the program experienced challenges with funds flows and reporting that disrupted
both HSSF and RBF processes and reduced their positive impact. The latter, in particular, experienced
difficulties: according to the ICR (para. 41), only two transfers were made during the project period, and
utilization of funds (for essential equipment and nutrition commodities) was low.


Over 15 million people (moderately malnourished children under five and pregnant and lactating women) in
drought-affected areas received health care services and relevant food supplements, compared to a target of
5.5 million. The share of severely malnourished children under five who recovered after receiving treatment
totaled 84 percent, compared to a target of 60 percent.


The number of women receiving free delivery services according to quality norms at public health facilities
totaled 604,500, against a target of 550,000 and a baseline of 454,000.


The number of immunized children totaled 11.1 million, compared to a target of 18 million and a baseline of
11.9 million.


Health insurance coverage for poor and vulnerable households reached 181,500 households, compared to a

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE-Health SWAP (FY10) (P074091)



target of 182,000 households, representing about 50 percent of Kenya’s orphaned and vulnerable
children. An impact evaluation (cited in the ICR, page 17) concluded that health insurance subsides for the
poor increased utilization of health services and reduced their share in household expenditures. The average
number of hospitalizations per household per annum increased from 1.4 to 1.6, compared to a decline of 1.6
to 1.3 in a control group. In addition, the subsidy was estimated to have reduced health spending by 6.8
percent as a share of household expenditures.



Summary. Practically the whole population now has access to essential health and nutrition services, albeit
through services with a particular focus on the poor. The project supported lower level health facilities mainly
used by the poor; targeted drought-affected populations; and supported rollout of a health insurance subsidy
scheme for the poor. Outpatient visits to Level 1, 2, and 3 services (services at sub-national levels) almost
doubled; in drought-stricken areas they almost tripled. Female outpatient visits increased by more than 140
percent, while women taking advantage of free delivery increased by 33 percent. Immunizations,
however, remained flat. Decentralization has disrupted the flow of funds under the HSSF as well as the RBF
schemes, as the timely provision of funds for planning and operational purposes has become
uncertain. Overall, however, the shortcomings were outweighed by the achievements in access to and quality
of nutrition and health services, especially for women, children, and drought-affected populations.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the effectiveness of planning, financing, procurement of pharmaceutical and medical supplies.

Rationale
The objective was to improve the efficiency of the medical supplies authority, KEMSA, by introducing reforms
to the supply chain, establishing a buffer stock of essential medicines and medical supplies, and introducing
more effective procurement procedures, all to ensure a reliable supply of medicines and medical supplies.



Planning. Management of the supply chain for medicines and medical supplies in KEMSA was reformed
by integrating previously separate vertical supply chains into a single system. However, at the same time,
counties were made responsible for planning and managing their respective drug and medical supply needs,
something they were not equipped to do, in all likelihood reducing efforts at increased efficiency in
planning. The ICR provided no information on the impact of the decentralization reform to planning in the
provision of medicines and medical supplies. It did, however, indicate that “after devolution, many counties
failed to order and pay for essential medicines from KEMSA on time, increasing stock-outs" (ICR, page 20).




                                                                                                  Page 7 of 15
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         KE-Health SWAP (FY10) (P074091)



                      Financing. In order to adequately resource KEMSA in procuring medicines and medical supplies, the project
                      financed the establishment of a buffer stock of medicines and supplies; this supported the existing
                      mechanism of reimbursement of KEMSA by the Ministry of Health. Under this structure, KEMSA now is able
                      to sell medicines and medical supplies on a revolving fund basis, responding to the needs of 47 counties.



                      Procurement. With predictability of financing in place, KEMSA was able to attain a 100 percent completion
                      rate of planned procurements, against a target of 60 percent. KEMSA was also able to reach a value fill rate
                      of 83 percent, against a target of 80 percent and a baseline of 73 percent.



                      Summary: Mechanisms were put into place that plausibly ensured the timely availability of essential
                      medicines and medical supplies, as indicated by value fill ratios and completed procurement orders. Any
                      disconnect that may arise in financing or delivery in the supply chain is likely to be driven by external factors,
                      notably a still-incomplete decentralization reform, not necessarily by issues in the new medicines and
                      commodities supply system.



                      Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale
The first objective - provision and use of essential services - was largely met, despite the disruptions created by
the decentralization of health operations to county levels. Services may have been affected by the
decentralization, notably through disruptions to the provision of medicines and medical supplies, which may have
had some effect on health outcomes. However, the project does not offer any definite indications that this might
have been the case. The second objective was substantially achieved. Overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial


 5. Efficiency
No efficiency analysis was undertaken in the PAD. The ICR (pages 48-50) included an economic analysis of the
delivery of KEPH based on income from mothers’ lives saved, where the internal rate of return was 9.9
percent. Using a discount rate of 3 percent and a net present value of US$60.9 million, benefits
outweighed costs, with a benefit-cost ratio of 1.7:1. Increasing the discount rate to 5 percent still yielded a
positive return (US$3.4 million) and a benefit-cost ratio of 1.04:1. The analysis did not include the effects of
child health and nutrition. Nutrition data was unavailable, though experience indicates that emergency


                                                                                                                           Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE-Health SWAP (FY10) (P074091)



supplementary feeding programs do tend to be modestly cost-effective; in this case, the ICR team considered
the economic benefits to be minimal. Supporting the intervention package (KEPH), which included cost-
effective interventions, also contributed to efficiency. The additional spending on priority cohorts (under AF) is
likely to have provided value for money by dampening the health effects of the crisis.



However, these efficiencies were tempered by the less-than-successful devolution of service delivery to county
levels: the funds flow arrangements under the HSSF and RBF were disrupted, and essential activities were
curtailed (basic repairs, maintenance, and certain administrative functions under the former; and RBF
flows under the latter, where some US$4 million of the proceeds of the project were cancelled). While
procurement of medical equipment and supplies under KEMSA improved as a result of the project, ministry
procurement remained slow and experienced considerable delays, and county-level procurement was
abandoned altogether. In addition, absorption of RBF funds by facilities remained low, due to disbursement
delays and delays in internal clearances in the health ministries (ICR, page 25), staff turnover after the merger of
the MOMS and MOPH (ICR, page 25), and protracted health workers' strikes that lasted for months and
disproportionately impacted front-line facilities serviced by the project (ICR, pages 18 and 25).


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                               9.90
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO is rated high, as the PDO responded to country needs and Bank strategy. Efficacy
for Objective 1 is rated substantial, as indicators related to the increase in scope were all met. Efficacy for
Objective 2 is also rated substantial, noting, however, its sensitivity to the stability of financial flows in the
system. Efficiency is rated modest. These ratings are indicative of moderate shortcomings in the project's
preparation and implementation, and Outcome is therefore rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE-Health SWAP (FY10) (P074091)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project helped set up systems that continue to address priorities in health care in Kenya. A new Bank
project, "Transforming Health Systems for Universal Care" (US$ 150 million, 2015-2021), offers some
assurance that the development outcome of this project will be preserved. However, to a large extent
outcomes – timely delivery of essential services, planning, procurement, and supply chain management --
are dependent on maintaining predictable financial flows that facilitate these activities, and on the success of
the decentralization effort. These are processes that are still taking shape, and there is at least moderate
risk if resource flows are not mastered better than was the case during project implementation. After
devolution, the Danish International Development Agency -- the only other partner financing the HSSF --
withdrew, leaving the Bank as the only financier of that element of the JFA. Many of the other SWAp
structures were similarly impacted by devolution and are not operating as initially envisioned (ICR, page 44).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically relevant, taking into account the country and sector context. It was
  designed as part of a SWAp, ensuring coherence with support provided by other donors and focus in
  areas where the Bank had a comparative advantage, as did the establishment of a SWAp secretariat for
  information sharing. The project also built on the experience of previous Bank projects. Still, the project
  may have been too ambitious. It was developed during a period of administrative reorganization, and
  implementation of the HSSF grant system and RBF would coincide with the devolution of operational
  tasks, including planning and financial management, to sub-national (county) authorities. The latter
  would find it challenging to cope with their new responsibilities, and this would subsequently affect the
  management of drug and medical supply needs. The M&E system (the results framework) could have
  been stronger, especially when flagging behavior changes instigated by the project.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision was managed from the country office, and this was reflected in the responsiveness of the
 project to evolving circumstances in the health sector and the country. In addition to regular supervision,
 and in line with the SWAp, biannual missions were held jointly with other participants. Through AFs and
 project restructurings, the team took a proactive approach in addressing needs as they arose, notably in
 helping address the drought, scaling up project activities to target women and children as project
 beneficiaries, and accommodating delays in finalizing project activities. Still, the project would experience
 flow-of-funds disruptions that would affect implementation of the RBF, and while key indicators were



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Health SWAP (FY10) (P074091)



 revised twice, outcome indicators did not well determine the impact of project interventions on either
 institutional or client behaviors.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 A detailed results framework and monitoring plan were developed during preparation. Data on the majority
 of indicators were to be collected from routine data sources, complemented by surveys where needed.
 Originally, six outcome indicators and fourteen intermediate indicators were to be tracked. All had baseline
 data and targets. Still, the results framework had only two indicators that were specifically focused on
 outcomes: number of project beneficiaries and children immunized for the first objective, and drug stock-
 outs as a proxy for the second objective. This shortcoming was rectified during the AFs, when new
 outcome indicators were introduced to reflect adjustments in the PDO to accommodate drought-affected
 and women and children. A persistent absence was that of institutional indicators measuring the impact of
 change.



b. M&E Implementation
  Results were regularly updated in Implementation Status and Results Reports. The results framework
  was adjusted to changes in the PDO, and indicators were revised accordingly. Two studies – a
  household expenditure survey and a service delivery indicator survey -- were started during
  implementation but were not completed by project closing, and therefore were not able to inform project
  implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project appears to have generated much data that was not used effectively. KEMSA built an MIS,
  but with weak data analysis at the county level its value may have been reduced. Much of the reporting
  that flowed to the Ministry of Health was not shared with key stakeholders, including the Bank, and
  therefore also remained of limited value.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Health SWAP (FY10) (P074091)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental safeguards. The project triggered Operational Policy 4.01, Environmental Assessment,
   and was classified as environmental Category B. The safeguard policy issue concerned handling and
   disposal of medical waste generated by health facilities The project procured incinerators for five hospitals
   and supported training in the handling and disposal of medical waste and infection control. The project
   overall was compliant with the environmental safeguard policy (ICR, page 27).



   Social safeguards. The project was designed to address inequities in access to and utilization of health
   services. It triggered OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples, for which an Indigenous Peoples Planning
   Framework was prepared at appraisal. During implementation, and especially after the AFs, emphasis was
   placed on targeting drought-affected populations and women and children from the arid and semiarid
   regions of Kenya. The poor were also targeted.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. At the project's mid-term review (August 2013), financial management
   arrangements in the central Ministry of Health and counties were reported as adequate. There were no
   outstanding audit issues, and interim financial reports were submitted in a timely manner and in a form
   acceptable to the Bank. However, the advent of devolution disrupted the HSSF financial management
   arrangements and adversely affected the transfer of grants to the health facilities. Many counties were no
   longer submitting financial returns, and by project closure, several issues raised in the audit reports and
   other reviews had not been addressed, including ineligible expenditures of Kshs 296 million and potential
   ineligible expenditure of Kshs 1,166 million. The audit report for the period ending June 30, 2018 also
   noted that the statement of financial assets and liabilities reflected a bank balance of Kshs 1,029
   million as of 30 June 2018. Furthermore, the National Hospital Insurance Fund implementing the health
   insurance subsidies did not submit quarterly reports to the Ministry of Health, and whatever reports there
   were, were not shared with stakeholders and could therefore not inform project implementation. The
   financial management issues are being followed up under the follow-on project.



   Procurement. The bulk of procurement under the project was carried out under component two by
   KEMSA. Prior to the project, procurement by KEMSA experienced major shortcomings, but with support of
   the project, KEMSA made substantial progress in the procurement of essential medicines and
   implementation of procurement plans. In the project design, health facilities were meant to handle small
   procurements.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Health SWAP (FY10) (P074091)



   None reported.



d. Other
   Gender

   The project directly targeted women providing a range of essential reproductive and maternal health
   services. In addition to the 34.4 million women beneficiaries, the project supported over 600,000 women in
   receiving free delivery services that met the quality norms at public health facilities.



   Institutional Strengthening

   While devolution disrupted the project’s fund flow arrangements, the project contributed to building capacity
   of counties to manage fiscal transfers from the government. The reforms of the supply chain management
   system, which were to a large extent supported by the project, have enhanced KEMSA’s institutional
   capacity.



   Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity

   The project was pro-poor. It supported lower level health facilities utilized mainly by the poor; targeted
   drought affected populations by supplying nutrition commodities to manage malnutrition among children
   under five years, pregnant and lactating women; and supported the rollout of the government flagship
   program providing health insurance subsidies to the poor. Furthermore, the RBF program was implemented
   in the 21 semiarid and arid counties where poverty levels are highest in Kenya.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

These lessons are adapted from ICR:


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       KE-Health SWAP (FY10) (P074091)




Being aware of the most vulnerable in a crisis situation can strongly improve outcomes.
Everyone may be vulnerable in a crisis, but some are more so. As the project turned to address
people suffering from the drought, it placed particular emphasis on delivering appropriate services to
high-risk groups, essentially pregnant and lactating women and children under five.



Ongoing administrative reforms may influence how reforms on the ground will play out.
Insufficient attention to administrative reforms may require later adjustments to project design. The
ongoing decentralization process gave new responsibilities for delivering essential health services to
county governments. As a result, project implementation arrangements, including financial
management and procurement, were critically affected, and the implementation of both the HSSF
and RBF programs faltered.



Overly tight project schedules may not be helpful to implementation. Project performance may
often be affected by adherence to tight timetables rather than realities on the ground. The project
closing date was extended twice, in part to accommodate increases in scope, but in part to allow
implementation to be completed.



Direct funding of health facilities requires preparation. Direct transfer of funds to sub-national
health facilities can improve service delivery, increase its relevance, and promote transparency and
accountability. Implementation of both the HSSF and RBF programs faltered in Kenya in the
absence of well-defined roles between the central authority and county levels.



Implementation of complex projects can be facilitated by in-country presence of the task
team. When projects are complex and new procedures are being introduced, close hands-on
assistance by Bank teams can be an important feature of success. This project was complex and
implemented in a challenging context, where the continuity and in-country presence of the task team
was critical to maintain focus.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE-Health SWAP (FY10) (P074091)



The ICR provided a thorough assessment of the project. It covered the critical features in sufficient detail,
providing enough evidence-based information and analysis to allow the ICRR to evaluate the project. It was
sufficiently referenced where necessary. In the absence of a clear results framework in the PAD, the ICR did a
commendable job in setting out the theory of change. The theory of change (or the results framework) could
have been used more rigorously in analyzing the achievement of PDOs and their links to intermediate
outcomes and outputs. That would have facilitated drawing conclusions about the achievements of the project;
as is, one is left a bit interpreting the text. The analysis of efficiency was well structured, and the discussion of
M&E more thorough than is usually the case. Overall, the ICR was relatively clear in its messaging and
responsive to the guidelines.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 15 of 15
