     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Sustainable Coffee Production (P127258)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021693

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P127258                                    BI-Sustainable Coffee Production

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Burundi                                    Environment & Natural Resources


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-11799,TF-14427                          30-Apr-2017                                           4,220,867.68

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Apr-2013                                30-Oct-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              4,233,000.00                                   4,233,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               4,220,867.68                                   4,220,867.68

 Actual                                           4,220,867.68                                   4,220,867.68




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Divya Kapoor                J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the Sustainable Coffee Landscape Project (PADZOC) was “to pilot sustainable land and
   water management practices in the Recipient's coffee landscape” (Global Environment Facility Grant
   Agreement, Schedule 1 and PAD page 6).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Sustainable Coffee Production (P127258)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Sustainable Coffee Landscape Management

   (Appraisal Estimate US$2.82 million; Actual at Project Closing US$2.83 million)

   As defined in the Grant Agreement this component was aimed at improvement of sustainable coffee
   landscape management in target areas*, by: (a) overall support to; and (b) provision of matching grants for
   sub-projects related to, sustainable land and water management, promotion of shade-grown coffee
   plantations, and strengthening the protection and management of the Bururi Forest Nature Reserve; and (c)
   carrying out of studies on the effects of various kinds of shade management on improved coffee production.

   Component 2: Addressing Pollution Point Sources in Coffee Washing Stations (phrased
   ‘Environmentally Sustainable Coffee Processing’ in the Grant Agreement, Schedule 1)

   (Appraisal Estimate US$0.59 million; Actual at Project Closing US$0.24 million)

   This component comprised promotion of environmentally sound processing of coffee cherries in coffee
   washing stations through (a) provision of matching grants for upgrading or establishment of effluent control
   systems at selected washing stations and establishment of standards and regulations to promote the
   environmentally sound operation of coffee washing stations and (b) strengthening of institutional capacity to
   monitor the implementation of sustainable technologies and the enforcement of regulations and policies.

   Component 3: Diversification of Livelihoods

   (Appraisal Estimate US$0.41 million; Actual at Project Closing US$0.43 million)

   This comprised diversification of livelihoods in target areas* through (a) carrying out of a marketing study
   and preparation of an action plan to identify target consumer markets and suitable certification schemes; (b)
   facilitation of certification for select farmer cooperatives and coffee washing stations; (c) piloting of an
   ecotourism initiative in the Bururi Forest Nature Reserve; and (d) provision of matching grants for
   community-based agritourism initiatives in select coffee farms.

   Component 4: Project Management, Knowledge and Learning (Appraisal Estimate US$0.41 million; Actual
   at Project Closing US$0.72 million)

   This comprised project coordination, management and monitoring, preparation of financial audits and
   periodic evaluations and provision of goods, training, operating costs and consultants' services for the said
   purposes. It also included carrying out of specialized impact evaluation on select activities piloted under the
   project, including project key outcomes and success factors; and dissemination of information on shade
   grown coffee, sustainable land management practices and related topics.

   Note* At appraisal the PAD (para 26) defined the target areas as Bubanza province (bordering Kibira
   National Park), Bururi province (where the Bururi Forest Nature Reserve is located), and Muyinga province


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Sustainable Coffee Production (P127258)



   (bordering Ruvubu National Park). At restructuring in February 2017 Kayanza province was added to the
   target areas (ICR, para 31)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost

   Total Appraisal Estimate: US$4.23 million

   Actual Disbursement: US$4.22 million

   Project Financing (ICR datasheet page 2):

   World Bank Financing:

   • GEF Grant Original Estimate US$4.20 million; Actual Disbursement US$4.19 million

   • TerrAfrica Trust Fund Grant Original Estimate US$0.33 million; Actual Disbursement US$0.33 million

   Co-Financing (ICR page 47, Annex 3; Annex 4 where allocations of co-financing totals to project
   components are presented):

         World Bank: “Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Markets Development Project” (PRODEMA) – Grant –
          US$13.5 million
         World Bank: “Lake Victoria Environmental Project” (LVEMP) – Grant – US$5.8 million

   Borrower contribution (ICR page 47, Annex 3):

   • Original Estimate US$0.5 million; Actual Disbursement US$0.5 million (ICR, page 47 - in-kind co-
   financing). The World Bank task team clarified that there was no Government contribution anticipated at
   project design (ICR Data Sheet, ICR page 2) reads $0.

   Key Dates:

   Approval: 30 April 2013

   Effectiveness: 08 June 2012

   Original Closing: 30 April 2017; Actual Closing: 30 October 2018

   Restructuring: 21 February 2017 (The main elements of the restructuring were; change in results
   framework, change in components and cost, change in loan closing date, reallocation between
   disbursement categories, and inclusion of an additional province in the project target area).




3. Relevance of Objectives

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BI-Sustainable Coffee Production (P127258)




               Rationale
               Coffee is the main export crop of Burundi, accounting for more than 60 percent of the country’s total export
               earnings (ICR para 4). Annual gains vary due to cyclical changes in production caused by soil degradation,
               ageing plantations, pests and diseases, exacerbated by climate change. Increased production of sun-grown
               coffee in Burundi has contributed to environmental problems related to land degradation and poor water
               management. In addition, solid and liquid organic waste from coffee washing stations (CWS) is a major
               source of water pollution (ICR para 4) and water degradation. The rationale for World Bank involvement
               was identified in 2010 and comprised the introduction of shade-grown coffee to combat land degradation
               and to increase soil fertility.

               At closing, the project was aligned with Burundi’s 2018 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) that highlights
               the country’s dependence on agricultural land productivity and mitigation of environmental fragility.
               According to the SCD, Burundi’s endowment in natural resources is key to its agricultural productivity and
               socioeconomic development. Although agriculture is the backbone of the economy, many Burundians face
               hunger, malnutrition and stunting. By encouraging agro-ecological practices like polycultures through
               shade-grown coffee practices, fruit trees like banana which form an important part of local diets are grown
               together with coffee plants and contribute to the country’s food supply and food security goals as well. The
               ICR notes (para 39) that the PDO is aligned with GEF-7 strategy which continues to prioritize
               mainstreaming biodiversity, mitigating land degradation, and promoting sustainable forest management.
               The PDO is also relevant for Burundi’s National Coffee Strategy (2015-2021) and the Burundi National
               Development Plan 2018-2027 which aims to promote the coffee sector while protecting the environment.
               Despite the years of political and economic fragility facing Burundi, combined with demographic pressures
               and environmental fragility, the relevance of this project’s objectives continued to be substantial when the
               project closed.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             For the purpose of this review’s assessment of the project’s efficacy the PDO has been partitioned into two
                             sub-objectives so as to focus on the two different issues covered by the PDO as reflected in the project’s
                             activities. The two objectives (referred to in this template as Objective 1 and Objective 2) will be: (i) Pilot
                             Sustainable Land and Water Management Practices in the Coffee Landscape, and (2) Pilot Sustainable
                             Water Management Practices at Coffee Washing Stations in the Coffee Landscape.

                             Objective 1: Pilot sustainable land and water management practices in the coffee landscape.


                                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BI-Sustainable Coffee Production (P127258)




Rationale
The theory of change for this objective is that the development of shade trees in coffee plantations, along with
the introduction of sustainable land and water resource management (SLWM) practices, will reduce land
degradation, improve soil fertility, enhance environmental protection and conservation, and lead to increased
production of high-quality Arabica coffee in Burundi for export and related socio-economic development. This
project is intended to pilot the use of various types of shade trees, together with sustainable land and water
management (SLWM) practices, training programs on shade-grown coffee and SLWM. Access to high value
international markets for shade-grown coffee created an additional incentive for achieving a successful pilot..

Outputs

      Establishment of 28 Farmer Field Schools (FFS), help to stabilize steep slopes through structured,
         time-bound and participatory approaches. The FFS were successfully established and managed by 33
         coffee farmers and extension agents (including eight women). The FFS trained farmers had started to
         interplant field crops, with bananas and some fruit and shade trees in their coffee fields (ICR, para 50)
        Training program for farmers in the target project area on shade-grown coffee and SLWM. Training
         modules on SLWM technologies and practices, as well as a manual on shade-grown coffee were
         produced, validated, and translated in Kirundi (the national language) to facilitate the transfer of
         knowledge to farmers. According to the task team, the preface of this shade-grown coffee manual has
         been signed by the Minister of Agriculture, showing progress towards the institutionalization of shade-
         grown coffee (ICR, para 52 and task team interview). A total of 23,506 individuals (over a target of
         30,000) were trained in SLWM, shade-grown coffee and biodiversity conservation practices (ICR, para
         52).
        Research demonstration sites for shade-grown coffee were established (Original target 12; Actual
         achieved 61).
        A communication plan was designed and implemented with activities including published articles,
         project documentaries, and radio dissemination (target achieved).
        66 sub-projects on SLWM, including restoration activities in the Bururi Natural Forest Reserve
         (RNFB), and 324 sub-projects on shade-grown coffee were financed and implemented. The project
         provided grants totaling 2,535,442,899 Burundi Francs (about US$1,386,285), and beneficiaries
         matched about 10% (ICR para 48).
        These sub-projects benefitted 13,309 households (of which 5,599 were female-headed) and a total of
         4,658 hectares of land were brought under SLWM, forest and shade-grown coffee (against the original
         target of 4,500 ha) (ICR para 48).
        GEF tracking tools were (Sustainable Forest Management, Land Degradation, Biodiversity 1 and 2)
         updated (target of 4 tools was achieved).
        The project supported management of the Bururi Forest Nature Reserve (RNFB), a globally
         recognized biodiversity area, and important to coffee growing areas in terms of hydrology and soil
         fertility. Through the Burundian Office for Environmental Protection, the project achieved the
         following: (i) equipped and trained the eco-guards (in charge of patrolling the Reserve) to camp in the
         forest and work day and night to put an end to the illegal acts of degradation in the reserve and
         rehabilitate the dilapidated buildings of the Burundian Office of Environmental Protection (OBPE) in
         Bururi; (ii) trained surrounding communities and local authorities on the importance and proper
         management of the Reserve; (iii) provided cash-for-work and other incentives to these communities in
         return for forest restoration and rehabilitation work; and (iv) supported the establishment of the
         Reserve boundary (ICR, paras 53-54)


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BI-Sustainable Coffee Production (P127258)



Outcomes

      Cultivation of shade trees like eucalyptus, calliandra, grevillea, cedrella and eucaena plants, as well as
         banana plants helped control erosion and provide an additional source of income for the farmers,
         including for fuelwood (ICR para 49).
        The project supported the creation and operation of three research sites on shade-grown coffee at the
         ISABU centers in Kayanza and Gitega, where data were collected to evaluate coffee growing
         conditions under different shading systems and with different cash crops. Results showed that
         grevillea (shade-tree) and banana (cash crop) were the most popular species associated with coffee
         (ICR, para 52) in Burundi
        The ICR, based on an impact evaluation, provided evidence of the project’s benefits by comparing the
         results of the development of shade trees on a sample of farms in the project area against the
         performance on coffee farms in contiguous “control” areas in Burundi between 2014 and 2018. The
         following statistically significant improvements were measured: (i) the project contributed to an
         increase in the shade-grown coffee adoption rate by 26% among the target beneficiaries compared
         with control arms; (ii) project beneficiaries increased shade-grown coffee trees by an average of 37.7
         trees per farm between 2014 and 2018 in the project area compared with an average of 2.6 trees per
         farm in the control area; (iii) on average, a coffee tree with shade produced 101 grams more roasted
         coffee than a tree without shade – representing an increase in yield of about 20% assuming an
         average annual yield per tree of 1 to 1.5 lbs. of roasted coffee; (iv) using on an index of food scarcity
         the impact evaluation found that between 2014 and 2018 the index declined more on sample farms in
         the project area (24%) than on the sample farms in the control area (13%) and the decline on farms in
         the project area was statistically significant whereas the decline on the control group farms was not.
        Another positive outcome was the integration of the indigenous Batwa community into the planning
         and management of the Bururi National Reserve. The 28 Batwa households, who were previously
         squatting in the center of the Bururi Commune and dependent of the natural resources of the Reserve,
         were organized into community groups and received financial support from the project in the amount
         of 54,288,000 BIF (equivalent to US$30,000) in exchange for helping to protect the Reserve (ICR para
         57).
        As a result of the project’s support to the Bururi Natural Reserve, the main infractions (i.e. sawmilling,
         recurrent bush fires, boundary encroachment) that threatened the Reserve completely stopped (eco-
         guards and community members jointly patrol the forest); 264 ha (out of the total 2,600 ha) of the
         Reserve that was previously being severely degraded by agricultural encroachment practices is now
         at an advanced stage of natural regeneration; the Protected Area Management Effectiveness Tracking
         Tool (PAMETT) score is 8014 (higher than the original target of 5015), indicating a noticeable
         improvement in biodiversity of the Reserve (ICR paras 54-55).

Based on this evidence in the ICR, this review rates the achievement of this objective as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BI-Sustainable Coffee Production (P127258)



Objective 2: Pilot sustainable water management practices in the coffee landscape

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective is that the processing of coffee cherries using improved and regulated
technologies to address pollution sources at coffee washing stations (CWS) would lead to reduced pollution
of rivers and other water courses contributing to reduced water degradation and sustainable environmental
benefits. This project is therefore aimed at the introduction of improved technologies at CWS, with the overall
intended impact of assisting Burundi to improve the environmental sustainability of its coffee landscape.

Outputs

      At the processing phase, environmentally sound standards for CWS were promoted. The project’s
       marketing activity supported certification of selected CWS to better prepare Burundi’s access to niche
       markets.

      Definition of standards and environmental regulations to promote the management and treatment of
       environmentally friendly water at CWS were discussed and agreed during a national workshop and
       submitted to the Regulation Authority of the Coffee Value Chain (ARFIC) – a public enterprise that
       represents the Government of Burundi in the coffee sector – for future adoption (ICR, para 65).

      The project supported the rehabilitation of selected CWS to help address point source pollution to help
       protect the health of waterways as well as better access to higher value markets that require improved
       standards of production. This was done through direct investments in technology improvements at
       selected CWS and support in strengthening policy and regulatory frameworks. Six CWS were
       rehabilitated - two in Bubanza, two in Bururi, one in Muyinga, and one in Ngozi (ICR paras 62-63)

Outcomes

      The project supported agricultural cooperatives and private washing stations by funding capacity
       building activities to improve the treatment and pulping systems for quality coffee at CWSs. After the
       establishment of six CWSs, the coffee cherry pulp was being separated from the water, instead of
       being washed away with the water, thus reducing organic pollution as well as minimizing odors that
       arose from rapid fermentation of the pulp in the water (ICR para 63). Following water and effluent
       quality analysis work in the six CWS, it was reported that, although there were improvements, 4 out of
       8 water quality parameters had yet to reach national standards.

      Following results of the marketing study, the project funded the initial Fairtrade certification costs for
       two of the newly rehabilitated CWS (Bururi and Bubanza). After the project’s mid-term review, two
       other cooperatives (in Musigati and Burunga) were added to the list and are currently in the process of
       obtaining their certificates (para 69)

Based on the information in the ICR the achievement of this objective is rated modest.



Rating
Modest


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       BI-Sustainable Coffee Production (P127258)




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale
Overall Efficacy

This review agrees that achievements under Objective 1 were ‘transformational’ in introducing shade-grown
coffee to Burundi, where previously coffee mono-culture was predominant (ICR para 73). The project’s beneficiary
farmers who adopted the practice of coffee grown under a poly-culture increased and diversified their incomes.
The work done in Bururi, involving the marginalized Batwa community in forest restoration and protection, was
beneficial to both the community and the forest. The direct beneficiaries of the project numbered 17,971
(exceeding the target of 15,000) who benefitted from the total of 408 sub-projects implemented focused on
SLWM, shade- grown coffee, restoration and livelihood activities in the Bururi Reserve associated with agro-
tourism. These were substantial achievements.

On the other hand, with respect to Objective 2 despite the rehabilitation of six targeted CWSs and the installation
of effluent control systems their effectiveness still needs to be improved to comply with the national
standards. This is a crucial issue for Burundi because CWS certification is necessary for attracting higher
international prices for coffee. Plans are in place to achieve the certification of all CWSs in Burundi but the
achievement of the objective of six targeted CWSs in this pilot so far is modest. It was noted amongst the
Lessons from this project in paragraph 119 of the ICR that “It is (therefore) crucial that this be further investigated
and followed up on under the PACSC project, as the new project plans to rehabilitate 80 CWS across the
country.”

The impact evaluation found that substantial achievements of Objective 1 in this pilot project have already had a
spillover effects on farms outside the project area. These positive development in shade-grown coffee will
provide the raw high-quality material for successful growth in the coffee industry. Of course, it will take some
years before the full effect of the improved production technology has an impact on the total production of higher
quality coffee. At that time the need for all CWSs to be certified will be critical. Therefore, despite the shortfall in
the certification of CWSs during this project this review concludes that the overall achievements by the pilot
towards an integrated high-quality coffee production and processing system in Burundi has been substantial.

Diversified Livelihoods

While “Diversified Livelihoods” was one of the project’s activities, it was not included in the project’s objectives
and hence not part of this review and rating of efficacy. Nevertheless, information on the achievements of this
activity is added here.

                       A marketing study was conducted to identify the target markets for high-quality coffee in the region, and
                        appropriate certification systems – particularly for organic, shade-grown coffee, fair trade, superior quality
                        (ICR para 68)

                       The project supported the Batwa community to sustainably develop and manage their new land through
                        the installation of anti-erosion devices, and by encouraging food production through sweet potato crops
                        and Amaranth, primarily aimed at improving the livelihoods of the community. Thus, the Batwa community
                        is expected to benefit from the generated incomes for their daily food needs and with the daily savings
                        (ICR para 58)



                                                                                                                        Page 8 of 16
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        BI-Sustainable Coffee Production (P127258)




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial


 5. Efficiency
The ICR based its economic analysis of the project’s efficiency on net present values at different interest
rates. Annex 4 in the ICR provided estimates of the net present value of the project based on two scenarios
namely (a) coffee production only, and (b) the net present value of coffee production plus other benefits from the
landscape improvement aspects of the project such as other products (fruits and fuel wood), improved soil
structure and reduced soil erosion, and other forest ecosystem benefits like the enhanced environment and
improvements in biodiversity. According to Annex 4 (para 15) the net benefits from coffee production alone
were based on a total increase in the acreage of shade-grown coffee of 470.23 acres in the project areas and
project data on yields and production costs. For the NPV analysis that included net benefits from coffee
production as well as net benefits from landscape improvements, information on the expected value of net
benefits from landscape improvements were based on data used in the project appraisal document for the
Burundi Landscape Restoration and Resilience Project. For each of the basic scenarios the value of coffee
production was valued at farm gate prices (for local markets) and at international prices (for export
markets). The discount rates used for the analysis were 5%, 10% and 20% with a time horizon was 20 years
which was the “maximum duration in which coffee plants are most productive”. ( The assumptions made to
determine the project’s NPV various under the various assumptions were not specified in the ICR. The results
of the analysis in the ICR are shown in the table below.

                                                         Discount Rates
Items
                                                         5%             10%                    20%
(a) NPV from coffee only                                 (US$)          (US$)                  (US$)
      at farm gate coffee price                         (715,054           (989,946)          (1,243.629)

      at international coffee price                     6,499,700          4,108,624          1,902,034
(b) NPV from coffee plus landscape benefits
      at farm gate coffee price                         1,273,296          415,194            (376,700)

      at international coffee price                     8,488,050          5,513.764          2,768,963




As the ICR noted, incremental coffee production valued at the farm-gate price does not result in a positive
NPV. But, with coffee valued at the international price, the NPV is positive and substantial at all discount rates.
As mentioned in the ICR the results of this analysis are significant because “CWS certification and promotion
abroad under PADZOC are important if farmers are to attract foreign businesses and higher prices for coffee”
(para 73).



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BI-Sustainable Coffee Production (P127258)



In the course of a response to IEG from the Bank project team on a draft of this ICR Review, estimates were
provided of internal rates of return (IRRs). Amongst the IRR estimates were IRRs calculated using the total cost
of the project ($4.2 million) in relation to the overall net benefits from the production of shade-grown coffee and
the associated landscape benefits. The results summarized below show clearly substantial efficiency when the
value of incremental coffee production is valued at the international coffee price. The project team underlined
that these IRR estimates were a “lower bound” because, while the total project cost was used in the analysis,
the net benefits from project components other than production of shade-grown coffee were not included in the
analysis due to lack of data.


                   Items
                                                   IRRs
         (a) NPV from coffee only
             at farm gate coffee price            -8.72%

           at international coffee price          15.87%
         (b) NPV from coffee plus
            landscape benefits
             at farm gate coffee price            0.80%

           at international coffee price          21.26%




Finally, the project’s effectiveness in carbon sequestration should be taken into account in assessing overall
efficiency. The ICR included estimates for sequestration in shade grown coffee and because of the prevention of
forest degradation

Efficiency of Carbon sequestration resulting from shade grown coffee: The ICR (Annex 4, para 21) noted
that the project promoted the incorporation of shade in 1,878.95 ha of areas planted with coffee. It stated that
assuming that the above-ground biomass of the shade trees is 195 kg per tree and considering that the baseline
is no shade trees and the increment represents 200 stems per ha, then the biomass is approximately 93,405
kg/ha or 93.4 ton biomass/ha. Given that biomass is around 50% carbon, then the shade trees have generated
around 46.7 ton CO2/ha (19 ton carbon/ha times 44/12 which is the stoichiometric ratio of CO2 to C). Assuming
there is a 20-year rotation, the figure comes to approximately 2.3 ton CO2/ha/yr. Considering that the shade
covers 1,878.95 ha, the total amount of carbon sequestered is about 4,321.59 ton CO2/yr or 86,431.8 ton CO2
assuming 20 years of expected lifetime of the shade and coffee trees.

Efficiency of Carbon benefits as forest degradation is prevented: Using a similar analytical approach the
ICR estimated that the reduced degradation of forests over a 20-year period 4,805 ton of CO2 could be
preserved or rather not emitted into the atmosphere ICR, Annex 4, para 22).

On implementation efficiency, the ICR notes in paras 80 and 95 that there were significant delays in the
implementation of sub-projects under Components 1 and 2, even though the project was using the same
implementation units as PRODEMA (already mentioned as another World Bank project in the same provinces

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BI-Sustainable Coffee Production (P127258)



which co-financed this project), due to delays in recruitment of the SLWM specialist and the lack of baselines for
an impact evaluation. There was no M&E specialist on the project for over a year, with the result that ‘the gap in
M&E was felt by the project (ICR para 95). Delays also occurred due to the fragile political context in the
country, following the Burundian unrest in 2015.

Even after taking account of the shortcomings in operational efficiency, this review rates the project’s efficiency
as a pilot as substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the project’s objectives was Substantial. Overall, the project’s efficacy was rated
substantial despite some shortcomings in the achievement of objective 2. This review agrees with the ICR’s
rating of the project’s efficiency as Substantial. It is this review's assessment that there were minor
shortcomings in this project's achievement of its objectives. Its outcome is therefore rated Satisfactory


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR notes that the activities piloted in this project are being scaled up through World Bank financed
projects addressing “Restoration and Resilience of Landscapes”, and “Coffee Sector Competitiveness” (para
112). However, the ICR also drew attention to some risks to the project’s development outcomes. They
included insecure land tenure, vulnerability to climate change and extreme weather events, as well as
political and social unrest (para 113).



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Sustainable Coffee Production (P127258)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR (para 109) states that the design of this project was based on the World Bank’s Agro-Pastoral
  Productivity and Markets Development Project (PRODEMA) in Burundi and furthered the country’s
  national efforts to improve agricultural productivity. PADZOC used the existing implementation
  arrangements of PRODEMA to implement this project’s activities (i.e. same national project coordination
  team and same regional coordination team). PADZOC built on PRODEMA by selecting 3 provinces
  where PRODEMA was already working. The ICR notes that (para 94), it would have been more efficient
  to conduct the baseline surveys for the impact evaluation prior to effectiveness, given the delays
  experienced subsequently. Overall, the PDO scope was consistent with the financing scale of the project
  (small grant), and the project was ready for implementation given that PADZOC used the existing
  implementation arrangements of PRODEMA to implement project activities, i.e. same national and
  regional project coordination teams, familiar with Bank’s operational, fiduciary and safeguards
  requirements.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (para 110), supervision missions were conducted in a timely manner, and
 videoconferencing was used during the 2015 unrest in Burundi when missions had been suspended. The
 PCU staff were mostly being paid under the PRODEMA project When the latter ended in 2015, there was
 a one-year gap between PRODEMA and the start of the Additional Financing under PRODEMA in 2016;
 during this time, the PADZOC project paid salaries of key staff in the PCU so as not to disrupt project
 activities (ICR para 96). There were significant delays in the implementation of sub-projects under
 components 1 and 2, even while the project was using the same implementation units as PRODEMA
 (another World Bank project in the same provinces), due to delays in recruitment of the SLWM specialist
 and lack of baselines for an impact evaluation (ICR paras 80 and 95). There was no M&E
 specialist engaged in the project for over a year. Delays also occurred due to the fragile context in the
 country, following the Burundian unrest in 2015. Given all the delays incurred by the project (described
 above and in section 5 of the ICRR), the task team recommended restructuring to extend the project by 18
 months to allow completion of all planned activities. Performance reporting was candid and of high quality
 and ISRs were filed in on time (ICR para 110). The ICR also reports that the Bank made adequate
 transition arrangements for the Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project and the Burundi Landscape
 Restoration projects to take over and scale up the PADZOC project’s activities after project closure.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Sustainable Coffee Production (P127258)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The ICR (para 98) affirms that the project’s theory of change was clear and adequate indicators were
 identified to monitor progress towards the PDO. The PADZOC management information system (MIS) was
 based on an already functional and working system of PRODEMA. The MIS incorporated new information
 and data related to biodiversity, sustainable land and water management, and other topics relevant to the
 project, and supplemental training was extended to all relevant staff to cover these new topics. A need to
 further refine some intermediate indicators was identified during the MTR and changes to these indicators
 were made in the 2017 restructuring.

 As noted in Section 8.a. of this review, the intermediate indicator on “Number of tourists visiting new agri-
 tourism and eco-tourism initiatives as a result of the project” was removed (ICR para 91), and the indicator
 “Reduced amount of water utilized for the processing of coffee as a result of the project” was replaced with
 “Coffee Washing Stations (CWS) to meet national effluent discharge standards as a result of the project” as
 these CWS were not constrained by access to water (ICR para 34). Also, during restructuring, the
 establishment of Farmer Field Schools (FFS) were included under the indicator “Research demonstration
 sites for shade-grown coffee” however given the difference in the nature of the activities (FFS are more
 participatory), this could have been a separate additional indicator (ICR para 98).



b. M&E Implementation
  PADZOC built on the monitoring system of PRODEMA to include indicators for PADZOC using the same
  methodology for data collection and aggregation. However, there was a gap in monitoring activities
  between 2016 and 2017 when the national M&E specialist resigned and a new one was recruited, with
  the result that ‘the gap in M&E was felt by the project’ (ICR, para 95). The project conducted an impact
  assessment in collaboration with the World Bank's Development Impact Evaluation (DIME) unit, but as
  mentioned previously, there was significant delay in collecting data for the baseline for the study.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project M&E system was used to track progress towards project objectives and inform project
  management. It informed the restructuring of the project in 2017 and helped highlight the need to
  reallocate funds in order to increase demonstration sites (ICR para 104). The system also helped to
  track the number of infractions in the Bururi Forest Reserve and provided data for the Impact
  Assessment.




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Sustainable Coffee Production (P127258)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as environmental category B partial assessment and triggered the following
   safeguards policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests
   (OP/BP 4.36), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Indigenous People (OP/BP 4.10), and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The Bank task team confirmed to IEG that PADZOC built on the existing
   safeguards instruments of PRODEMA by updating these instruments for PADZOC. An overall
   Environmental and Social Framework (ESMF) was prepared, as well as a Resettlement Plan and an
   Integrated Pest Management Plan, which served to guide the environmental and social management during
   project design and implementation. Overall, safeguard compliance was Satisfactory (ICR, para 106).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   PADZOC used the existing fiduciary system of PRODEMA for financial management, procurement
   management and disbursement (Bank task team advice.

   Financial Management: As per the ICR (para 109), an FM Specialist based in the Bank office in
   Bujumbura carried out regular implementation support missions. The quarterly Interim Unaudited Financial
   Reports were submitted to the Bank for review on time and there were no inconsistencies in the follow-up.
   The latest project audit for the year ending in December 31, 2018 resulted in an unmodified (clean) opinion
   on the project financial statements.

   Procurement: According to the ICR, procurement processes were implemented based on the applicable
   guidelines and in accordance with the procurement plan, which was duly updated, reviewed by the Bank
   and disclosed regularly. Procurement processes and asset verification under the small grants program
   were verified by external auditors as acceptable to the Bank, and no issues were raised.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The pilot actions in PADZOC contributed to scaling-up ongoing and future projects in Burundi (ICR, paras
   87-88 and task team interview), namely the “Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project” (US$55 million) and
   the “Burundi Landscape Restoration and Resilience Project” (US$30 million). The Coffee Sector
   Competitiveness project will scale up the shade-grown coffee practices and the rehabilitation of the coffee
   washing stations. The Landscape project will scale-up the sustainable land and water management
   practices and the work conducted with the Batwa communities (indigenous people) near the Bururi
   Reserve in other protected areas.



                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Sustainable Coffee Production (P127258)




d. Other
   Gender Issues. The ICR states (para 83) that the 40% of the project beneficiaries (17,971) were women
   (short of the 50% original target). Some explanation of what benefits exactly were expected for the women
   would have been useful. For example, were more women expected to enter the labor force or were more
   women expected to get trained in SLWM practices? IEG's interview with the task team confirmed that both
   these benefits were expected, and also that the women were expected to become organized in
   cooperatives to sell more shade-grown coffee.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                  IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR listed three lessons learned from the project. They are summarized below with some
editing.

Introducing shade-grown coffee in Burundi was significant and transformational - but
difficult. Changing deep-rooted practices requires investment of sustained national effort: In this
case, changing from sun-grown coffee trees (from colonial times) until now when the shade-grown
coffee technology project was introduced. The ICR states that it was an exchange visit to see
successful shade-grown coffee practices in Colombia that instigated the Ministry of Agriculture to
request this project. Demonstration sites were set up for sustainable land and water management
practices, and a shade-grown coffee manual was prepared for national adoption. The lesson is that
difficulties facing transformational change can be overcome by a strategy of demonstration.

Integrating indigenous communities in the protection of natural forest reserves is invaluable
for sustainable and continued protection of forests: In this project the integration of the landless
Batwa community, which without changes in their traditional livelihood strategies posed a threat to
forest conservation and biodiversity, were encouraged through participation in forest rehabilitation
using cash-for-work activities which enabled them to acquire land and contribute to forest
protection. It is anticipated that this model will be replicated and scaled up in the context of the
forthcoming Landscape Restoration and Resilience Project, to be financed by the World Bank.

The use of an existing World Bank-experienced project management unit can provide a
useful mechanism for a new project to reduce implementation risks at start up. In this project
the use of the earlier PRODEMA project implementation unit helped accelerate this project’s

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BI-Sustainable Coffee Production (P127258)



implementation and alleviated the impact of delays caused by political unrest, prolonged drought as
well as delays in collecting baseline study data.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

There is good quality evidence and analysis in this interesting ICR. There is candor in the reporting.
Nevertheless, several clarifications were requested of the task team to complete this review and responses
were received. There was sufficient narrative on the project’s implementation, and the impact evaluation
contributed to a strong results-focus. The ICR's quality was rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 16 of 16
