     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB - Education Development Project II (P118187)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021654

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P118187                                     LB - Education Development Project II

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Lebanon                                     Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-79660                                 31-Dec-2016                                         39,951,596.54

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Nov-2010                                30-Jun-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             40,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                              39,951,596.54                                             0.00

 Actual                                          39,951,596.54                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Behrens                    IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (page 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (page 6), the project
   objectives were as follows:

           To improve teaching quality and the learning environment in general education and in
           preschool in the Lebanese Republic; and



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB - Education Development Project II (P118187)



         To increase governance and managerial capacity of the Ministry of Education and Higher
          Education (MEHE) and schools.

   In 2011, the war in neighboring Syria led to an influx of approximately 1.5 million refugees into Lebanon.
   Education, as one of the major public services provided by the government, was significantly impacted by the
   increased enrollment of over 500,000 Syrian students. Therefore, government and Bank priorities shifted from
   sector reform to emergency response. The project design and results framework were revised according to
   this changing sociopolitical context, although the project objectives and outcome targets remained the same.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Early Childhood Education (Appraisal: US$ 15.7 million; Actual: US$ 18.7 million): This component aimed
   to increase the school readiness of Lebanese students upon entry into primary education. Activities
   included: improving the physical classroom space through rehabilitation; enhancing the preschool
   curriculum and learning materials; professional development for preschool teachers; and communication
   and awareness campaigns on the importance of early childhood education.

   2. Supporting Improvements in Quality of Education (Appraisal: US$7.6 million; Actual: US$ 6.1 million):
   This component aimed to support quality learning by focusing on school-level factors and teacher-related
   characteristics that lead to better learning outcomes. Activities included: implementation of a school
   improvement model; training for school administrators; school improvement grants; professional
   development for teachers; and development of a national teacher competency framework.

   3. Education Sector Policy Development and Management (Appraisal: US$ 19.3 million; Actual: US$ 15.1
   million): This component aimed to support the effective management and coordination of the education
   sector. Activities included: review of various regulatory frameworks; streamlining of various administrative
   processes; and strengthening the education management information system.

   Section 4 below notes the activities that were dropped due to project restructurings.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

         The appraised project cost was US$ 42.6 million. The actual project cost was US$ 40.0 million.

   Financing




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB - Education Development Project II (P118187)



         The project was mostly financed by an IBRD loan of US$ 40.0 million, which disbursed US$ 39.95
           million.

   Borrower contribution

         The Borrower was expected to contribute US$ 2.6 million. The ICR indicated that no Borrower
           contribution was provided.

   Dates

         2011: Major events occurred, including the collapse of the national government and the war in
          neighboring Syria, which led to an influx of approximately 1.5 million refugees. This led to a two-year
          time lapse between project approval and project effectiveness, as Parliament could not convene to
          ratify the loan agreement.
         September 2015: A project restructuring was prepared and approved by the Bank; however, the
          government was unable to ratify an amendment to the loan agreement given the uncertain status of
          the national government and lengthy Parliamentary procedures.
         November 2016: Due to the above, the project restructuring was modified to essential changes that
          did not require amendments to the legal agreement, and thus this version of the project restructuring
          moved forward. The modifications included the results framework (indicators), reallocation of
          funds, and an extension of the closing date from December 2016 to December 2017.
         December 2017: The project closing date was extended again from December 2017 to June 2018 to
          allow for completion of activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At the time of project approval, Lebanon was on track to achieve universal primary education, but the
education system still faced several major challenges. Preschool enrollment was low in disadvantaged
areas due to inadequate space and poor teaching and learning environments, leading to an increasing gap
in school readiness and achievement between students in public (low-income) schools and private (high-
income) schools. Private sector provision of education represented two-thirds of schooling for primary and
secondary education, and hence there was an oversupply of teaching staff in public schools (7:1
pupil:teacher ratio) but low levels of teacher quality in part due to minimal in-service teacher training and
weak quality standards for new teacher hiring. Lebanon had completed the first phase of sector reforms and
was moving forward to focusing on quality of learning at all levels. The Bank's Country Assistance Strategy
for FY11-14 identified improved quality of education as a key priority. Hence, the project objectives were
highly relevant at the time of project approval.



Two significant disruptions occurred during the project period in 2011: the collapse of the government and
the war in Syria. The latter led to a significant influx of refugees (approximately 1.5 million), including
children needing to continue their education. Access to and quality of public schools were heavily impacted

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      LB - Education Development Project II (P118187)



               by the drastic increases in enrollment. Other emergency education operations were prepared in response to
               the crisis, in parallel with some modifications to this project in terms of the results framework and
               activities. However, the project objectives remained the same and therefore were less relevant to the new
               context. Increasing access to and equity of education were no longer high priorities. The Bank's Country
               Partnership Framework for FY17-22, while still identifying improved delivery of education services as an
               overall objective in the education sector, emphasized access and the need to respond to the stresses
               placed on the education system due to the refugee crisis.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve teaching quality in preschools

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for the first objective (to improve teaching quality in preschool) and the second objective
                             (to improve the learning environment in preschool) was overall sound. The original design included improving
                             the physical infrastructure of preschools, particularly in disadvantaged areas (i.e. poor and/or remote areas
                             with low enrollment rates), developing learning materials based on an improved preschool curriculum, and
                             training teachers according to agreed national standards. These were all intended to address the significant
                             gap in school readiness between disadvantaged areas (with low quality preschool services) and higher-
                             income communities.



                             Outputs

                                        Provision of training to 790 kindergarten teachers on pedagogical use of new materials (target: 590).

                             Under the restructured project, continuous professional development for teachers was dropped and
                             thus funded by other donors.



                             Outcomes

                             No outcomes reported, including whether there was an increase in the proportion of qualified teachers.



                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LB - Education Development Project II (P118187)




Achievement of this objective is rated Modest due to lack of evidence of outcomes.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the learning environment in preschools

Rationale
Outputs

      Rehabilitation of 162 kindergarten classrooms (target: 153).
      Provision of furniture and learning materials to 306 kindergartens (target: 273).
      Provision of training to 790 kindergarten teachers on pedagogical use of new materials (target: 590).

The parent involvement program and furnishing of teacher training institutes were dropped and thus funded
by other donors.



Outcomes

      The proportion of preschools rated “good” or “excellent” on the Early Childhood Environment Rating
       Scale (ECERS) increased from 3% in 2017 to 44% in 2018 (target: 60%). The proportion of
       preschools rated “inadequate” declined from 86% in 2017 to 22% in 2018. The original baseline from
       2015 was not comparable due to changes in the instrument design. It should be noted that the 2015
       baseline was 36%, meaning that the target of 60% would entail a 24 percentage point increase; with
       the 2017 ECERS, the baseline was reset to 3%, making the end-line result of 44% a 41 percentage
       point increase. This indicates a substantial level of improvement over what was originally expected,
       despite not meeting the formal target of 60%. The ICR (pages 18 and 19) emphasized the "diligent"
       development and implementation of the ECERS. The ICR (page 18) also cited anecdotal evidence on
       strong preschool quality from site visits and interviews with school principals during the ICR mission.



The ICR also reported that the percentage of 3-5 year olds enrolled in kindergarten in the 230 project schools
was 53%, surpassing the target of 20%. This entailed an increase of 6,466 children. Enrollment in non-project
schools was 37%. The increase was largely driven by high demand from Syrian refugees as well as
Lebanese children. While this outcome reflected increased access, it is not clear what impact this increased
enrollment may have had on the "learning environment."



                                                                                                 Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LB - Education Development Project II (P118187)




Achievement of this objective is rated Substantial due to improved scores on the ECERS, although the
timeframe of the results (2017 baseline to 2018 end-line) was very narrow.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve teaching quality in general education

Rationale
The theory of change for third objective (to improve teaching quality in general education) and the
fourth objective (to improve the learning environment in general education) was overall sound, albeit
ambitious for the project period. School-centered development through improved school leadership and
school-based improvement models would improve the learning environment. Teacher professional
development according to a national system of professional standards and models for pre-service training
and continuous professional development were expected to lead to an increased proportion of qualified
teachers and reduction in contract teachers. However, given the time necessary to develop and
institutionalize (legalize) professional standards, frameworks, and training models, the expected impact on the
actual teaching cadre was likely not to materialize for several years.



Outputs

      Adoption of a National Competency Framework that established professional standards for educators.
       The ICR reported that MEHE and other development partners provided teacher professional
       development opportunities in line with the Framework, including an online platform that provided
       online training.
      Provision of training for 291 trainers on teacher training, pedagogical counselor training, and
       psychological counselor training (target: 260).



However,

      Some activities were dropped, including support for evaluating current teacher professional
       development models and deployment and the strategic framework for teacher professional
       development.




                                                                                                 Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LB - Education Development Project II (P118187)



Outcomes

No outcomes reported. Three original PDO indicators -- on the number of schools where at least 60 percent
of the classes in every grade level are being taught using active, learner-centered teaching methods,
reduction in repetition rates and reduction in number of contract teachers -- were dropped.



Achievement of this objective is rated Modest due to lack of evidence.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To improve the learning environment in general education

Rationale
Outputs

      Development of School Improvement Plans (SIPs) in 419 schools (target: 440). Grants in the amount
       of US$7,000 were provided to approved SIPs for teaching materials, minor rehabilitation of schools,
       extracurricular activities, and teacher training. 95% of the schools implemented a self-evaluation
       process to ensure alignment of grant requests with actual needs.
      Provision of training for 291 trainers on teacher training, pedagogical counselor training, and
       psychological counselor training (target: 260).



Outcomes

      95% of project schools prepared SIPs that were approved and under implementation, surpassing the
       target of 75%.



Achievement of this objective is rated Substantial due to implementation of SIPs, which were based on self-
evaluation processes to link grants with needs.



Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LB - Education Development Project II (P118187)




OBJECTIVE 5
Objective
To increase governance and managerial capacity of the Ministry of Education and Higher Education

Rationale
The theory of change for the fifth and sixth objectives (to increase governance and managerial capacity of
MEHE and to increase governance and managerial capacity of schools) was overall sound. The support to
school-based management, development of teacher standards, and the enhancement of the education
management information system (EMIS) was likely to improve capacity to effectively manage schools.



Outputs

      Adoption of National Competency Framework standards into the teacher development curriculum,
       training modules, and preservice training model.
      Implementation of ECERS as an assessment tool to inform decision-making.
      Upgrading of EMIS and staff training, including connecting of EMIS with all public schools and regional
       education offices, automation of data collection and analysis processes to enable more timely and
       reliable data transfer, digitizing of national exam scoring and reporting processes, and training for
       MEHE staff.
      Support for 2011 Trends in Mathematics and Science analysis, including preparation of a final report.

However, the development of a medium-term expenditure framework was dropped (funded by a separate
Bank operation), and changes to the regulatory framework for MEHE were also dropped due to the
low likelihood that such changes could be approved by Parliament in a timely manner.



Outcomes

      MEHE provided teacher professional development training and opportunities in alignment with the
       National Competency Framework, thus supporting the integration of teaching competency standards
       into current teaching practices. MEHE also developed an online platform to enable access to tutorial
       videos, scenarios, and information on professional standards and virtual training.
      The MEHE education information system is now capable of hosting data for all schools and regional
       education offices. Examples of the increased capability of the EMIS were as follows: MEHE was able
       to produce disaggregated student enrollment data ten months faster than in previous years, and data
       on student academic performance and drop out/transition rates were used to inform allocation of
       resources to schools.



Based on the above, achievement of this objective is rated Substantial.




                                                                                                Page 8 of 16
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         LB - Education Development Project II (P118187)




                      Rating
                      Substantial


                      OBJECTIVE 6
                      Objective
                      To increase governance and managerial capacity of schools

                      Rationale
                      Outputs

                            Establishment of school councils in all project schools.
                            Training of 1,181 school administrators on school-based management practices.
                            Implementation of school self-evaluations, including training of 30 school improvement faciltiators to
                             support school leaders.
                            Development of SIPs in 419 schools (target: 440). Grants in the amount of US$7,000 were provided
                             to approved SIPs for teaching materials, minor rehabilitation of schools, extracurricular activities, and
                             teacher training.



                      Outcomes

                            95% of project schools completed the self evaluation process, surpassing the target of 80%. This
                             process was a necessary step to preparing SIPs.
                            95% of project schools had SIPs approved and under implementation, surpassing the target of 75%.
                            The ICR (page 21) reported the following improvements in school management: development of a
                             culture of data-driven decision making, collaborative leadership approach, self-confidence, and
                             partnerships between schools and communities.



                      Based on the above, achievement of this objective is rated Substantial.



                      Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale
Achievement of the following objectives was rated Substantial:

                        Improved learning environment of preschools.
                        Improved learning environment of general education.

                                                                                                                         Page 9 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LB - Education Development Project II (P118187)



      Improved capacity of schools.
      Improved capacity of MEHE.



Achievement of the following objectives was rated Modest:

      Improved teaching quality of preschools.
      Improved teaching quality of general education.



Therefore, the overall Efficacy rating is Substantial, although it should be noted that two of the six objectives
lacked measurable outcome indicators.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial


 5. Efficiency
The economic and financial analysis at appraisal (PAD, Annex 9) justified the investment in improved quality of
education based on international evidence of its effect on economic growth. The case was made for significant
returns on public investment in early childhood education, the efficiency of a school-based management
approach, and benefits of increasing teacher quality. The analysis also attempted to quantify benefits of the
project up to year 2025, in the form of savings for the government from reduced recurrent costs per graduate.
The expected savings was estimated at US$ 523 million, equivalent to 15 percent of the net present value of
total recurrent expenditure during that time period. If the quality improvements lead to an increasing number of
students in public school, then the savings were estimated at 19 percent of the net present value.

The ICR (Annex 4) presented some unit cost comparisons for appraised vs. actual costs. The average cost per
preschool for rehabilitation and furnishing was 23 percent higher than appraised, due to cost increases for the
rehabilitation aspect. However, the unit cost for enrolling an additional child in kindergarten, which
was estimated at appraisal at US$ 5,333 per child, was 37 percent lower at US$3,335. The average cost per
school for the school improvement grant preparation was US$ 14,746 actual, which was 15 percent lower than
estimated at appraisal at US$ 17,333. There were also likely efficiency gains due to shared utilization of tools
with other donor partners, for example UNICEF (competency framework) and USAID (development of the SIP
model).

However, there were significant shortcomings. There was a lengthy delay of 24 months between approval and
effectiveness, and subsequently an 18 month project closing date extension. The ICR suggested that the
accelerated pace of implementation and disbursement during the latter part of the project period led to full
implementation and achievement of outcomes nonetheless. However, although overall project costs remained
within the original financing envelope, there was a reduced project scope due to dropped activities (professional
development for preschool teachers, parent involvement program, furnishing of teacher training institutes,
analysis of current teacher professional development mechanisms, medium term expenditure framework, and

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LB - Education Development Project II (P118187)



review of MEHE regulatory framework). Also, many of the key project activities appeared aimed at increasing
access and equity, while the project objectives were aimed at improving quality; the project therefore expended
considerable resources on activities that were not directly tied to its stated objectives. These factors indicate
Modest efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the project objectives is rated Substantial due to strong alignment with country and Bank
strategies, although the emergence of the Syrian refugee crisis in 2011 shifted priority away from sector reform
to emergency response. Efficacy is rated Substantial due to achievements in improving the learning
environment in preschools and general education and in improving capacity of the MEHE and schools; however,
there was insufficient evidence on achievements in improving teaching quality in preschools and general
education. Efficiency is rated Modest due to mixed evidence on appraised unit costs vs. actual costs, as well as
lengthy delays and numerous dropped activities. Due to these moderate shortcomings in Efficacy and
Efficiency, overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Several key activities are being continued under the Bank's current Reaching All Children with Education
2 (P159470, approved in FY2017 for US$ 100.0 million) operation, including teacher training, EMIS data
collection, and development of teacher standards. Other capacity strengthening activities were
institutionalized into MEHE processes, such as teacher professional development, the school improvement



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB - Education Development Project II (P118187)



model, and M&E data collection and reporting. However, the highly uncertain political situation and status of
Syrian refugees puts the development outcomes at significant risk.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was well aligned with the national development and education sector strategic priorities. The
  project design drew upon lessons from the predecessor Education Development Project I, including the
  emphasis on the school as a key unit of change and teachers as key actors in improving quality. The risk
  assessment considered overall risk as Moderate, with most risks mitigated through capacity building
  activities, including for fiduciary management. However, some institutional support activities for the
  MEHE required legislative/Parliamentary action and thus were difficult to control. There were also some
  shortcomings in the results framework (see Section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team was highly flexible and responsive to significant and challenging shifts in the sociopolitical
 context, although there were still lengthy delays in formal project restructuring due to factors beyond the
 control of the Bank team. Some of the key indicators/definitions were changed and some activities were
 dropped; however, there still remained one key indicator that was less relevant (increase in preschool
 enrollment) and no measurable indicators for improved teaching quality. Implementation Supervision
 Report ratings were candid in assigning ratings in the unsatisfactory range during the first half of the project
 period when activity was stalled.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E arrangements were clear, including responsibilities for data collection and capacity building of MEHE
 to carry out M&E. There were planned evaluative activities such as a preschool survey and an evaluation

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB - Education Development Project II (P118187)



 of the school-based improvement model. However, the PDO indicator on increased enrollment in preschool
 was not clearly linked to the objectives of improved teaching quality or learning environment of preschools;
 the PAD (Annex 4) noted that this was one of main objectives of the national ECE program, but it was not
 strongly linked to the actual project activities. Some of the original PDO indicators were dropped due to the
 project's delayed effectiveness (other donors took up these activities) and/or shift in socio-political context
 such as the influx of Syrian refugees. Other shortcomings in M&E, as noted in the ICR (page 31), included
 the following: lack of appropriate indicators for the objective to improve the learning environment in general
 education, weak link between intended outcomes and indicators (reduction in contract teachers, reduction
 in repetition rates), and weak capacity to collect specific school-level data (number of schools where at
 least 60 percent of classes in every grade level are being taught using active, learner-centered teaching
 methods).



b. M&E Implementation
  Although there was a significant delay in filling the M&E specialist position, carrying out of M&E activities
  was overall adequate. Revisions were made to the results framework to clarify indicators and strengthen
  linkages to project activities, as well as to improve alignment with restructured activities. However, as
  noted previously, there were no measurable indicators for the PDOs on improved quality of teaching. The
  first attempt to collect baseline data for the ECERS was inadequate (given the language and cultural
  context), and therefore the ECERS was revised but then was not comparable to results from subsequent
  rounds; hence, only the results from 2017 and 2018 could be used to measure change. Evaluative
  studies were carried out as planned.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (page 32) reported the following examples of the use of M&E in decision making: the 2015
  ECERS report recommended adjusting measurement tools to respond to the Lebanese language and
  cultural context; the 2017 ECERS report led to tailoring of preschool teacher training in the use of the
  new material; and M&E reporting results were used as the basis for reallocating funds (such as towards
  the schools receiving grants).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category "B" project due to rehabilitation of school buildings for preschool
   classes. The safeguard policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) was triggered and therefore an
   environmental assessment framework was prepared. The ICR does not report on whether there was
   satisfactory compliance with the safeguard measures.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB - Education Development Project II (P118187)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: The ICR reported that financial management performance was overall
   satisfactory. A financial assessment conducted during appraisal concluded that financial management
   systems were adequate, and supervision was conducted on a regular basis. All financial covenants were
   complied with in a timely manner, and audit reports were submitted in a timely manner with no major
   problems reported.



   Procurement: A procurement assessment conducted during appraisal concluded that procurement
   capacity was adequate. Procurement processes were followed in a satisfactory manner, although with
   some delays in part due to the turnover in staff. Post-project reviews identified some areas for
   improvement: filing, contract management, publication of contracts, inventory of project assets, and
   complaint mechanisms.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR, adapted by IEG:




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LB - Education Development Project II (P118187)



        Embedding capacity strengthening activities into existing institutional processes can help
         ensure sustainability. In the case of this project, sharing M&E results as part of the annual
         review process - for example, the ECERS - helped to ensure use of M&E in decisions to
         update activities. M&E data was also used to inform resource allocation decisions at the time
         of project restructuring.
        The school improvement process, even with only a modest grant award, can be highly
         effective if it includes a self-evaluation aspect. In the case of this project, school administrator
         training included a self-evaluation process, which identified priority needs and ensured a
         strong link between the grant funding and actual needs. The self-evaluation can also draw
         upon results from school surveys.
        A project can still be effectively implemented in contexts of unanticipated fragility and
         instability, if there is flexibility in the project design and a strong, persistent engagement with
         the client on the ground. In the case of this project, restructuring along with additional staff
         support allowed for a more relevant project design and results framework, additional time for
         implementation, and responsiveness to changes in government demand and context.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of the ICR was overall satisfactory, particularly given the complex backdrop and context of the
project that emerged during the project period. The ICR, albeit somewhat lengthy, provided strong evidence
and examples of significant institutional impact despite a fragile sociopolitical environment, and
also useful examples on how M&E can be well-utilized to improve outcomes. However, the quality of evidence
had some shortcomings, as there were minimal outputs and outcomes directly linked to 'improved teaching
quality"; therefore, the analysis of achievements also had some shortcomings, as the ICR did not provide
convincing evidence to support its Substantial ratings for these objectives. Also, the ICR did not confirm
whether the project was in full compliance with safeguard policies.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                         Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
LB - Education Development Project II (P118187)




                                                                               Page 16 of 16
