     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BT: Remote Rural Communities Development (P123820)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0021496

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P123820                                    BT: Remote Rural Communities Development

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Bhutan                                     Agriculture


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51640                                 31-May-2018                                            8,692,704.20

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Oct-2012                               31-May-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             9,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              9,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                          8,692,704.20                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hannah Mary Bleby           John R. Eriksson             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Orford




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The statements of the Project Development Objective (PDO) in Financial Agreement (FA), Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD) and Implementation Completion Report (ICR) are identical. The project development
   objective is to increase (i) agriculture productivity and (ii) access to community assets in remote rural areas
   (by improving access to markets, irrigation, agricultural technologies, and community infrastructure). (PAD p4,
   FA p4, ICR p1).



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BT: Remote Rural Communities Development (P123820)



   This ICR Review treats the following as the project objectives:

   PDO 1: increase agricultural productivity in remote rural areas

   PDO 2: increase access to community assets in remote rural areas



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project underwent a level 2 restructuring in August 2017 to reduce the scope of irrigation work (ICR p8),
   due to cost overruns (see section 2e below) although the process was initiated in November 2015. The
   PDO was unchanged from appraisal. The first three PDO indicator targets were maintained although
   proxies were adjusted, following consultations with the communities and to better capture results (see
   discussion in section 4 of this document). The fourth PDO indicator target was revised up to address
   underestimations at appraisal (ICR para 12). The project components were not revised.

   Component A. Rural Infrastructure (estimated cost of US$6.19 million; actual cost of US$5.33
   million). This component focused on improving irrigation and connecting remote rural communities to
   markets through (a) constructing farm roads, landslide protection, and rehabilitation works; (b) rehabilitating
   existing irrigation schemes; (c) developing three high‐efficiency pilot irrigation systems; (d) constructing
   water storages to support paddy nurseries and high value crops; and (e) strengthening the capacity of
   Water User Associations (WUAs) to improve the management of operation and maintenance (O&M)
   schemes. This component focused at the dzongkhag (district) level, as it was designed to benefit multiple
   gewogs (local administrations) (PAD para 16).

   B. Community, Marketing, and Productive Infrastructure (estimated cost of US$2.33 million; actual
   cost of US$2.46 million excluding beneficiary contribution). This component was made up of two
   subcomponents: (B1) support in high-poverty areas for improving access to critical community infrastructure
   and community‐led marketing infrastructure. Subprojects were identified and implemented by communities,
   taking a participatory approach; and (B2) support to existing producers on a cost sharing basis, for
   improving productivity of key commodities and adoption of sustainable land management (SLM) and wildlife
   management technologies (WLM). This component was focused on the gewog (local) level.

   C. Project Management and Institutional Strengthening (estimated cost of US$0.48 and actual costs
   were US$0.41m) This component supported project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and
   the strengthening of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forest’s (MoAF’s) capacity to support the
   implementation of community subprojects. It also financed the mid‐term review (MTR) and end‐line
   evaluation. This component focused at the national level.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BT: Remote Rural Communities Development (P123820)



   The ICR states that the scope under component 2 was expanded due to substantial cost savings from
   exchange rate gains (ICR p42). Saving from exchange rate gains (about US$800,000) plus US$200,000
   from Component A1 (road construction) were allocated to Component A2 (irrigation) which faced cost
   overruns, due to a range of issues, including required changes in design, losses due to weather,
   transportation costs, and non-competitive procurement (ICR para 16).

   The expected borrower contribution at appraisal was US$500,000 in cash contributions from beneficiaries of
   cardamom, citrus and livestock activities. Around $143,000 was forthcoming (with higher in-kind
   contributions) but the requirement was eventually cancelled since it was causing significant delays, and was
   eventually recognized as unaffordable and inequitable, given the project was targeting the poorest areas
   (ICR p9-10, PAD para 6).

   Key dates were as follows: The project was approved on October 2, 2012 and became effective on
   November 15 2012. The mid term review was dated November 24 2015. Estimated original closure and
   actual closure were both May 31 2018. Restructuring Level 2 was dated August 24, 2017.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PAD and ICR showed clear links at appraisal and closing, between the project’s objectives and the
development priorities of the Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB) and the World Bank (the Bank).

Country context: As set out in the PAD, Bhutan is highly dependent on the Renewable Natural Resources
(RNR) sector, of which agriculture is a significant part, for employment (65% of total and 95% of Bhutan’s
poor), food security and export earnings. Despite strong potential for high-value production, proximity to
large, accessible markets and extensive government support, the sector was growing significantly slower at
2.2%, compared with annual GDP growth of 9% from about 2000-2008 (PAD para 1).

The project objectives responded to the priorities in Bhutan’s Tenth Five-Year Plan (FYP) for National
Development (2008-2013) and to the forward looking 11th FYP (2014-2019) which included: maintaining
strong GDP growth and poverty reduction, emphasizing balanced regional development (including the
poorest, most isolated areas, which had so far, benefitted least – PAD para 3); with particular emphasis on
crop disease treatment; directly involving farmers in remote areas; strengthening supply chains, including
internationally; improving public services such as infrastructure, irrigation, and social assistance (PAD para
10).

The design also responded to fundamental constraints to growth and poverty reduction, such as poor
connectivity between communities, markets and social services, due to mountainous terrain and limited and
poor road infrastructure, especially in the south and south-west of the country, where poverty incidence is
high (PAD p1).

Sectoral and Institutional context: Improving productivity and incomes in the Renewable Natural
Resources (RNR) sector has been key to the RGoB’s efforts over the past two decades, to decentralize and
stimulate capacity for self-action and self-governance, and reduce reliance on central government as a
means of poverty alleviation (PAD para 7). The project set out to address key constraints to productivity and

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BT: Remote Rural Communities Development (P123820)



connectivity, such as: low levels of technology adoption; poor land, water and forest management; low
capacity to deal with disease in important cash crops such as citrus and cardamom; and small dispersed
rural population, which all compounded the challenges, especially in the poorest, more remote areas (PAD
p2-3).

The project design took detailed account of the multilayered governance arrangements between central and
local government. It attempted to appropriately align implementation responsibilities with the respective
administration levels (PAD p10-11 and Annex 3). To account for identified substantial risks in implementing
agency capacity, Component C (Project management and institutional strengthening – PAD para 27)
focused on strengthening MoAF to support local agencies in implementation.

The Bank’s comparative advantage for this project lay in three decades of support to the rural
development sector, and lessons from two ongoing operations in rural infrastructure and land management
(PAD para 9). This project would bring about comprehensive livelihoods support, given its focus on remote
and poor communities. Support to the RNR sector was agreed with the RGoB in the Country Partnership
Strategy 2011-2014, in line with the Tenth FYP (2008-2013) and Eleventh FYP (2014-2019). Addressing
low agricultural productivity was established as a priority, on the basis of a review undertaken by the Bank
as part of the Country Program Strategy (CPS) (PAD para 10). The project also aligned with other IDA and
IFAD and GEF projects in Bhutan (PAD para 11).

However, a significant number of the project outputs were based on assumptions (set out in the Results
Chain, ICR Figure 1) that did not hold, (see table below) particularly in relation to PDO1 (increased
agricultural productivity). Consequently, the relevance of some planned outputs to achieving PDO1, was
reduced (e.g. the amount of area replanted with certain crops was an inadequate output to achieve
increased productivity, since in fact, disease persisted as a binding constraint to productivity). The table
below sets out the discrepancies between the assumptions and the actual situation.



  Results Chain Key Assumptions (ICR Figure 1)          Actual situation
                                                     Project was restructured to change scope of
  Full rehabilitation of irrigation schemes without
                                                     irrigation work in response to changed needs on the
design change/modernization
                                                     ground, cost overruns and delays. (ICR para 16);
  Local contractors with adequate capacity exist     No significant change
                                                     Cash contribution by beneficiaries proved
  Cash contribution is affordable to beneficiaries
                                                     unaffordable and inequitable (ICR para 17);
  Replanting citrus/cardamom plants addresses        Significant rates of disease persisted despite
disease issues                                       replanting. (ICR para 33-34);
                                                     While productivity improved, there was a 40 percent
                                                     decline in cow numbers, due to government policy
  Improved dairy cow breed will be maintained
                                                     of eliminating ‘scrub animals’, including those cross-
                                                     bred with the improved breed. (ICR para 35);
                                                     Market for eggs existed but declined by 69 percent,
  Markets for eggs exist/existing groups with
                                                     due to marketing difficulties, high feed costs and
market linkages will be selected
                                                     asset loss (ICR para 36);
  Unit prices for cardamom/citrus seedlings will not Unit rates for seedlings supplied by National Seed
change                                               Centre did increase (ICR para 19);


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BT: Remote Rural Communities Development (P123820)



                  IA and field staff have capacity to implement                    Implementing agency and field staff had relatively
                capacity building works without TA                                 low capacity and did require TA (ICR para 64, 67);
                  Additional grant resources will be located for                   Additional grant resources were not found for
                institutional/capacity building.                                   institutional/capacity building (ICR para 62).



               The ICR states that the original theory of change was not affected by the restructuring (para 23). This is
               apparent, even though assumptions related to implementation of certain activities were flawed (see table
               above as well as Section 9 for further discussion).

               The project’s PDOs themselves were realistic (increasing agricultural productivity (PDO1) and increasing
               access to community assets (PDO2)), taking into account the available financial, institutional and human
               resources. The PDOs targeted clearly established and agreed needs and drew on relevant Bank
               experience and resources. But the assumptions of what (activities) would be required to achieve them did
               not hold.

               Based on high relevance and reasonable ambition of objectives, but flawed assumptions regarding the
               relevance of some activities required for achieving PDO1, relevance overall is rated substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             PDO 1: increase agricultural productivity in remote rural areas

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (Results Chain)

                             The theory of change for the project was logical. The project aimed to increase (1) agricultural productivity
                             and (2) access to community assets in remote rural areas by improving access to markets, irrigation,
                             agricultural technologies, and community infrastructure (ICR para 6). This would be achieved through
                             providing comprehensive livelihoods support, making community-led investments, and through strengthening
                             local, regional and national implementation capacity (see ICR Figure 1 p6 and PAD p2-3). The project would
                             contribute to Bhutan’s higher-level objectives of balanced urban-rural development and poverty reduction by
                             addressing key constraints to increased agricultural productivity and connectivity in some of the poorest, most
                             remote areas of the country (PAD p3-4).


                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BT: Remote Rural Communities Development (P123820)



Against PDO1, the ICR reports that:

      PDO Indicator target 1: increasing crop productivity by 20 percent (Paddy) was met, achieving 2.9
       from a baseline of 2.2 tons per hectare. Although not in the revised results framework, the ICR notes
       the end-line survey also found that yields in high efficiency irrigation scheme areas (built by the
       project) increased by 33 percent for maize, 23 percent for vegetables, and 34 percent for cardamom
       (ICR para 29). In both high-efficiency and rehabilitated irrigation project areas, crop diversification was
       also observed in the end-line survey with notable increases in area planted with a range of other crops
       (ICR para 30).
      PDO Indicator target 3: Marketed value of agricultural and livestock production was to increase by 20
       percent in targeted areas through investments in rehabilitating selected productive assets. The target
       was not achieved in three of four targeted commodities where, in fact, market value declined. The
       result for cardamom was -9%, citrus -5% and poultry -47%. Only dairy increased, by 12%, which was
       less than the targeted increase of 20%. Baselines for each were given as 0% (ICR p38 and 45). This
       left some beneficiaries of these activities worse off than before the project began (ICR p46). To what
       extent this was the case, was not able to be assessed through the data collected by the project.

Intermediate outcome results and targets (PDOI 1):

      #13: Seedling planting target of 440ha was exceeded, with 594 ha planted (no baseline given).
      #14: rehabilitation of 20% of targeted area were partially achieved: 61% for cardamom but 4% for
         citrus (no baseline given).
        #15: (number of clients who adopted an improved agricultural and livestock technology promoted by
         the project) was 450, almost doubling the target of 284 (no baseline).
        #16: target of 119 women from target #15 was exceeded, achieving 189 (ICR p38-39).
        #18: Seedling survival rate targets of at least 70% were also achieved (no baseline given). According
         to the endline survey, there was 85.4 percent survival rate for forest and 69.8 percent for NFWP
         species (ICR p39).129 ha of 132.6 ha citrus area was productive. 66 ha of 82.7 ha of cardamom area
         was productive.
        #19: Egg production fell significantly short of the target of 800,000 eggs, achieving 186,405.
        #20: Milk production by those households who received cows from the project reached 386,400 liters
         against a target of 170,000 and a baseline of 0. Milk production from cows supplied by the project was
         substantially higher than that of traditional cows. Marketing of cheese and butter also increased
         substantially (by 44%). But overall, milk production declined due to a 40% reduction (mortality and
         culling) in cow numbers (ICR paras 13 and 35). The gains at the beneficiary household level were
         therefore offset by the overall decline in milk production.

The Results Framework also refers to an intermediate target (#17) of at least 10 new technologies developed
(from baseline 0), which was met. Evidence is not clear in the ICR, however, of what these 10 technologies
were or by whom they were developed or used. Mention is made of fencing, training in farming practices and
water saving techniques and general reference to ‘sustainable land management technologies’ and ‘wildlife
management technologies’ (ICR para 40). But the ICR cites a lack of data to assess impacts of these
activities (para 40). RGoB comments in response to the ICR note that the end-line survey had more detail on
technology uptake rates. While included in Annex 5 of the ICR, it would have been appropriate to have
included this government comment in the main text of the ICR.



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BT: Remote Rural Communities Development (P123820)



The efficacy of PDO 1 overall was modest, based on having only partially met or not met at all a majority of
targets, although in a few cases targets were exceeded. So while production increased in many cases, a
number of targets specifying increasing marketed value of agricultural and livestock production were not
achieved. The result was that some farmers were left worse off than before the project began (ICR p46.
Specifics on the extent to which this was so are not provided).



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

PDO 2: increase access to community assets in remote rural areas

Rationale
Against PDO2, the ICR reports that:

      PDO Indicator target 2: (share of beneficiaries with access to critical community infrastructure was to
       increase by 20 percent in targeted area) was largely achieved (p38). From a baseline of 15% of
       beneficiaries with access to critical community infrastructure, at project closing 33% had access. This
       was an increase of 18 percentage points, largely achieving the target of 20 percentage points. This
       represented a combination of access to all kinds of infrastructure provided by the project (ICR paras
       42-44 and clarification from project team).
      PDO Indicator target 4: (25,000 direct project beneficiaries revised up at restructuring from 15,000)
       was exceeded, achieving 31,814 (127%), against a baseline of 0. This overachievement of the target
       was reported in the ICR as largely due to an underestimation of the original and revised targets during
       restructuring (ICR para 45). Of these beneficiaries, the target of 48% being female was met (15,304
       (149% of target) also against a baseline of 0) (ICR p38).

Intermediate outcome indicator targets (PDOI 2):

      #6: 13 Chiwogs had improved road access to markets, exceeding the target of 11 (revised down from
         40 at restructuring) over a 0 baseline
        #7: 36.1 km of roads were constructed, exceeding target of 34 over a 0 baseline
        #9: 688 ha were provided with improved irrigation, against a target of 845
        #10: 162 ha were provided with high efficiency irrigation, exceeding target of 60 over 0 baseline
        #11: 59 WUAs were created or strengthened, exceeding target of 49 over baseline of 33
        #12: Chiwogs with improved access to critical marketing and community infrastructure met target of 47
         over 0 baseline (ICR p38). There was, however, no further evidence of these activities presented in or
         annexed to the ICR.

Access to community-led marketing infrastructure investments contributed to both parts of the PDO and
increased by 9% overall (ICR para 43). The ICR also notes (para 39) that although the effects of these
activities on production and market value were not tracked by the project, the end-line survey reported

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 17
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         BT: Remote Rural Communities Development (P123820)



                      substantial increases in maize productivity and market value, attributable to the maize processing units
                      established by the project.

                      The efficacy of PDO 2 overall was substantial, based on almost fully achieving targets in relation to increased
                      access to critical community infrastructure and community-led marketing infrastructure, and exceeding the
                      target numbers of beneficiaries. It should be noted though, that exceeding the latter target rested on the basis
                      of an underestimation of this target at appraisal and again at restructuring.



                      Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale
Efficacy of the project outcomes was weakened by insufficient focus on and funding for strengthening local
institutions to implement and monitor the project. This was true in both design and implementation (see ICR para
72 and section 9 of this document). Risks in this regard were identified in the PAD (p50) and mitigating measures
were proposed through Component C (Project Management and Institutional Strengthening) but there were
insufficient indicators against them and implementation was weak (e.g. ICR paras 31, 40, 56). RGoB reluctance to
use credit/loan resources for such activities was a contributing factor (ICR para 57). This finding underscores the
ICR’s observation that ‘hard’ investments must be supported by ‘soft’ investments in order to reach desired
objectives (para 100). (Lack of adequate Bank supervision also contributed to this result (see section 8b of this
document).

Overall efficacy of the project was modest, based on only partly achieving its objectives. While indicator target 1
of PDO1 was met, target 3 was not only not achieved, importantly, some farmers were left worse off as a result of
the project. The beneficiary targets (2 and 4) of PDO2 were largely achieved or exceeded (due in part to initial
underestimation of targets and to no provided baseline), respectively, resulting in a substantial rating. Therefore,
on balance, and given the lack of information regarding baselines from which to evaluate changes, the overall
efficacy of the project is judged to be Modest.



Overall Efficacy Rating                                                       Primary reason
Modest                                                                        Low achievement

 5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency: An economic analysis was undertaken at appraisal and at evaluation (ICR Annex 4),
using the same methodology. It excluded returns to social and marketing infrastructures, community forests and
SLM and WLM technologies due to unavailability of data. The ex-post economic rates of return and economic
net present value estimates at 12% and BTN of 68 million were considerably lower than at appraisal at 23% and
BTN 302 million, respectively. The ICR points to key contributing factors as: (i) considerable implementation
delays which slowed the benefit realization; (ii) lower than expected benefit scopes for almost all activities; and
(iii) poor performance of investments in cardamom, citrus, and poultry commodities (ICR para 49).


                                                                                                                        Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BT: Remote Rural Communities Development (P123820)



Return on investments estimates in irrigation infrastructure was EIRR 14%. Returns on agriculture were much
lower at 5% for cardamom and citrus, and dairy and poultry at around 1% (ICR p47).

The project beneficiaries reported efficiency gains resulting from: increased crop yields and diversification;
improved water supply; increased irrigable land (ICR p44); higher milk production (from project cows); improved
access to markets; goods and services; and the end-line survey reported a reduction in walking time by almost
half (ICR para 41).

Although not analyzed, due to lack of data, the ICR economic analysis also points out that it could reasonably be
expected that investments in market and community infrastructure would improve access to income generating
opportunities and wildlife technologies would reduce crop loss. Additionally, the project generated non-quantified
benefits such as improved capacity, market information, agricultural and water saving techniques, and improved
quality of agricultural products. These would overall, also likely increase returns on project investments,
(assuming that these benefits exceeded their costs) (ICR p42).

Administrative Efficiency: The project was completed without extension. As the ICR notes though (p16), the
project faced substantial implementation delays primarily related to a lack of implementing agency capacity in
engineering, procurement, financial management and M&E; lack of a dedicated team and staff shortages (e.g.
no requirement to add the project to their own work plans); an unrealistic cash contribution requirement (see
section 2e above). While causes of multiple delays are noted throughout the ICR, the length of delays against
expected timeframes is not detailed. (Slow spending against disbursement is indicated at Figure 2, p24).

Due to inadequate monitoring and evaluation (see section 9 below), issues arising were not addressed in a
timely manner. There were also substantial cost overruns in irrigation works (36% more budget was required)
but changes to the irrigation scope also brought efficiency gains in the form of more durable irrigation systems
and lower maintenance costs. At the same time, implementation delays, reduced benefit scopes and poor
investments in several key cash commodities resulted in an ERR at closure almost half that at appraisal. Saving
from exchange rates (about US$ 800,000, ICR p42), however, were also instrumental in reaching irrigation
targets (ICR para 52). The project was completed with a final 91.2% disbursement rate (final figure provided by
project team post ICR).


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 23.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              12.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BT: Remote Rural Communities Development (P123820)




6. Outcome

The project generated a number of positive outcomes towards its objectives of 1) increasing agricultural
productivity in remote rural areas and 2) increasing access to community assets for people in remote rural
areas. Ultimately though, on the basis of only partially meeting its objectives (modest efficacy), its modest
efficiency and substantial relevance, the overall outcome rating is moderately unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The PAD recognized substantial capacity risk in the implementing agency (although its commitment was
considered strong) but did not consider design, delivery or monitoring risks to be more than low-moderate
(PAD p11).The ICR, however, pointed to likely high risks in relation to: maintaining infrastructure built by the
project (due to insufficient capacity and support from the project for local groups responsible for ongoing
maintenance and to Bhutan’s harsh conditions – para 95) and financial viability of crops (due to ongoing
disease issues not resolved by the project – para 96). There were also concerns over the continuation of
water and road user groups, critical to maintaining infrastructure, in the absence of support from the project
and not being integrated into the MoAF structure. A lack of adequate technical support to beneficiaries after
the project presented substantial risk (ICR para 98). These combined to make for a substantial to high
overall risk to development outcome.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Alignment of the project with both the RGoB and World Bank’s priorities was clear. The Theory of
  Change (TOC) outlined in the PAD (para 12) made clear connections between objectives (increase
  agriculture productivity and access to community assets) and outputs/activities (improving access to
  markets, irrigation, agricultural technologies, and community infrastructure). These aligned well with the
  components of the project, and intended beneficiaries were also clear and appropriate to the
  government’s overall development objectives. In the ICR, the TOC is represented by the Results Chain
  diagram (Figure 1).

  However, the ICR highlights a number of significant weaknesses. Although reasonable actions were
  proposed in the PAD (p50) to achieve expected outcomes or mitigate risks, more emphasis could have
  been placed on critical parts of the project so as to increase the likelihood that outcomes would be
  realized, such as: maintaining the improved cow breeds, support for implementation capacity and
  institutional strengthening (the Bank did not identify expected grant resources for capacity and
  institutional strengthening – ICR para 86), and disease analysis and control measures (ICR para 85).

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BT: Remote Rural Communities Development (P123820)



  Additionally, closer analysis of the financial viability and perceived equity of the cash contribution by
  beneficiaries would have been useful in minimizing the significant disruptions caused by this requirement.

  Significantly, eight out of nine key assumptions listed in the Results Chain (ICR Figure 1, p6) did not hold
  (ICR para 61-63). Some were outside the project’s control, such as market rates for commodities, but the
  majority of assumptions were not grounded in evidence and would have benefited from deeper analysis
  and verification ahead of implementation.

  Based on a relatively clear theory of change and good alignment with Government and Bank priorities,
  but significant shortcomings in some aspects of analysis and emphasis that contributed to non-
  achievement of some objectives, Quality at Entry is rated moderately unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 There were serious shortcomings in the quality of supervision. The ICR cited infrequent field visits,
 inaccurate, untimely and insufficient identification and reporting of issues, for example: the unviability of the
 planned cash contribution by farmers; the state of the irrigation systems at project opening; and weak
 progress of capacity building programs. Neither was the beneficiary participatory monitoring implemented,
 as envisaged in the PAD, although it was described as ‘essential’ to measuring project specific indicators
 (PAD para 38). These resulted in poorer quality follow-up of identified issues than would likely have
 otherwise been possible (ICR para 92) and likely reductions in efficacy and efficiency. Three changes of
 Task Team Leader also contributed to these shortcomings. The quality of technical experts provided to the
 project was questioned by the implementing agency (ICR para 93).

 The ratings of Modest for M&E across the board also reflect the shortcomings in quality of supervision (see
 section 9 below).

 Another indicator of inadequate supervision was the large discrepancies between disbursement of funds
 and actual spending, particularly early in the project (due primarily to implementation delays, see ICR figure
 2, p24), yet there were consistent implementation ratings of satisfactory, largely due to lack of accuracy
 and candor in the Bank’s reporting (ICR para 89).

 Bank supervision overall was inadequate and untimely, leading to major shortcomings in the quality of
 information and subsequent shortcomings in follow-up of identified issues.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BT: Remote Rural Communities Development (P123820)




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 At appraisal, the M&E process design was satisfactory. It was intended to be based on existing MoAF
 practices and draw on its agricultural data, implemented by the Project Coordination Unit (PCU, located in
 the MoAF), and complemented by a beneficiary participatory monitoring system. It was intended to provide
 for ‘continuous learning and adjustment’ (PAD p 11, 54). The outcomes were aligned with outputs and
 reasonably informed by PDO level indicators (ICR para 69), although many of the targets were themselves,
 output not outcome based. The Results Framework at PDO indicator level remained largely relevant
 throughout project implementation.

 However, many of the intermediate outcome indicators were flawed, for example: having multiple targets,
 targets misaligned with plant maturity periods, inaccurate descriptions of baseline and target values (ICR
 p20). Neither Midterm Review (MTR) nor the restructuring addressed these issues and added unhelpful
 complexity (ICR para 70 and 75). Further, according to the ICR, the capacity of the PCU proved too
 stretched, due to an overload of other work demands and lack of incentives to prioritize the project (ICR
 para 72) and the participatory monitoring system was not implemented (ICR para 73). This affected data
 quality and availability for implementation as well as evaluation (ICR para 75).

 Given the importance of capacity building and institutional strengthening for both successful
 implementation and risk mitigation at several levels, identified in the PAD (e.g. p50), it was a deficiency in
 design not to have more intermediate indicators focused on these issues (see also section 4 above).



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR states that efforts by the PCU to establish M&E processes early in the project were positive
  although they were not sustained, due to capacity constraints of the PCU and MoAF more broadly, for
  M&E (ICR para 72). As mentioned above, the major shortcoming of M&E implementation was not
  undertaking the beneficiary participatory monitoring system. The ICR does not specify why this was the
  case but suggests that weak capacity and poor Bank supervision contributed to lack of implementation of
  the participatory monitoring system (see section 8b above). While the project budgeted for surveys, it did
  not include funds for training field officers (ICR para 71). This combination of factors left significant gaps
  and inaccuracies in data during the project and at the close of the project, particularly related to
  investments in critical social and marketing infrastructures, sustainable land management and wildlife
  management technologies, and community forests. These had to be excluded from the efficiency
  analysis due to the lack of reliable data (ICR p43).




c. M&E Utilization
  While data collection and reporting from the field did occur, the ICR points out that the lack of accurate,
  timely data undermined supervision and evaluation of project results. This meant that issues facing
  beneficiaries as well as potential benefits, were not identified (ICR para 76), for example, disease in
  crops or lack of distribution pipes, resulting in water storages (ICR para 66). This undermined the

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BT: Remote Rural Communities Development (P123820)



  potential to make mid-course corrections in a timely way and negatively affected results, for example,
  lower yields in disease affected crops, which necessitated extra financing (allocated from within the
  project budget) to connect water storage and distributions systems late in the project (ICR para 28).

  Based on significant shortcomings of M&E design, implementation and utilization, which made it difficult
  to assess the results of the project overall, the rating is Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered the following safeguards: Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01, Pest Management
   OP 4.09, Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12, Forests OP/BP 4.36, Projects on International Waterways
   OP/BP7.50 (PAD p19).

   Social safeguards: According to the ICR (para 76), all activities complied with safeguard requirements, with
   consistent rating of satisfactory or moderately satisfactory. No negative impacts were encountered during
   implementation, and grievances were satisfactorily resolved at the community level through a mechanism
   established by the project. Several positive social impacts were observed by an independent assessment
   carried out in 2017, noting a reduction of women’s drudgery and ‘time poverty’ (i.e. not having enough time
   to meet the demands of daily life or to maintain their wellbeing), increased mobility and economic
   empowerment (ICR para 76). Further details of this assessment are not provided in the ICR.

   Environmental safeguards: while compliance was rated satisfactory or moderately satisfactory, and
   compliance reportedly improved as a result of training by the PCU, reporting on environmental safeguards
   was hampered by the lack of a full-time specialist for the full project in the PCU (ICR para 77). No other
   detail is provided in the ICR.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement compliance was mostly rated moderately satisfactory, with one instance of moderately
   unsatisfactory and some audit observations by the Royal Audit Authority (RAA), (ICR para 78). The ICR
   describes this as due to a lack of dedicated procurement capacity in the gewogs, unfamiliarity with Bank
   processes (some training was delivered by the Bank – ICR para 79), decentralized procurement processes
   and remote project sites.

   Goods and services procurement was satisfactorily addressed by assigning a procurement specialist for
   one year. But weak procurement capacity remained throughout the project. Works contracts faced
   significant issues such as rebidding and mis-awarding of contracts (although no actual mis-procurement
   cases), resulting in significant delays and underutilization of project resources. These were suitably
   addressed by project management (ICR para 81). Conduct of a survey to better understand the local

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BT: Remote Rural Communities Development (P123820)



  contractor market reduced these incidences and contributed to more efficient use of project resources (ICR
  para 80). The ICR notes that lessons from this project on use of a procurement specialist in the PCU
  influenced the Bank’s Food Security and Agricultural Productivity project (para 81).

  Financial management ratings were mostly satisfactory or moderately satisfactory, with one instance of
  moderately unsatisfactory in the 2015 Mid-Term Review (ICR para 82). According to the ICR, overall the
  financial management system worked well and reporting happened on time. Disbursement by project
  closing was 91.2% (final figure provided by project team post ICR). Challenges noted in the ICR were
  some slippages in awarding of works contracts, the departure of an experienced accountant part way
  through the project leaving pending work and causing some delays, and difficulty in collecting information
  from remote sites (ICR paras 82-83). Agreed internal auditing did not take place, primarily due to the still
  evolving capacity of the local audit authority. External audits were unqualified although they included some
  observations, which were regularly followed up by the Bank. Ratings by the RAA remained satisfactory
  (comment provided by project team post ICR).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  According to the ICR, the capacity of the National Seed Center and National Plant Protection Center were
  increased through the construction of 7 additional propagation houses and nurseries (in response to the
  NSC struggling to meet the project’s demand for seedlings), establishing a laboratory for disease detection
  unit, allowing for local testing of plants as opposed to overseas. This was and would continue to benefit
  communities beyond the project area (ICR para 60).



d. Other
  Gender: The project did not explicitly consider gender in its design or implementation (other than PDO
  target of ensuring 48% female beneficiaries). The ICR indicates that there were some positive outcomes
  from the project on reducing women’s drudgery, ‘time poverty’, increased mobility, and economic
  empowerment were found by the independent results assessment, as well as ‘impacts on social dynamics
  (para 55). But there are no data presented from the assessment or elsewhere.

  Other: The ICR (para 58) points to modest outcomes in mobilizing private sector finance (US$51,000 as
  cash contributions from farmers, although the intended amount was US$500,000 in cash and in-kind
  contributions). Institutional strengthening, while insufficient for full realization of the project’s objectives,
  nevertheless did contribute some additional capability in road maintenance, water management, elements
  of crop production, bio-engineering, procurement and financial management and community infrastructure
  implementation (ICR paras 56, 57).

  Poverty reduction and shared prosperity: Since the beneficiaries of the project were some of the
  poorest, most remote communities in Bhutan, the benefits the project generated, such as improved access
  to community infrastructure, some strengthened implementation capacity, increased crop yields and
  diversification, can plausibly have contributed to more even development. This was supported by the
  RGoB’s response to the ICR (Annex 5), which emphasized positive outcomes of the project. No specific
  poverty analysis was undertaken after the project.



                                                                                                      Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BT: Remote Rural Communities Development (P123820)




11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately             Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
Bank Performance                 Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

A lack of designated project, unit, and team management and implementation capacity can
significantly affect project outcomes. The project implementation was affected by the lack of a
dedicated project management team, frequent staff turnovers, and weak commitment by designated
staff due to heavy work overload and lack of incentives. The implementing entity needed to ensure
that there was a dedicated project management unit staffed with full‐time staff for key positions,
including project management, procurement, financial management, and M&E specialists. The
World Bank could help to ensure this through covenants and supervision.

Supplementing ‘hard’ investments with ’soft’ investments is critical for achieving desired
development outcomes, particularly where there is weak institutional capacity at the district and
local levels. The project had limited scope for soft investments, as the government was unwilling to
draw on credit/loan resources. The Bank’s expectation that additional grants could be mobilized for
this purpose also failed to materialize. The lack of ‘soft’ investments hampered the development
outcome and the efficiency of the project.

Building a functional M&E system is critical to monitoring progress, identifying issues, and
assessing outcomes and results and making mid-course modifications. A lack of availability of
accurate M&E data significantly affected project implementation and constrained timely identification
of the key issues faced by beneficiaries. Project evaluation was also hindered by the scattered,
irregular, and incomplete M&E data. Selection of accurately defined outcome and results indicators,
as well as relevant proxies, is critical for accurately measuring results and impacts, and for effective
implementation of M&E activities.

Close, frequent, and consistent Bank supervision can detect problems early on and work
with the client to identify solutions. For example, close supervision would have helped identify
semi-defunct irrigation systems early on, allowing for immediate repairs and avoiding unplanned but
important changes in project activities (e.g. extra installation of high-efficiency irrigation), undertaken
in order to maximize attainment of project objectives.

Ex‐ante market assessment must underpin Bank‐financed operations that seek to increase
market access or market values. Market issues, as evidenced by the project, cannot be addressed
through a selection criterion that requires having existing market linkages. That is, selection of

                                                                                                       Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BT: Remote Rural Communities Development (P123820)



groups with existing market access does not guarantee that they will not (or do not) also face market
access issues. Farmers should also have ‘skin in the game’ for viability and sustainability of
investments in productive assets.

Additional lesson from IEG:

Assumptions in the Results Chain warrant very close attention by local implementing
partners, prior to implementation, to minimize design and implementation issues. The
assumptions set out in the results chain were critical to the success of the project, yet almost all did
not hold, and underlay many of the challenges the project faced. Given the high percentage of failed
assumptions, some mitigation of project challenges may have been possible upon closer and early
examination of these assumptions.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is of substantial quality. It is well written, and consistently provides evidence of claims or observations
and paints a clear picture of the project. It provides insightful analysis on the background to issues that arose
and uses sparse data well. The Efficiency Analysis (ICR Annex 4) is strong, with substantial detail provided and
explanations of method and results, including where few project data were available. While being strongly
critical of the project in places, the ICR acknowledges achievements and provides solid reasoning for its
conclusions. It is frank about the Bank’s poor performance.

There were, however, a moderate number of inconsistencies or gaps in figures between different parts of the
ICR (often resulting from complexities of the restructuring), which required clarification in order to make proper
evaluations. This compromised the quality of the ICR somewhat.

The end-line survey and an ‘independent assessment’ are referred to several times but specific data from these
are not presented, nor are references given to the documents. This leaves a couple of small gaps noted above,
and raised questions from the borrower regarding interpretation of the end-line survey data, in an otherwise
tight presentation of the evidence.

Inclusion of the RGoB’s response to the ICR and the Bank’s rejoinder (ICR Annex 5) provides important context
to how the project was viewed by local stakeholders (which was more positively than the overall ratings
suggest, noting results in the end-line survey in particular), as well as underscoring the reasoning presented in
the ICR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
BT: Remote Rural Communities Development (P123820)




                                                                                  Page 17 of 17
