     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CCT (P103974)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021614

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P103974                                   CCT

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 North Macedonia                           Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-77350                                28-Feb-2014                                          21,507,935.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Jun-2009                               31-Aug-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           25,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            22,345,355.32                                               0.00

 Actual                                        21,507,935.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Judyth L. Twigg            Robert Mark Lacey            Joy Behrens                     IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (p. 5), the objectives were "to strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of
   the Borrower’s social safety net through: (a) the introduction of conditional cash transfers (CCT); and (b)
   improvements in the administration, oversight, monitoring and evaluation of social assistance transfers."

   Three outcome targets were revised at a May 2013 restructuring. As they were revised upward, this review
   does not undertake a split evaluation.


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CCT (P103974)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  23-May-2013

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components:

   1. Enhancing the Human Capital Links to Cash Assistance (appraisal: Euro 16.15 million; revised at 2013
   restructuring: Euro 12 million; actual: Euro 8.67 million). This component was to finance: (i) the
   implementation of a CCT program for poor families with children in secondary education, paid as a "top-up"
   for existing Social Financial Assistance (SFA) recipients, conditioned on an 85% school attendance rate,
   and paid directly to beneficiaries on a quarterly basis; and (ii) the identification, development, and
   implementation of possible CCT extensions, including diagnostics on defining target groups, incentives,
   outreach mechanisms, and other program parameters. The means-tested SFA program, a "benefit of last
   resort" similar to guaranteed minimum income schemes in many European Union countries, had been
   demonstrated as well targeted to the poor.

   2. Strengthening Safety Net Administration (appraisal: Euro 1.97 million; revised at 2013 restructuring: Euro
   5.46 million; actual: Euro 7.11 million). This component was to build on and extend activities being
   supported under the then ongoing Social Protection Implementation Loan (SPIL) Project (2004-2011, US$
   9.45 million), which focused on strengthening the efficiency of benefits administration and oversight,
   improving service delivery, and building capacity for policy development, monitoring, and evaluation. The
   component's planned activities included further improvements in the cash benefits management information
   system (CBMIS); assessments of targeting, eligibility, and registry systems for various cash benefit
   programs; development and application of oversight and control mechanisms to monitor implementation of
   the CCTs and other social benefits; a functional analysis of Social Welfare Centers (SWCs); and capacity
   building for program management.

   3. Project Management, Monitoring, and Impact Evaluation (appraisal: Euro 1.13 million; revised at 2013
   restructuring Euro 1.79 million; actual: Euro 1.42 million). This component was to finance activities to
   support project administration and implementation; development and establishment of a monitoring and
   impact evaluation system; and development and implementation of a public awareness campaign.

   At a 2013 restructuring, an amendment to the first component allowed for financing of the CCT-subsidized
   youth employment program beyond a pilot phase, as it became clear that this would the main supported



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CCT (P103974)



   CCT "extension"; and a new subcomponent was added to the second component to finance minor civil
   works for refurbishment of eleven existing SWC offices.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost: Total costs were estimated at Euro 20.3 million (US$ 25 million). Euro 17.25 million (US$ 21.5
   million) was actually spent. The project spent considerably more than planned on the second component,
   and about half of what was planned on the first component.

   Financing: The project was to be financed by a Specific Investment Loan in the amount of Euro 19.3 million
   (US$ 25 million). Euro 17.25 million (US$ 21.5 million) was disbursed, and Euro 1.6 million (US$ 2.9 million)
   was cancelled.

   Borrower contribution: A Borrower contribution of Euro 1.0 million was planned. The ICR did not state
   whether this contribution was actually made. The Borrower's comments stated that the government
   contributed about Euro 27,000 (ICR, p. 60).

   Dates: The project was approved on June 16, 2009 and became effective on October 28, 2009. It
   underwent five restructurings:

         January 2011: The financing percentage of the loan categories was changed to 100% Bank
            financing, and disbursement conditions were amended to allow for the financing of the first year of
            CCT program implementation.
           May 2013: Some changes were made to the language and targets of three of the five key
            performance indicators, as well as to some intermediate indicators. Targets were revised upward,
            and edits to indicator formulation were for clarity and higher precision rather than substance.
            Elements of the first component were expanded, and a new subcomponent was added to the
            second component. The closing date was extended by 22 months, from February 2014 to December
            2015.
           February 2015: Funds were reallocated between disbursement categories.
           July 2015: The closing date was extended by two years to December 2017, to complete activities
            related to cash benefits administration and further policy dialogue.
           September 2017: The target value for number of direct project beneficiaries was revised upward,
            some funds were cancelled, and the closing date was extended a final time to August 2018.

   The mid-term review was held in September of 2012. The project closed four years later than its originally
   scheduled closing date, on August 31, 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project's objectives were straightforward, and measurable, and their attainment was within existing
capacity. The project was highly responsive to country conditions and government strategy at the time of

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CCT (P103974)



               appraisal. At that time, it appeared likely that poverty and demand for social assistance benefits were likely
               to remain high, particularly as a consequence of the 2008 global financial crisis. Although coverage and
               targeting of the SFA to the poor were strong, the social safety net faced challenges related to fragmentation
               and administration. A four-pronged government strategy for reform, initiated in 2007, focused on
               legislative action to harmonize benefits, improvements in the cash benefit information system, structural
               reform of SWCs, and introduction of CCTs. This project built on activities initiated under the predecessor
               SPIL project to support this strategy. This project also aimed to correct important demand-side gaps in
               secondary school enrollment, attendance, and completion, acknowledging access and quality of education
               as one of the government's top five stated priorities at the time (PAD, p. 4).

               The objectives were also highly relevant to Bank strategy at appraisal and at closing. The Country
               Partnership Strategy (CPS) approved by the Bank in March 2007 and covering FY 2007-2010 established
               three strategic priorities: enhancing economic growth and job creation, improving governance, and
               improving public service delivery. The project supported these priorities by linking elements of the human
               development agenda (education) into a comprehensive effort to tackle persistent and inter-generational
               poverty. The CPS at closing (FY 2015-2018) contained a pillar on "skills and inclusion," focusing on both
               employability and more efficient public services; CCT was specifically listed as one of the tools for achieving
               the CPS outcome "social protection system more efficient and compatible with employment."


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen the effectiveness of the Borrower’s social safety net

                             Rationale
                             The PAD did not define "effectiveness," but the ICR reasonably inferred from the indicators and activities
                             assigned to the objective that effectiveness was intended to mean improved coverage of the CCT and impact
                             on secondary school enrollment and attendance rates for children in beneficiary households. The theory of
                             change for this objective held that support for the CCT program for poor families with children in secondary
                             education, as well as the identification, development, and implementation of possible CCT extensions, would
                             enhance participation and benefits associated with the country's social safety net.



                             Outputs




                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CCT (P103974)



The project supported implementation of the CCT program. 355 Ministry of Labor and Social Protection
(MLSP) and SWC staff were trained, far exceeding the target of 30. The CCT Implementation Unit was
staffed, and one staff member in each SWC was assigned to the CCT program, meeting the target.

A public awareness campaign was developed and implemented. Beneficiary awareness was reported to
have increased from 58.37% in 2011 to 75.9% in 2016, not quite reaching the target of 80% (ICR, p. 37),
though the ICR did not specify how this indicator was measured.

A Subsidized Employment Program (SEP) was implemented as the main "CCT extension," providing
incentives (wage subsidies and tax incentives) for companies to hire persons from socially vulnerable
categories, such as young SFA beneficiaries, youth without parental assistance, and ex-beneficiaries of the
secondary education CCT program (the ICR did not explain how these incentives were monitored or
controlled). This program reached 315 young underprivileged persons. An impact evaluation showed a
"notable increase" in employment of participants during the program period compared to a non-participant
control group, with employment levels remaining relatively high even after the SEP was completed (ICR, p.
18). The ICR (p. 28) also noted challenges with employability of these beneficiaries, however, ranging from
psychological (fear of losing benefits if employed) to practical (lack of skills).



Outcomes

There were 20,173 project beneficiaries, exceeding the original target of 18,000 and the revised target of
19,500. Of these, 48.1% were female, exceeding the original target of 45% and the revised target of 47%.

The percentage of SFA beneficiary children ages 15-18 who were registered with CCT reached 85.91% by
project closure, exceeding the original target of 40% and the revised target of 65%. The school attendance
rate of children ages 15-18 in CCT beneficiary households increased from 85% in 2015 to 93.9% in 2018,
exceeding the original/revised target of holding steady at 85%. This indicator replaced the original indicator,
the school enrollment rate of children ages 15-18 in CCT beneficiary households, which increased from
54.9% in 2010 to 75.9% in 2018, exceeding the original target of 43% and the revised target of 60%. An
impact evaluation found an increase of 10 percentage points in secondary school enrollment attributable to
the CCT, with the effect explained by lower dropout rates among older youth (ICR, p. 18).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen the efficiency of the Borrower’s social safety net

Rationale
The PAD did not define "efficiency," but the ICR reasonably inferred from the indicators and activities
assigned to the objective that efficiency was intended to mean improved targeting and strengthened
administration of safety net programs. The theory of change for this objective held that reviewing and

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 13
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         CCT (P103974)



                      strengthening business processes in the MLSP and SWCs, development of software and implementation
                      of the new cash benefit information system, identification of options for decentralization and local planning of
                      social services, development of standards for delivery of those services, and establishment of the
                      MLSP Policy Unit would lead to improved registry, eligibility, and targeting systems, as well as enhanced
                      oversight and control for CCTs and other SFA benefits.



                      Outputs

                      The CBMIS was introduced and linked with administrative registries in the Employment Agency, Cadaster
                      Agency, and Pension Fund. Assessments of targeting, eligibility, and registry systems for cash benefit
                      programs was carried out. Oversight and control mechanisms were developed and applied to monitor
                      implementation of CCTs and other SFA benefits. As a result, registration procedures have been simplified,
                      administrative costs have been reduced for benefit claimants, and errors have been reduced. By project
                      closure, all cash benefits programs had been integrated from previously fragmented and only partially
                      automated systems to administration through the MIS, exceeding the target of 90%. The processing time for
                      SFA applications was reduced from 69 days in 2010 to 11 days in 2018, far exceeding the target of a
                      reduction to 30 days. All education conditionalities (secondary school enrollment and attendance) are now
                      monitored across all quarters of the school year in the CBMIS, exceeding the target of 90%. However,
                      according to the ICR (p. 34), the percentage of transfer payments that were on time remained stagnant, at
                      50% in 2012 and 50.1% in 2018, not achieving the target of 80%; the ICR did not explain this seemingly
                      inconsistent result. The project team later explained that some schools did not enter data into the proper
                      CBMIS modules in a timely manner, necessitating late/make-up payments to those whose information was
                      not provided by established deadlines, but that these delays were minor, as all payments were consistently
                      made by the end of each school year.



                      Outcomes

                      Overall safety net targeting accuracy (percentage of safety net transfers going to the poorest quintile)
                      increased from 60.8% in 2014 to 77.7% in 2018, exceeding the original target of 50% and the revised target
                      of 65%. This result places North Macedonia among the best performers in the Europe and Central Asia
                      Region. The ICR further stated (p. 16) that leakage incidence to the richest quintile is low (1.4%) in all of the
                      country's social assistance programs except disability benefits, but no further information was provided.
                      Introduction of the CBMIS has reduced room for abuse of the system, resulting in a decline in the number of
                      social assistance recipients and thereby savings of about Euro 290,000 monthly, or about Euro 6 million since
                      the system was established (ICR, p. 17).



                      Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale

                                                                                                                         Page 6 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CCT (P103974)



Targets for key outcome indicators, which were reasonable and adequate measures of achievement of
both objectives, were reached or exceeded. The project's interventions were logically and plausibly connected to
observed outcomes, which were highly unlikely to have been achieved in the project's absence.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial


 5. Efficiency
The PAD conducted a cost-benefit analysis using CCT program costs (with an estimated 10% for administrative
costs), finding that CCT was expected to increase secondary school enrollment by 10 percentage points per
beneficiary; that each additional year in secondary school would produce a roughly 4% increase in consumption;
and that benefit-cost ratios would be 0.7, 1.1, and 1.83, based on alternative growth scenarios of 3%, 5%, and
7% respectively. The benefits therefore outweighed the costs in all but the lowest-growth scenarios.



The ICR (Annex 4) updated these calculations, observing that CCT transfers corresponded to only a small share
of average household expenditures (5-6%) and consumption (3-4%). Consequently, it found that the CCT was
unlikely to have had a significant effect on household expenditure or on poverty. This unexpected result arises
from households having reported levels of monthly expenditure 5-8 times larger than household income,
suggesting significant underreporting of income.



The project faced implementation challenges that had significant impact on efficiency. After two years of slow
initial implementation, the project was extended for a total of 4.5 years, in essence doubling its life span. Early
delays had to do with the predecessor SPIL project having not finalized the CBMIS, which was originally a
disbursement condition for this project; although the Bank and the government reacted promptly to this limitation
by amending the legal agreement, the adjustment nevertheless took time. As implementation progressed, the
disbursement rate was constantly low due to a lower-than-expected number of CCT secondary education
beneficiaries. Program coverage was high, but the number of SFA beneficiaries in general had decreased by
half (from about 50,000 to 25,000) because of improved targeting of the benefit administration system (after the
introduction of the CBMIS) and reduced inclusion errors. Finally, a volatile political environment during the
project's last few years, resulting in frequent changes in ministers (five in total), caused support for the project to
vary; early implementation was adversely affected by insufficient allocations in the state budget for the project
(ICR, p. 24), a situation that was later corrected through amendments to the project's legal agreement that
stabilized the budget planning process.


Efficiency Rating
Modest



                                                                                                         Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CCT (P103974)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         0
 Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         0
 ICR Estimate                                                  0
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's objectives were highly relevant to country conditions, government strategy, and Bank strategy at
appraisal and at closing. The objectives to improve effectiveness and efficiency of the social safety net were
both substantially achieved. Efficiency, however, was modest, given multiple project delays and extensions as
well as a volatile political environment. These ratings indicate moderate shortcomings in the project's
preparation and implementation, resulting in an Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Despite political volatility, the Bank's dialogue with all political structures in the social protection and inclusion
areas has remained strong. A follow-on operation, the Social Services Improvement Project, was approved
in September 2018 (US$ 33.4 million, 2018-2024) to build on the achievements of the CCT to introduce
second-generation policy reforms in social and child protection. A new Law on Social Protection has been
prepared and was awaiting parliamentary approval at the time of the ICR; the project team later confirmed
that this law has been passed. The CBMIS remains fully operational, allowing for regular collection and
analysis of administrative data related to all cash transfers and the socioeconomic situation of beneficiary
households. However, poverty and equity remain significant concerns. An increasing share of social
assistance resources is being directed toward categorical (non-means-tested) programs, though spending on
means-tested programs has not declined, as overall family and child protection spending is increasing (ICR,
p. 22). Additionally, the political environment remains complex, raising the possibility of sudden changes in
course with regard to social protection policy. Persistent technical capacity constraints may slow
implementation of further reform steps (ICR, p. 28).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance



                                                                                                           Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CCT (P103974)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project's objectives and planned activities were realistic and well specified, based on existing
  capacity, the policy environment, and country context. Neither the PAD nor the ICR reported on other
  external partners involved in the sector. The project built on lessons learned from previous operations in
  the country, including the SPIL project, as well as other Bank-financed CCTs: the essential role of
  government commitment and appropriate project preparation, the benefits of mainstreaming CCT within
  the ministry responsible for other cash benefit programs, the importance of oversight and controls
  mechanisms for reducing fraud and other errors, and the need for a strong monitoring and evaluation
  system for continuously improving program operations and for program sustainability (PAD, p. 11). Risk
  assessment (PAD, pp. 15-16) was thorough and candid. Financial management risk (potential for fraud,
  errors, and leakages of social cash benefits to the non-poor) was rated as high, and both sector-level
  risks (fragmentation, changes in government, political pressures for "quick-fix" reforms) and technical
  design risks (inappropriate criteria, inadequate targeting or compliance monitoring) were rated as
  substantial. Mitigation measures, including public awareness campaigns, a strong project results
  framework and monitoring, and attention to legal frameworks, were detailed and appropriate. M&E
  design was sound (see Section 9a), as were arrangements for fiduciary compliance (see Section
  10b). Implementation arrangements were well established, though the CBMIS -- a prerequisite for this
  project that was to have been completed under the previous SPIL program -- was not ready on time due
  to software contracting challenges, producing significant delays due to the project's disbursement
  condition that withdrawals could not be made for payment of the CCT grants without an operational
  CBMIS.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 During a period of sustained political instability in the country (through which the Bank in general
 experienced significant delays in its portfolio), the project team remained engaged and kept the CCT
 "relatively stable," thereby moving project activities forward, albeit with some delay (ICR, p. 24). The team
 was responsive to everyday implementation challenges, especially during the initial period of delayed
 implementation (ICR, p. 27), responding with solutions such as introducing amendments to the Loan
 Agreement and modifying disbursement conditions to remove impediments to implementation. Appropriate
 adjustments were made to outcome and intermediate outcome indicators and targets.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CCT (P103974)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD (p. 14) stated that the project was to support the government in implementing an M&E system for
 the project and the CCT program, with a focus on results. The results framework was well detailed (PAD,
 pp. 40-45), with appropriate and measurable outcome and intermediate outcome indicators clearly
 reflecting the project's implicit theory of change. Many baseline values were not set in the PAD, but were
 to be established in the project's first year. Monitoring was to draw from administrative data from the
 management information system developed under the SPIL project (CBMIS), annual Household Budget
 Surveys, CCT impact evaluations supported by the project, and operations and performance audits. The
 main features of the impact evaluation design were outlined in the PAD. The Policy Unit in the MLSP was
 to be the focal point for data collection and analysis.



b. M&E Implementation
  The CBMIS, once operational, collected "a wealth of easily accessible and important" administrative data
  (ICR, p. 25). Data were systematically collected and analyzed by the government and the Bank. Two
  impact evaluations were conducted on the CCT program (on its overall impact, and on the impact of
  different payment and recipient modalities on education outcomes and household consumption), and two
  on the SEP.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 25), project data were regularly used for decision making, adjustment
  (restructuring), and planning purposes. Indicators were redefined and adjusted as needed, based on
  M&E data and analysis. Based on analysis of the SEP pilot, the project was restructured to continue
  and expand it beyond the pilot phase. Key pieces of national legislation were informed by findings from
  project-financed analytical reports (ICR, p. 28).



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Environmental Assessment Category C. No safeguard policies were triggered. At
   the second restructuring, when some minor refurbishment of offices was added to the second component,
   the environmental category was reviewed and reconfirmed as Category C.




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CCT (P103974)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management reviews and audits found arrangements for planning and budgeting, accounting,
   internal controls, flow of funds, financial reporting, and external audit to be adequate. The CCT program
   has relatively complex arrangements for channeling funds to students and employers, but eligibility and
   procedures were well detailed in operational manuals. No significant problems were reported during the
   project's lifetime, and financial management was "steadily" rated as Satisfactory (ICR, pp. 26,
   27). Performance, operational, and financial audits were delivered on time.



   Procurement was consistently rated Satisfactory, and was carried out in accordance with applicable Bank
   guidelines. No major issues were reported with either procurement or contract implementation (ICR, p.
   27).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                                                                               The CBMIS -- a prerequisite for
                                                                               this project that was to have
                                                                               been completed under the
                                                                               previous SPIL program -- was
                                                                               not ready on time, producing
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   significant delays due to the
                                                                               project's disbursement condition
                                                                               that withdrawals could not be
                                                                               made for payment of the CCT
                                                                               grants without an operational
                                                                               CBMIS.
                                                                               The M&E system had no notable
                                                                               shortcomings and was more
                                                                               than sufficient to assess
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           High
                                                                               achievement of objectives. Its
                                                                               findings were disseminated and
                                                                               effectively used for decision

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CCT (P103974)



                                                                                 making, adjustment, and
                                                                                 planning purposes.
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 28-30) presented several insightful lessons, including the following (with some
adaptation of language):

Management information system investments must be fully in place prior to beginning
implementation of programs that rely on them. In this case, the cash benefit MIS was not complete
at project start, delaying launch of the entire conditional cash transfer program.

Government budgetary commitments cannot be considered fully certain in a volatile political
environment. In this case, annual allocations from the state budget were not always in line with
project financing agreements and needs, requiring later adaptation of project financing
arrangements. Careful assessment of the budget process during project appraisal, as well as
flexibility during implementation, is required to adapt to changing circumstances outside the project's
control.

The poorest and most vulnerable social program beneficiaries are frequently difficult to employ.
They may be concerned that they will lose benefits if they work, and they may lack skills attractive to
local labor markets. In this case, an individual approach, considering the unique situation and
challenges of each beneficiary family, was effective.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear, concise, and evidence-based. It followed established guidelines. Its analysis was well
aligned to the project's objectives. The Borrower's ICR presented some information and analysis -- on project
financing, dates, CCT and SEP beneficiaries, outputs related to development and structure of the CBMIS, and
findings from the impact evaluations (especially on payment modalities) -- more precisely and thoroughly than
the main ICR. The main ICR's lessons, which were comprehensive and insightful, drew heavily from the
Borrower's ICR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 13
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CCT (P103974)




                                                                  Page 13 of 13
