     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REAL ESTATE CADASTRE (P101214)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021543

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P101214                                  REAL ESTATE CADASTRE

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Kosovo                                   Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-46910,IDA-H5440                     31-Jul-2015                                            10,828,168.02

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 04-Feb-2010                             30-Jun-2018

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           12,250,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            11,812,517.49                                              0.00

 Actual                                        10,828,168.02                                              0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Victor M. Vergara         Victoria Alexeeva           Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective was to help develop Kosovo's land and property markets and to improve
   tenure security (Financing Agreement, page 5).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   No

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REAL ESTATE CADASTRE (P101214)




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component A: Municipal Land Administration (Appraisal 7.38 USD million – Actual 7.59 USD million). The
   objective of this component was to support the improvement of MCO capacity to deliver services through
   the financing the following sub-component activities: Sub-Component A1: Detailed design and rehabilitation
   of the MCOs. This sub-component intended to finance the reengineering of up to 20 MCOs by funding
   building renovations, furniture, equipment and archives. The goal was to improve client services and apply
   new front/back office layouts and standardized procedures in order to make transactions more systematic,
   efficient and transparent. Sub-Component A2: Systematic registration. This sub-component supported
   systematic updating of cadastral information (“cadastral reconstruction” (CR)) in the MCOs by integrating
   systematic registration data into the Kosovo Cadaster and Land Information system (KCLIS) after the
   Kosovo Cadaster Agency (KCA) approved the quality of the data.


   Component B: KCA Institutional Framework (Appraisal 1.69 USD million -Actual 2.43 USD million). The
   objective of this component was to support the KCA’s institutional reform and the upgrading of its technical
   infrastructure. It was rolled out through the following sub-components: Sub-Component B1: Institutional
   Reform. This sub-component supported the KCA’s overall reform, based on the Kosovo Cadaster
   Development Strategy (KCDS), Business Plan (BP) and Implementation Plan (IP). The legal and normative
   framework were upgraded in several aspects: legislation and operational manuals for front/back office
   operations, Building Cadaster Construction (BCC), Cadastral Reconstruction (CR), Quality Control (QC)
   and strategies for Information Technology (IT) and National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI). Sub-
   Component B2: KCA Technical Infrastructure. This sub-component financed the establishment and
   maintenance of a Continuous Operating Reference Network (CORN) to provide a single source of reference
   points to surveyors as well as support a KCA Hotline for MCOs and clients for queries and have an
   authoritative source of information on legal and technical questions.


   Component C: Project Management, Training and Public Outreach (Appraisal 2.62 USD million - Actual
   1.67 USD million ). The objective of this component was to support the KCA in managing the project,
   monitor and evaluate the project’s effectiveness, and build its management and other skills. The component
   financed the following activities: Sub-Component C1: Project Management and Donor Coordination. This
   sub-component financed the strengthening of the KCA’s Project Coordination Office (PCO) to ensure
   project due diligence in procurement and financial management, monitor and evaluate the project’s
   progress, coordinate donor inputs, report to the Government and donors and organize events. Additionally,
   and as part of credit effectiveness, it was ensured that the PCO’s staff included a coordinator, a financial
   management specialist, a local procurement specialist, a legal specialist and a cadaster specialist.
   Furthermore, a Financial Management Manual was prepared as part of the Project Operations Manual
   (POM). Sub-Component C2: Training. This sub-component supported the design and implementation of a
   comprehensive training program for KCA and MCO managers and staff, the PCO, private surveyors and
   other key stakeholders in management, planning, legal, technical and administrative subprojects. Sub-
   Component C3: Public Outreach. Activities under this sub-component included social assessments,
   customer satisfaction surveys, and public awareness campaigns to improve outcomes of CR and
   strengthen women’s property rights.


                                                                                                  Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    REAL ESTATE CADASTRE (P101214)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The total project cost at closure was US$10.83 million, slightly lower than the appraisal
  estimate of US$13.86 million.

  Financing. The project was financed through a combination of IDA credit in the amount of US$6.74 million
  and an IDA grant of US$5.51 million for a total estimate of US$12.25 million. At closure, it was disbursed at
  US$10.83 million, as confirmed by the project team.

  Borrower contribution. The Borrower commitment was US$1.61 million. No actual contribution was made.

  Dates. The project closing date was extended by a total of three years from July 31, 2015 to June 30, 2018.
  There was a total of five 5 level II project restructurings, including three Project extensions for a cumulative
  period of 22 months (ICR p 10-11). The adjustments included the elevation of two IO indicators to PDO
  indicators to allow the Results Framework to better capture the PDO’s target outcomes considering
  macroeconomic fluctuations. These changes are described below:



      1. In July 2015, the first extension of IDA Grant-H5440 and only extension for IDA Credit-46910 for an
           18-month period (from July 31, 2015 to January 31, 2017) to support institutional strengthening and
           sustainability of the KCA and to complete systematic registration.
      2.   In December 2015, the creation of disbursement Category 4 (Works and Technical Services for
           Parts A.1, A.2(a) and A.2(c) of the Project). For IDA-46910, Category 4 (75 percent financed)
           merged all works and technical services from Categories 1 and 2 (both 75 percent financed); for
           IDA-H5440, the Restructuring allowed the transfer of €2.05 million of grant proceeds from Category
           3 (100 financed) to Category 4 (100 percent financed). In addition, Two of the project’s Intermediate
           Outcome (IO) Indicators --“Number of Days to Complete a Transaction” and “Target Population with
           Use or Ownership Rights Recorded as a Result of the Project - were elevated to PDO Indicators as
           the sole original PDO Indicator; “Increase in the Number of Transactions,” was found to be far too
           dependent on the overall economic performance of the country and, therefore, did not adequately
           reflect the project’s activities.
      3.   In October 2016, the creation of a new IDA-46910 expenditure called “IS-Technical Services for Part
           B,” with US$ 296,000 reallocated from Category 4. During the Level 2 Restructuring of December
           2015, the official Government request mistakenly left out technical services for Component B from
           the new cost category. This Restructuring was required to include technical services in the
           expenditure category for grant funding by the Bank’s finance and disbursement terms. Two other
           reallocations occurred: (i) the reallocation of just over US$ 1.0 million from IDA-46910 Category 4 to
           Category 3; and (ii) the reallocation of just over US$ 542,000 from IDA-H440 Category 3 to
           Category.
      4.   In October 2016, the second extension of IDA-H5440 for a 5-month period (January 31, 2017 to
           June 30, 2017) to test and ensure system operability and sustainability of key IT systems and
           geospatial data infrastructure and to have sufficient time to draft the new Integrated Cadastre Law
           as part of efforts to ensure the institutional sustainability of KCA.
      5.   In June 2017, the third extension of IDA-H5440 for a 12-month period (June 30, 2017 to June 30,
           2018) to: (i) maintain engagement on the drafting of the new Integrated Cadastre Law; and (ii)

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      REAL ESTATE CADASTRE (P101214)



                                          implement the then-ongoing IT system upgrade that allowed KCA to improve service delivery to
                                          citizens, government agencies and the private sector. While these activities continued, the Bank
                                          team also used the time to begin scoping out the activities of a new project that would build upon
                                          RECAP’s achievements.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               The development objective of the project was relevant during preparation and implementation. In transition
               countries like Kosovo, improving land administration through a reliable and efficient registration and
               cadaster system is important for economic growth. Similarly, streamlining planning and permitting
               processes is basic for improving the overall investment climate and ultimately attract investors. The
               development objective was also relevant in terms of meeting the EU’s accession standards. At completion,
               the project objectives were aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY17 – FY21. The
               CPF was endorsed by the Board of Directors in April 2017 and aligns with the priorities of the Government’s
               National Development Strategy (NDS) for 2016-2021 and the 2016 Economic Reform Program that most
               effectively contributed to eradicating extreme poverty and improving shared prosperity. The project
               significantly contributed to the several Focus Area of the CPF including Focus Area 1 – Enhancing
               Conditions for Accelerated Private Sector Growth and Employment; Objective 1: Improve the business
               environment and access to finance and Indicator 5: Number of properties updated and validated in the
               digital cadaster (Kosovo Cadaster Land Information system).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To help develop Kosovo's land and property markets.

                             Rationale
                             Outputs (extracted and adapted from ICR pages 30-35)

                                        The number of Municipal Cadastral Offices with improved workflows was 23 against a target of 20 and
                                         a baseline of 2.
                                        Increased percentage coverage to land administration services for all was increased to 77.4% against
                                         a target of 80% and a baseline of 30%

                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   REAL ESTATE CADASTRE (P101214)




      Increased percentage access to land administration services for women to 16.81% against a target of
         15% and a baseline of 12%
        The reduction of the average number of days to complete the recording of the purchase or sale of
         property in Kosovo’s land administration system in both urban and rural areas reduced to 9.84 days
         against a target of 10-days and a baseline of 30 days.
        The process of Cadaster Reconstruction and Building Cadaster Construction recorded 300,000 use or
         ownership rights exceeding the original PDO indicator end target of 180,000.
        The number of transactions registered by 10% per year 31274 against a target of 48718 and a
         baseline of 27500.
        Increased access to land administration services for women was 16.81% against a target of 15%.
         With a baseline of 12%
        Target land area with use or ownership rights recorded as a result of project 84639.0 Ha against a
         target of 50,000 Ha and a baseline of 0.
        Land parcels with use or ownership rights recorded as a result of the project 178412 against a target
         of 132,000 and baseline of 0.
        Land parcels with use/ownership rights recorded as result of project – female 29,991 against target of
         26400.
        Operations manuals for Municipal Cadaster Offices in use against a target of in use and a baseline of
         draft.
        Kosovo Cadaster Agency guidelines approved 4 against a target of 4 and a baseline of 0.



Outcomes

Given the combination of outputs and outcomes, the project helped to develop land and property markets.
From a client perspective the project contributed to the recordation of 300,000 use or ownership rights
exceeding the PDO target of 180,000. In addition, land parcels with use or ownership rights recorded
because of the project was 178,412 against a target of 132,000. On the ground, changes were visible to
citizens. The reduction of the average number of days to complete the recording of the purchase or sale of
property in Kosovo’s land administration system in both urban and rural areas reduced to 9.84. The project
contributed to expanding property markets for women as it met target. Land and property transactions
throughout project did increase, transactions were linked to macroeconomic factors that affected Kosovo
during project implementation. Subsequently, the performance of RECAP’s “Number of transactions
registered by 10 percent per year” fluctuated over time, with overachievement in some years and
underachievement in other years. On a cumulative basis, the project overachieved its original target. For
example, the cumulative target of the indicator up to 2017 was 260,897 transactions whereas the project
recorded 320,167 transactions, i.e. 23 percent over the cumulative target.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 14
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         REAL ESTATE CADASTRE (P101214)




                      Objective
                      To improve tenure security.

                      Rationale
                      Outputs (extracted and adapted from ICR pages 35-36)

                            The number of licensed private surveyors using the Kosovo Continuous Operating Resource Network
                             increased to 159 against a target of 30.
                            Adoption of the National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) strategy as planned.
                            Creation of Digital archive as planned.
                            Customer surveys to assess the satisfaction level achieved was 81 against a target of 53 and a
                             baseline of 43.



                      Outcomes

                      Given the combination of outputs and the achievement of outcomes, the project helped to improve tenure
                      security. The adoption of National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) strategy as well as the creation of digital
                      archive helped create verifiable and public information on an equal access basis to the public. In addition, the
                      adoption of the cadastral manuals would provide assurance of quality control in the system including the
                      recordation of properties. This is reflected in the high level of satisfaction of final users as service satisfaction
                      reached 81% against a target of 53%. There were other outcomes which are not as well documented and
                      lack outcome metrics including the delivery of 46 trainings were organized for the benefit of 810
                      participants. The ICR reports that the outcome of the trainings was increased technical knowledge in KCA
                      and the MCOs. Improved job training expected to help resolve the lack of human capacity within Kosovo’s
                      land administration system and in theory should have contributed to increased level of the competency levels
                      of management and staff who were directly involved in overseeing land and property records, registration and
                      transactions as well as the affiliated policies and procedures. No metrics on competency were presented in
                      the ICR.



                      Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale
The overall rating is substantial consistent with the substantial rating for the two objectives: (i) to help develop
land and property markets in Kosovo and (ii) improving tenure security.



Overall Efficacy Rating



                                                                                                                            Page 6 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       REAL ESTATE CADASTRE (P101214)



Substantial


5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

The economic analysis developed by the PAD had limitations and could not be used to develop an accurate
assessment of the efficiency of the project. The flawed economic analysis stems from the approach that had
been taken by many World Bank land administration projects linking the efficiency of the project to market based
variables rather than more direct benefits generated by land administration projects. The flaws of the PAD
economic analysis also included using optimistic assumptions for forecasts and not accounting direct benefits
such as cadaster reconstruction and building cadaster construction.



Thus, the ICR did not replicate the analysis and instead, carried out efficiency analysis is based on direct
benefits. The ICR efficiency analysis are based on three direct benefits:



(i) immediate costs savings to citizens from cadaster reconstruction. The cost of sporadic registration of one
parcel in Kosovo EUR 150—representing 50% of average monthly wage and even a higher percentage of
income of the bottom 40%. Therefore, cadastral reconstruction paid for by RECAP was crucial in clarifying the
property rights associated with 330,000 parcels. This represents EUR 49.50 million cumulative savings for
citizens that did not have to pay sporadic registration costs but would get the benefits of registration.



(ii) immediate cost savings to citizens, businesses and government (local/national) from building cadaster
reconstruction. The rights for 3,040 buildings and 41,500 parts of buildings (apartment and business) in 30 cities
between 2012 and 2015. The costs of sporadic registration associated with buildings and parts of buildings are
EUR 120 and EUR 80 respectively. Therefore, the BCC work financed by the project represents cumulative
savings of EUR 3.68 million to citizens, businesses, and government as they did not have to pay BCC costs but
would get the benefits from registration.



(iii) productivity gains from the digital archive. Investments in digital archive have led to significant productivity
gains for both KCA and MCOs because staff do not have to spend time manually checking paper archives and
documents and do not require travel from one office to another. Time savings can range from 1 hour for simple
sale extracts, 2-4 hours for historical extracts, and sometimes weeks for more complex cases requiring travel to
other parts of Kosovo. A 2-hour time saving per transaction is assumed over transaction requests and requests
are capped at 20% of actual registered sales. Based on average wage in Kosovo and estimating that up to 30%
of the municipal cadaster office completed scanning for the digital archive, the estimated productivity gains are
EUR 0.04 million for the period of 2015 to 2018.




                                                                                                         Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      REAL ESTATE CADASTRE (P101214)



The approach taken by the ICR is methodologically sound and provides an accurate assessment of the major
components of the projects. However, there are aspects of the project, including the capacity building – that are
not directly included in the assessment.

Based on the three streams of benefits, and using a discount rate of 25 percent and project period of 2011 to
2018, the ICR calculates the project NPV €6.18 million (approximately US$ 5.15 million) and the IRR is
estimated at 40.9 percent. The NPV is greater than zero and the IRR exceeds the discount rate of 25 percent.

Operational/Administrative Issues

The project experienced a delay of 18 months in effectiveness due to delays in the ratification of the project’s
Financing Agreement by Parliament. To address the issue, the Bank granted three extensions for the
effectiveness date and established good communication with the Government. The project team and the CMU
engaged key figures of Kosovo’s various political parties who were part of parliament to address any concerns
regarding IDA financing or project activities. Once the delays were resolved, parliament approved the project
and it became officially effective on June 17, 2011.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 21.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              40.92
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The overall outcome rating is assessed as Satisfactory based on: (a) High rating on Relevance; (b) Substantial
rating for Efficacy in achieving the first and second objectives; and (c) Substantial rating for efficiency with
respect to the use of resources to achieve the project objectives and outcomes.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REAL ESTATE CADASTRE (P101214)




There are several risks to development outcome associated with the project:

KCA Institutional Sustainability. A budgetary imbalance exists at the central level with the Kosovo
Cadaster Agency, which is responsible for investments and maintenance of the cadastral data and systems,
while the cadastral service revenues are generated at municipal cadastral offices and go to the
municipalities. The funding of the Kosovo Cadaster Agency is not robust and relies on Government budget
allocations. Additionally, since cadastral staff are appointed by the mayor of the municipality, there is a
turnover associated with elections with corresponding challenges with retention of capacity.



Kosovo Property Comparison and Verification Agency Mandate. In December 2016, a law was enacted
changing the nature of the former Kosovo Property Agency and creating the new Kosovo Property
Comparison and Verification Agency. The Agency’s additional mandate is to process the pending pre-1999
cadastral documents. The processing of these documents could help fill gaps in the Kosovo cadaster.
However, if the pre-1999 documents are not properly integrated into the Kosovo cadaster, it could potentially
decrease tenure security and could cause disruptions in the property market. This risk, in turn, could affect
the sustainability of cadaster reconstruction investments already made in 30 percent of Kosovo’s priority
cadastral zones under the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was well prepared and conceived but had several M&E design shortcomings, which required
  modification as part of the restructuring. The design shortcomings increased the level of effort required
  for the preparation of the ICR:

         The results chain was based on unrealized assumptions including that transactions could be
          increased by 10 percent each year.
         There was a lack of an indicator that specifically tracked the number of people whose property
          rights were registered because of the project.
         The sole PDO indicator did not measure the number of days to register the sale of a residential
          property or the increase in the percentage of the population in target areas with registered rights.

  The forecasted economic analysis did not appropriately capture the estimated positive outcomes that the
  project would produce in line with the PDO.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REAL ESTATE CADASTRE (P101214)




b. Quality of supervision
 As noted by the ICR, the review of project records, together with testimonials from project participants
 during the life of project, confirm that the Bank provided effective support to implementation. The following
 points highlight the quality of supervision.

       The task team continuously assisted the project teams to improve implementation and track
          progress towards the PDO. This was done through in-country missions as well as remote support
          from Washington, DC.
         The active participation of a country-based staff in supervision allowed for immediate support and
          high-level policy discussions as needed.
         The Bank team helped Kosovo Cadaster Authority personnel to improve field data collection and
          management significantly throughout the project.
         The project team took the appropriate steps to address the project’s only Unsatisfactory rating when
          it arose; the 18-month delay in effectiveness due to circumstances outside the scope of the project
          resulted in the only time that the project experienced Moderately Unsatisfactory and Unsatisfactory
          ratings for Development Objectives and Implementation Progress.
         In response to Government requests, the Bank agreed to extend the project’s closing date three
          times to ensure good implementation and address issues regarding the institutional sustainability of
          the Kosovo Cadaster Agency.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design was influenced by the general direction of World Bank land administration projects, which
 at the time of appraisal used market indicators to measure project outcomes and successes. The
 vulnerability of this approach was evident when the Global Financial Crisis affected client countries with
 Bank-financed land and real estate projects and the progress of all market-linked indicators were negatively
 affected even though projects continued to reach their objectives.



 The M&E design had shortcomings in that the PDO indicator did not measure important aspects of the
 project including number of days to register the sale of a residential property or the increase in the
 percentage of the population in target areas with registered rights. While the appropriate intermediate




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REAL ESTATE CADASTRE (P101214)



 output indicators were later elevated to measure these outcomes effectively, they should have been
 included in the M&E Framework and categorized as PDO indicators from the beginning.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project progressed and was implemented largely as planned with regular discussions with Kosovo
  Cadastral Agency and timely submission of M&E reports.



  Improvements in the M&E framework were made during project restructuring and during the mid-term
  review including new indicators (1-4 in the list below) that were a requirement that all land projects
  include these core land indicators into their Results Frameworks. The following is the list if changes made
  to the M&E framework and indicators:



      1. Added “Target Population with use or ownership rights recorded as a result of the project”, which
         was later elevated to a PDO indicator.
      2. Added “Target land area with use or ownership rights recorded as a result of the project”.
      3. Added “Land parcels with use or ownership rights recorded as a result of the project”.
      4. Added “Land parcels with use/ownership rights recorded as a result of the project—female”,
      5. Disaggregated in data on the number of days to complete the recording of the purchase/sale of
         property by urban and rural areas, which was first reflected in RECAP’s seventh ISR.
      6. Modified goal of customer satisfaction with cadastral services for a 10 percent satisfaction
         increase for each customer survey.
      7. Lowered indicator “Increased access to land administration services for women” from 30 percent
         to 12 percent
      8. “Adoption of National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) Strategy” and “Creation of Digital Archive”
         IO Indicators were added.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project team and the implementing agency used the indicators to monitor the progress of the project
  and the M&E system has been mainstreamed into the Kosovo Cadastral Agency.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REAL ESTATE CADASTRE (P101214)



   The project was rated Category B project for Environmental safeguards. The main activities that required
   site specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) were: the reconstruction and refurbishment
   reengineering activities for the MCOs and the KCA office in Prishtina. All associated impacts, such as dust
   and noise from the construction works, construction waste management and other, small-scale impacts,
   were mitigated through sound construction practices. The PCO has prepared Checklist Environmental
   Management Plans (EMPs) for each of the project sites that are included in the bidding documents for each
   of the respective MCOs or the KCA. The PCO ensured compliance of the contractor and supervisor as well
   as adequate reporting. No operational policies for social safeguards were triggered by the project and no
   issues arose during implementation. Additionally, neither waivers of Bank policies were required, nor did
   issues arise during project implementation. The ICR (para 66) considers the Environmental and Social
   Safeguards rating as satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. Fiduciary assessments were conducted to ensure that the KCA had the
   institutional capacity to implement project. Additionally, the conditions for credit effectiveness ensured that
   the PCO consisted of the appropriate staff and had a Financial Management Manual that was acceptable
   to the Bank as a means of ensuring KCA’s readiness for project implementation. The Financial
   Management reporting was accurate and reliable as there was adequate controls over processing of
   payments and invoices and compliance with Bank financial reporting and disbursement requirements. No
   significant issues have been reported by the auditors in their audit report and management letter (ICR,
   para 69).

   Procurement. The ICR (para 67) reports that a procurement post review mission was conducted in
   February 2017 and found that in general the PCO/KCA had followed the World Bank procurement
   procedures set forth in the PAD, Legal Agreement and procurement plan.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       REAL ESTATE CADASTRE (P101214)



Quality of M&E                    Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

Two lessons were selected from the ICR, with some adaptation of the language:

        Bank-financed projects benefit from targeting the gender sensitization of an implementing
         agency, as this helps to mainstream gender into regular agency operations and ensures the
         drive for sustainability of gender-related outcomes beyond the life of Bank-financed projects.
         The gender focus can include public outreach activities to raise women’s awareness of their
         property rights and the importance of including their name as co-owners. These activities
         need to be client designed and implemented to improve the achievement of the Bank’s
         corporate commitments.

        To avoid delays in effectiveness it is important to explain the project’s benefits to key officials
         in charge of project ratification. This requires a proactive awareness attitude which equally
         engage a diversity of ruling parties and opposition to generate widespread support for an
         important reform agenda.

IEG-defined lessons

        Robust PDO indicators are the ones that are directly affected by project activities or
         outcomes, and relatively shielded from market fluctuations. Under this project, the shock
         caused by the global financial crisis and the subsequent dropping of indicators linked to the
         real estate market exposes an important issue in the design of indicators.
        An economic analysis of Land Administration projects requires well-reasoned and realistic
         estimates of expected benefits. These estimates should be justified using empirical historical
         performance data under similar settings as the project being appraised.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided substantial evidence and analysis and it is presented in a concise and effective manner. In
addition it provided evidence and substantial analysis on key lessons - particularly as it refers to
gender and the performance of the cadaster system. The results-oriented and internally consistent
presentation, which adhered to OPCS guidelines, provided a clear narrative. In addition, the ICR provided a

                                                                                                        Page 13 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REAL ESTATE CADASTRE (P101214)



candid and objective assessment of the Bank's quality at entry performance which provided a clear depiction of
the challenges during implementation and the rationale for adjustments. The only area where the ICR could
have provided greater detail is the capacity building.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 14
