     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     READ Project (P133079)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021615

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P133079                                    READ Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Gambia, The                                Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1370,IDA-H9160,TF-16496,TF-          28-Feb-2018                                          26,813,346.15
 A2125

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Mar-2014                               31-Aug-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            11,900,000.00                                    7,900,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             27,300,000.00                                    7,900,000.00

 Actual                                         26,866,553.65                                    7,891,298.87




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Salim J. Habayeb             Judyth L. Twigg            Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the project were to “increase access to basic education, improve quality of teaching and
   learning in lower basic schools, and strengthen education systems” (Financing Agreement, 4/9/14). The
   statements of objectives in the PAD and ICR were identical.




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     READ Project (P133079)



   Note on a revision of one associated outcome target. A restructuring associated with additional financing on
   9/14/16 revised two outcome indicators upwards, and another one (scores in English) downwards to reflect
   increased enrollments from disadvantaged groups who traditionally have lower performance in language
   tests. Since both original and revised targets were exceeded by project closing, neither the ICR nor this ICR
   Review applied a split evaluation, as it would not add value to outcome assessment in this case.



   Note on basic education: Basic or primary education consists of six years of primary education known as
   lower basic (grades 1-6, ages 7-12); three years of upper basic education (grades 7-9, ages 13-16); and Early
   Childhood Care and Development (ECD).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  14-Sep-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The original components and associated revisions are described below. The revisions were associated with
   additional financing in response to a national financial crisis brought on by external and internal shocks,
   including significant public sector debt, overvaluation of currency, delayed rainy season, and Ebola Virus
   Disease. The revisions provided temporary financing for teacher salaries, allowances, and school
   subgrants to ensure that progress and service delivery were maintained. Concurrently, ECD development
   strategy was modified from separate facilities to annexation of ECD classrooms to primary schools, based
   on evidence indicating that integration had higher impact.



   1. Increase Access to Basic Education (Appraisal US$6.0 million; Actual US$6.0 million).



    (a) School construction: Construction of about 40 multi-grade schools and water points in remote areas;
   and completion of construction for two schools of 9 grades, including 18 urban classrooms in each school.

   (b) Donkey carts: Provision of about 100 redesigned donkey carts for transportation for early grade
   children.



                                                                                                  Page 2 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  READ Project (P133079)



(c) Community-based ECD improvement: Construction of ECD classrooms; training for facilitators;
development of a program for facilitator certification; provision of teaching and learning materials;
supervision and monitoring of the program; and development of a monitoring tool.

(d) School subgrants supporting subprojects, including the provision of school materials and stationery.




2016 Revisions:



      Based on evidence from an impact evaluation that annexation had the greatest impact, the project
       opted to annex ECD classrooms, staff quarters, and toilet blocks rather than building separate
       community-based ECD structures as originally planned. In addition, the component provided for
       attaching ECD classrooms to 27 existing multigrade schools (out of 48 multigrade schools) along
       with the provision of furniture, teaching and learning materials, and additional training to ECD
       teachers.
      As part of the emergency response to the fiscal crisis in the country, the component provided school
       subgrants to subprojects in all public lower basic schools and upper basic schools, and stationery to
       all students in hardship areas. The incremental support was planned for seven months (ICR, p. 17).




2. Improve the Quality of Teaching and Learning (Appraisal U$$6.2 million; Revised US$18.0
million; Actual US$17.3 million).



(a) Enhanced teacher training: Restructuring of the Primary Teacher Certificate and the Higher Teacher
Certificate programs, through the provision of advisory services to relevant education staff to strengthen
teacher training, including assessment and redesign of the existing programs and development of a
professional examination.

(b) Stipends for student teachers: Provision of in-service teacher support, through the provision of
student teacher stipends to approximately 1,600 Higher Teacher Certificate students per year and 700
Primary Teacher Certificate students in their third year.

(c) Hardship allowances for public lower basic school teachers in remote areas.

(d) Extended teacher continuing professional development: Design and implementation of a demand-
driven in-service teacher professional development course and monitoring tools.




                                                                                               Page 3 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  READ Project (P133079)



(e) Teacher supervision: Provision of advisory services for the development, piloting, and validation of
standardized teacher observation tools.

(f) Reading in early grades: Improving early grades reading and foundational skills, including: carrying out
studies on reading programs; review of the reading curriculum and transition to full English proficiency;
strengthening teacher capacity on teaching reading skills; development and distribution of reading materials
and library books; assessment of early grade reading and math skills; and support to student reading
progress monitoring

(g) Developing evidence on improved reading performance through support of conditional cash
transfers to Koranic schools (Majalis or Daaras), benefiting about 1,500 pupils in literacy and numeracy.

(h) LEARNET: Support the phased connection of schools to LEARNET, a high-bandwidth Information and
Communications Technology (ICT) learning network.




2016 Revisions:



      The revisions provided US$5.2 million in teacher salaries and allowances as emergency assistance
       in the form of temporary funding to avoid teachers being unpaid during the fiscal crisis, after which
       the Government would resume payments in June 2017.
      Rather than providing broadband connectivity, the revision scaled up the Progressive Science
       Initiative/Progressive Math Initiative or PSI-PMI approach, specifically for the development of
       curriculum-linked digital content of mathematics, science and English. The reasons for this change
       included cost-effectiveness and long-term sustainability, as the public-private partnership necessary
       to provide broadband could not function effectively in a resource-constrained environment (ICR, p.
       19).




3. Technical and Institutional Support (Appraisal US$3.0 million; Revised US$1.7 million; Actual
US$2.4 million).



(a) Communications strategy: Development and implementation of a communications strategy, including
dissemination of information, training, outreach campaigns, and surveys.

(b) Institutional support and capacity building through continuous implementation of learning outcome
assessments; strengthening education data systems; strengthening the capacity of education staff in



                                                                                                Page 4 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    READ Project (P133079)



  assessing learning outcomes, statistics, and data collection; completing a national qualifications framework
  for higher education; and supporting project implementation, supervision, monitoring, and evaluation.



  4. Strengthening the Education System with a Focus on Governance and Management Results
  (Appraisal US$3.6 million; Revised US$1.6 million; Actual US$1.6 million). Improving access to
  education, and teacher and student performance, through the achievement of Disbursement Linked
  Indicators (DLIs).



  2016 Revisions:



  Challenges related to fund flows under the DLI mechanism were encountered (ICR, p. 16 and p. 23). Upon
  meeting DLIs, funds were made available in the consolidated account of the Ministry of Finance, but onward
  transfers to the Ministry of Basic and Secondary Education (MOBSE) were constrained by a difficult fiscal
  situation. Hence, the project reverted to the use of traditional investment approaches for this component,
  and DLIs were reclassified as intermediate results indicators.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost and Financing. The original project cost was estimated at US$34.8 million, consisting of: (a)
  US$18.8 million external financing (an IDA grant of US$11.9 million and another grant of US$6.9 million
  from the Global Partnership for Education); and (b) a Borrower/Recipient contribution of US$16 million
  equivalent. Traditional processes for Investment Project Financing were used, except for component 4
  (strengthening the education system), which was carried out using a results-based approach. Additional
  financing on 9/14/16 provided an IDA grant of US$7.5 million equivalent and a grant of US$1.0 million from
  the Early Learning Partnership Trust Fund to support temporary support for teachers’ salaries, allowances,
  and school grants as an emergency measure in response to the fiscal crisis in the country, and to further
  develop ECD activities (ICR, p. 15), all aggregating at US$27.3 million. No direct financing contribution was
  provided by the Borrower/Recipient in view of the financial crisis. The actual cost was US$26.9 million,
  reflecting a disbursement of about 99% against the revised cost of US$27.3 million.



  Dates. The initial design planned for a four-year implementation period. The project was approved on
  3/6/14 and became effective on 4/25/14. A Mid-Term Review was carried out on 12/5/15. The project
  closed on 8/31/18, six months beyond the original closing date. The project underwent two restructurings:
  (a) the first restructuring on 9/14/16 was associated with additional financing in response to the financial
  crisis. It modified the financing plan, disbursement arrangements, and results framework (see Section 2a);
  and (b) the second restructuring on 2/9/18 extended the project closing date by six months to 8/31/18 to
  complete activities and to ensure full handover of the constructed schools.




                                                                                                  Page 5 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      READ Project (P133079)




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               The project objectives were responsive to key education challenges in the country. At appraisal, the
               education sector, which is heavily donor-dependent, was facing multiple challenges, and improving
               students’ learning outcomes was a national priority. Access to basic education was inequitable, and scores
               of Early Grade Reading Assessment were low. The National Assessment Test conducted annually in
               grades 3, 5, and 8 revealed in 2012 that average scores in English ranged between 42% and 45%, and in
               mathematics between 37% and 42%. Out-of-school and dropout rates represented considerable
               inefficiencies in the system. A World Bank study in 2013 showed that the factors most reported by families
               were cost of access (46%), distance to school (15%), and work and family activities (7%). The cost burden
               included informal school fees and participation costs such as uniforms, shoes, school bags, and
               lunches. The country was pursuing efforts to improve teaching quality, but more efforts were needed to
               improve teacher training programs, and to provide an added focus on relevant subject content, pedagogic
               skills, ICT competencies, professional values and attitudes, and a higher quality intake of teacher
               candidates. At appraisal, the objectives were in line with Gambia Second Joint Assistance Strategy
               FY2013-2016 (World Bank and African Development Bank), Bank Education Strategy, and priorities of the
               Global Partnership for Education.



               At project closing, the objectives remained fully consistent with the current Country Engagement Note (CEN
               2018-2020) that followed a Systematic Country Diagnostic in 2017. The CEN had three focus areas of
               engagement: macroeconomic stabilization, restarting growth, and protecting the poorest from the impact of
               macroeconomic instability. Project objectives remained aligned to the third focus area, given that the
               project was centered on equitable access to quality learning opportunities and on improving the quality of
               education that ultimately promotes the likelihood of greater earnings. The project was in line with
               Government’s Education Sector Strategic Plan (ESSP) II 2014-2022 that aimed at similar improvements,
               including for increasing equitable access to quality education and strengthening sector management. The
               objectives were also consistent with the twin goals of the Bank for poverty reduction and shared prosperity.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Increase access to basic education.

                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   READ Project (P133079)




Rationale
Rationale



It was reasonable to expect that school construction, expanded ECD offerings, provision of school grants that
alleviate school fee barriers to schooling, stationery packages to hardship schools, and transportation of
young school children via donkey carts in remote communities would improve schooling availability, enhance
school readiness and its environment, and reduce parents' financial burden, which in turn would plausibly
contribute to increased access to basic education.



Outputs and intermediate results



The project built 84 additional primary level classrooms and 29 ECD classrooms, meeting the target for
each. It provided 54,611 stationery packages to lower basic school students in hardship areas, exceeding the
target of 36,500 packages. The project provided school grants on a regular basis. The number of
communities located more than three kilometers away from a lower basic school was reduced from a baseline
of 17% (339 communities) in 2013 to less than 5% (97 communities) by project closing in 2018, exceeding
the target of 14% (however, this indicator was attributable to the collective support of development partners,
the Bank-supported project, and the government, ICR, p. 51). All intermediate results targets were met or
exceeded.



School grants were aimed both at reducing informal school fees and at quality improvement expenditures,
mainly covering recurrent school costs such as stationery, chalk, material for posters, extra teacher training,
learning excursions, and minor school maintenance. Schools were precluded from using the grants for major
civil works or additional pay to teachers (ICR, p. 52).



Outcomes



Under the project, 79,541 additional students were enrolled in public basic schools and ECD by 2018,
exceeding both the original target of 35,000 and the revised target of 48,000 additional students. The
breakdown of this increase was as follows: in ECD, the baseline of 19,590 in 2013 increased to 31,848
students in 2018; in lower basic education from 184,279 to 245,106 students; and in upper basic
education from 69,372 to 75,827. The total aggregated baseline for basic education was 273,241 students,
increasing to a total of 352,782 students in 2018.




                                                                                                  Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   READ Project (P133079)




Direct project beneficiaries reached 330,442 in 2018, exceeding both the original target of 290,000 and the
revised target of 305,000. The percentage of female beneficiaries was 52%, exceeding the target of
50%. Direct beneficiaries included basic primary education students, including ECD students, teacher
trainees receiving stipends, and teachers receiving hardship allowances.



A noteworthy associated development was that the project resulted in the reduction and quasi-removal of the
burden of school fees on parents. In 2013, the annual average school fees paid by parents for their children
in lower basic schools was US$12 equivalent. A third-party firm conducted an evaluation of formal and
informal fees paid by parents and showed that only a small proportion of parents (2.9%) paid an average of
US$0.3 equivalent in 2018, resulting in a total average of only US$0.01. In public upper basic schools, 6.7%
of parents paid US$2.7 on average, reflecting a total average of US$0.18 against US$17 at the baseline.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the quality of teaching and learning in lower basic schools.

Rationale
Rationale



In addition to the school improvements described under objective 1, the theory of change in both the ICR and
the PAD (p. 51) illustrated a combination of incentives and improved professional development, where it was
reasonable to expect that improved initial teacher training, expanded in-service courses, stipends for student
teachers, hardship allowances in remote areas, teacher supervision and support, improved reading curricula,
and provision of textbooks to students would improve teacher skills, qualifications, and deployment, and
student opportunities to learn, which in turn would plausibly contribute to improving the quality of teaching and
learning.



Outputs and Intermediate results



1,906 additional qualified teachers emerged from the project, exceeding the target of 1,750. The reading
curriculum guidelines were developed by Directorate of Curriculum of MOBSE based on evaluation results of
early reading strategies. Human resources supplementary data (personnel details, qualifications, promotion

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   READ Project (P133079)



and postings history) were updated in the human resources database at Directorate of Human Resources in
MOBSE. Average teacher on-time attendance increased from a baseline of 90% in 2013 to 95% in 2018,
attaining the target. An ECD monitoring tool was developed and used. 176 teachers benefited from training
using the newly developed e-curriculum, short of the target of 200 teachers. Externally reviewed and
overseen end-of-year examinations for students completing the second year of revised Primary Teacher
Certificate and Higher Teacher Certificate programs were not continued under the project because the firm
revising the Gambia College curriculum indicated that the review of the new curriculum had to be conducted
prior to completing the development of the end-of- year examination. According to the ICR (p. 45), this task
was planned to be pursued under the follow-on project (Education Sector Support Program, P162890, US$30
million, 2018-2022).



A new classroom observation tool was developed and consisted of direct in-class observation of the teaching
process by cluster monitors and Head Teachers (TTL clarifications, 6/5/19). Its aim was to: (a) provide
developmental feedback to teachers; (b) guide supervisors and schools in conducting supervision; and (c)
provide a mechanism for systematic recording and reporting of teaching quality. The five areas of analysis in
the classroom observation tool included: (i) time on task, (ii) preparation and planning; (iii) presentation/lesson
delivery; (iv) classroom management; and (v) student engagement in learning.



The distribution of textbooks improved the pupil-textbook ratio of core textbooks in grades 1-9 in public
schools from 4 to 1:1 by project closing in 2018.



Outcomes



The percentage of teachers in grades 1-3, from a randomly selected 15 percent of schools, who showed good
teaching performance through the newly introduced classroom observation tool reached 82.7%, exceeding
the target of 60%.



Mean scores in English in grade 3 in National Assessment Tests increased from a baseline of 41.5% in 2012
to 47.8% in 2017, exceeding both the original target of 46% and the revised target of 43%. The ICR stated
that a verification method was put in place to confirm the presence of the majority of children during testing
days and that attendance related to all students rather than the better performing ones (ICR, p. 22)



The Borrower comments also noted (ICR, p. 93) that, under the follow-on project, the government intends to
develop a comprehensive and strategic teacher training framework for all types of training, from pre-service to
in-service, along a continuum.



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   READ Project (P133079)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthen education systems in basic education.



Rationale
Rationale



It was reasonable to expect that system-strengthening activities in governance and management results,
enhancement of evidence-based decision-making and accountability, and technical and institutional support,
including the implementation of National Assessment Tests; collection and analysis of test results; distribution
of test results to regional directorates and to schools; review of National Assessment Test results to inform
School Development Plans; and evaluation of the degree to which School Development Plans were adjusted
would plausibly contribute to strengthened education systems.



Outputs and intermediate results



Annual training, promotion, and postings were linked with annually updated personnel records in
interfaced electronic management information systems and human resource systems. Training on School
Development Plans was conducted four times during project implementation by the Standards and Quality
Assurance Directorate and Planning Directorate of MOBSE. In 2015, 800 head teachers and cluster monitors
were trained. In 2016, 230 additional head teachers were trained, and a second training was conducted for
all head teachers, Regional Education Directorates staff, and cluster trainers. In 2018, third-party consultants
evaluated School Development Plans and confirmed that 95.3 percent were implemented. The Gambia
College curriculum was revised. The number of student teachers enrolled in the revised Primary Teacher
Certificate program reached 1,074 in 2018, exceeding the target of 900. An annual school census was carried
out. A Basic Education Sector communication strategy was developed by MOBSE. Citizen feedback was
included in the development of the school improvement grant manual.



The average National Assessment Test attendance of grade 3 and 5 students in all public schools for two full
days increased from a baseline of 89.1% in 2013 to 94.6% in 2018, close to the target of 95%. The average
National Assessment Test attendance of grade 8 students in all public schools for two full days increased
from a baseline of 83.7% in 2013 to 91.5% in 2018, short of the original target of 95%, but exceeding the

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 18
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         READ Project (P133079)



                      revised target of 90%. The percentage of Head Teachers skilled to interpret National Assessment Test
                      results reached 100% in 2018, exceeding the target of 95%.



                      Outcomes



                      The percentage of Head Teachers in lower basic schools adjusting School Development Plans in response to
                      National Assessment Test results and approved by Regional Directorates using an agreed checklist
                      increased from a 0 baseline to 95.3% in 2018, exceeding the target of 80%. According to the ICR, this
                      achievement built on the collective and systemic strengthening activities shown in the rationale section,
                      above.



                      Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale
The aggregation of one fully achieved objective with two almost fully achieved objectives is indicative of
Substantial overall efficacy.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial


 5. Efficiency
Both the PAD and ICR carried out adequate economic analysis, and the PAD (pp. 26-27) referred to wage
regression coefficients showing increasing returns to education as levels of education go up, after controlling for
other determinants. Similar to results found in other developing countries, the regression estimation for Gambia
showed that one additional year of education resulted in 6.1% higher wages, that people with higher levels of
education prefer to work in salaried jobs, and that people who attain a higher level of education receive greater
returns from education investments.



The cost-benefit analysis carried out by the PAD focused on quantifiable benefits and provided an economic
rationale for the non-tangible benefit portions using findings from global research (PAD, p. 107). The analysis
captured the economic benefit stream realized in terms of lifetime earnings resulting from better learning, and

                                                                                                                  Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      READ Project (P133079)



intermediate benefits of interventions. A 12% discount rate was used to derive future returns. The cost-benefit
analysis estimated a net present value (NPV) of benefits at US$26.6 million with an associated internal rate of
return (IRR) of 20%. The benefit/cost ratio was estimated at 1.9 (PAD, p. 111). A sensitivity analysis used a
higher discount rate of 15% under different scenarios (PAD, p. 109). Using a lower-bound discount rate of 18%
and an upper-bound discount rate of 10%, the sensitivity analysis estimated IRRs at 18% and 24% respectively
(PAD, p. 13).



The ICR carried out a similar cost-benefit analysis and compared its findings at project closing with those carried
out by the PAD at appraisal (ICR, pp. 24-25). The corresponding NPV of benefits was estimated at US$27.7
million, compared with US$26.6 million at appraisal. The IRR associated with this NPV was 21%. The
benefit/cost ratio was estimated at 1.7. While some benefits could not be quantified, the NPV from quantifiable
benefits was larger than NPV costs, suggesting the efficiency of project investments and indicating its economic
viability, according to the analysis.



In addition, several unit costs for project-supported activities, such as for textbooks and classroom construction,
were favorable (ICR, pp. 25-26). Unit costs ranged from US$0.24 to US$0.57 for textbooks, and from US$0.19
to US$0.81 for teacher guides. In the Democratic Republic of Congo, the unit cost of textbooks was US$1.3,
and ranged between US$0.97 and US$1.66 in Sierra Leone, and between US$1.10 and US$1.40 in Niger. The
low cost of textbooks under the project was in part attributable to selected firm experience and the larger
number of textbooks and guides procured, allowing economies of scale to be realized.



No shortcomings of significance were reported during implementation. The ICR (p. 26) described the efficient
execution of school grants as confirmed by audit findings. The ICR noted that 12 construction contracts were
finalized during the project with an average of 368 days between contract signing date and the provisional hand-
over of sites, and that construction used durable and child friendly materials, contributing to improved learning
environments with structures that were expected to last for more than 30 years assuming regular maintenance
was undertaken. The government pursued a highly participatory and consultative process to facilitate
implementation through its regular regional visits and Coordinating Committee Meetings, which were rotated
through the regions (ICR, p. 29). The rate of disbursement was high throughout implementation and reached
nearly 50% after the first year of implementation (ICR, p. 32). There were some occasional delays related to
elections and financial constraints, and the project closing date was extended by six months to complete
activities (ICR, p. 86).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      READ Project (P133079)




                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
Appraisal                                                  20.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
ICR Estimate                                               21.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High, as the objectives remained fully aligned with the Country Engagement
Note at project closing and with the country’s Education Sector Strategic Plan. Efficacy is rated Substantial, as
the project almost fully achieved its objectives. Efficiency is rated Substantial in view of favorable returns and
largely efficient implementation. Therefore, the overall Outcome is rated Satisfactory, indicative of essentially
minor shortcomings in the project’s overall preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Main risks to sustaining development outcomes are related to macroeconomic challenges and vulnerability to
external shocks. Hence, in the near term, continued financial support from development partners remains
critical. This was evident when temporary relief for salaries was needed during the fiscal crisis. However,
given that project interventions emanated from the ESSP and that government commitment remains high, it
is reasonable to expect that activities will continue, and outcomes will be sustained. School grants were fully
integrated into the MOBSE budget (ICR, p. 35). Capacity building was notable, including for improved
technical capacity to deploy and manage human resources, and for M&E. A follow-on project, the Education
Sector Support Program (P162890), became effective on 8/31/18 and built on the progress made under this
project (TTL clarification, 6/5/19).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was aligned with the national education sector strategy. The government
  demonstrated high commitment and played a major role in project preparation (ICR, 91). Stakeholders
  were fully involved in the preparation of the project, as required by the Global Partnership for Education
  (ICR, p. 92). The project's association with the Global Partnership further increased the quality of
  preparation. Stakeholders included development partners, officials from different ministries, and the


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     READ Project (P133079)



  private sector. Their core group was known as the Local Education Group. Past lessons learned were
  considered in design and implementation, including for improving access and equity, and the importance
  of hardship allowances and teacher training. Institutional and implementation arrangements were
  adequately prepared and included a senior inter-ministerial management team for oversight with periodic
  representation from the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs. A pre-existing Project Coordination
  Unit was assigned to the project, as it was familiar with Bank processes and guidelines. An
  environmental and social safeguards focal point was assigned to the unit. Although stakeholders were
  engaged, a stakeholder workshop was organized to foster ownership (PAD, p. 23). Fiduciary aspects
  were well planned and were in line with the Government Budget Management and Accountability
  Act. Risks were adequately identified, and mitigation measures were planned, including the risk of
  introducing a new disbursement mechanism with DLIs for one of the project components.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were regular, and there was continuity in task team leadership. According to the ICR
 (p. 34), documentation of progress made was "extremely thorough" throughout the project with diligent
 follow up, including monitoring compliance with safeguards. Regular financial management and
 procurement missions were undertaken by related specialists based in neighboring Senegal. During
 implementation, stakeholders led by the government were actively engaged through the bi-monthly
 Coordinating Committee Meetings and the monthly Local Education Group meetings. All six regions were
 visited each year by senior MOBSE officials. The Bank team was reportedly proactive and mobilized
 technical assistance as necessary to support MOBSE. The team was also responsive to sectoral needs
 during the financial crisis and in project restructuring that facilitated continued progress towards the
 achievement of intended objectives. No supervision and implementation support issues were reported by
 the ICR.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were clearly specified, and the theory of change was sound and reflected in the results
 framework. The indicators encompassed all outcomes of the objectives statement. Both intermediate and
 outcome indicators were suitable for tracking progress and in assessing outcome achievements. M&E was
 closely aligned to the ESSP. Baselines for relevant indicators were available. The fact that M&E

                                                                                               Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     READ Project (P133079)



 arrangements were embedded in existing systems, rather than a standalone arrangement, provided added
 strength to the design. MOBSE officers who managed the Education Management Information System
 were responsible for M&E. Additional surveys and assessments were planned (ICR, p, 31) for verification
 of DLIs and for technical aspects, including data collection for an ECD impact evaluation, evaluation of the
 classroom observation tool, assessment of reading performance in Majalis, evaluation of the early reading
 program, and evaluation of the effectiveness of the hardship allowance program.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E activities were implemented as planned through the government’s own systems of collection and
  with supplementary methods of collection and analysis as noted above in Section 9a. Additional data
  were collected through an integrated household survey. Additional studies were developed to
  supplement data in areas where interventions were new, or in new areas, such as for further analysis of
  ECD approaches, early reading, and foundational skills development in Majalis (ICR, 31). Supplemental
  training was undertaken in areas that required additional capacity building. According to the ICR (p. 32),
  reporting was timely and transparent.



c. M&E Utilization
  In addition to routine use of M&E for project monitoring and identification of capacity building needs,
  M&E findings were used to change ECD approaches from developing separate facilities to school-
  annexed classrooms where a higher impact was witnessed. Also, human resources data were
  integrated with the Education Management Information System to better address teacher deployment
  aspects (ICR, p. 32).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified under Environmental Category B - Partial Assessment. At entry, the project
   triggered two safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 and Involuntary Resettlement
   OP/BP 4.12 (ISDS-Appraisal Stage, and PAD, p. 32). At project restructuring in 2016, a third safeguard
   policy was triggered: Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 (ISDS-Restructuring Stage and ICR, p.
   33). It was unknown if subproject sites contained physical cultural resources, but, as a measure of
   prudence, potential impacts were assessed in the context of the Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF).



   An ESMF and a Resettlement Policy Framework were prepared and implemented, including institutional
   arrangements, roles and responsibilities of stakeholder groups involved, and implementation and monitoring

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        READ Project (P133079)



   of mitigation measures. A safeguards focal point in the Project Coordination Unit at MOBSE worked in
   collaboration with the National Environmental Agency to complete initial safeguards screening under
   national regulations, and both parties were actively engaged throughout the project. Environment and
   social safeguards checklists were not always systematically used for site visits and screening before the
   construction of schools started, and in the final stages, there was hazardous disposal of construction waste
   and inadequate development of water towers. These issues were rectified before project closure, and
   school sites were cleaned. Two compensation issues for land donations were observed and
   resolved. According to the ICR (p. 33), overall compliance was fairly adequate, but with some
   implementation challenges having been encountered, safeguards compliance was rated Moderately
   Satisfactory throughout the project period.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The ICR (p. 26) noted that financial management was strong and rated
   satisfactory by the Bank Team throughout project implementation. Audits were undertaken biannually and
   were unqualified (ICR, p. 32). Reporting was adequate, and interim financial reports were produced in
   accordance with established guidelines and procedures and submitted in a timely manner. The ICR (p. 26)
   stated that information from internal and external audits showed that project resources were used for their
   intended purposes.



   Procurement. Procurement performance was also rated satisfactory by the Bank Team throughout
   implementation, as procurement followed guidelines and its performance remained on track (ICR, p.
   33). The ICR reported minor delays in the procurement of textbooks during the final year of the project,
   and which were related to funds flow issues at the Central Bank.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                  IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory        Satisfactory


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     READ Project (P133079)



                                                                                No shortcomings were identified
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Highly Satisfactory       in the quality at entry or
                                                                                supervision.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   High


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 35-36) offered several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons
restated by IEG:



The Bank’s proactive engagement during periods of economic crisis can be instrumental in
ensuring continued service delivery and sustained progress towards the achievement of
development objectives. The Bank’s strategic decision to provide additional financing to the
Government of Gambia when it faced a severe fiscal crisis ensured that project progress was
maintained and subsequently scaled up.



High participation of senior officials in project supervision facilitates informed decision-
making. The Minister, Permanent Secretary, Deputy Permanent Secretary, and Directors of the
Ministry of Basic and Secondary Education visited one out of the six Regions every two months for
one week. Hence, all regions were visited every year. The high-level officials became familiar with
both physical and learning challenges through interactions with school heads, teachers, and
students, and the findings were shared at the Coordinating Committee Meetings. The ministry’s
senior management team became familiar with the challenges faced by the schools and their needs,
thus facilitating decisions in response to those needs.



Donkey carts can provide a viable though unconventional solution to schooling access in
difficult areas. In order to address access barriers in difficult areas, the project used donkey carts
for transporting young children to school, as the children would not have been able to walk long
distances. The government provided the donkeys, and the project funded the carts. This approach
strengthened community engagement and accountability: communities had to care for and feed the
donkeys, and in return they could use the animals for other tasks during the remainder of the day,
after transporting the children to and from schools. This arrangement constituted a sustainable and
low-cost transport solution for some of the most remote villages serving 2,000 school children daily
and was continued after project closing.



13. Assessment Recommended?


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       READ Project (P133079)



  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was highly clear and consistent, both internally and with the guidelines. It was results-oriented, and
the theory of change was aligned to development objectives. The evidence and analysis were also aligned to
the messages outlined in the ICR. Both narrative and evidence supported the ICR's main conclusions. Its
overview of the sector context and its thorough discussion of M&E were noteworthy. Lessons were derived
directly from project experience as outlined in the ICR. No shortcomings were identified in this high-quality ICR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 18
