     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AL Financial Sector DPL(P152064)



                                                                               Report Number : ICRR0021673

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P152064                                  AL Financial Sector DPL

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Albania                                  Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-86980                               31-Mar-2018                                      100,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Mar-2017                              31-Mar-2018

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                        100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                         100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                     100,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Fernando Manibog            Christopher David Nelson       IEGFP (Unit 3)
 Krishnamani



2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives

   The Development Policy Loan (DPL) involved a single tranche operation. The program objectives as stated in
   the Program Document (PD, page 1) was:

   "To strengthen the resiliency of the banking sector and the regulation and supervision of nonbank
   financial institutions"



                                                                                                Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AL Financial Sector DPL(P152064)



   This ICR Review will assess the achievement of the project’s overarching goal of strengthening the resiliency
   of the banking sector and regulation and supervision of nonbank financial institutions, in terms of the following
   three specific project development objectives (PDOs), which correspond directly with the DPLs three policy
   pillars (presented immediately below).
   PDO1: To enhance the financial safety net by adopting policy measures to reduce nonperforming loans
   (NPLs).
   PDO2: To strengthen regulation, supervision, and resolution regime of banks and Savings and Credit
   Associations (SCAs).
   PDO3: To strengthen the regulation and supervision of investment banks.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas

   Pillar 1. Reducing NPLs and enhancing the financial safety net. This pillar supported policy reforms
   aimed at reducing the extent of NPLs of the banking system through establishing a mechanism for
   expediting bankruptcies and extending the financial safety net for small enterprises through extending
   deposit insurance coverage to SCAs.

   There were four prior actions: (i) The parliament enacts the new bankruptcy law for expediting bankruptcies;
   (ii) The parliament introduces new bailiff reforms (discussed in section 4) for facilitating the collateral
   execution process; (iii) The parliament establishes the Public Oversight Board with its own funding sources
   and (iv) The parliament enacts legislation for supervising SCAs and adopts new licensing, reporting and risk
   management regulations for SCAs.


   2. Strengthening regulation, supervision and resolution regime of banks and SCAs. This pillar
   supported policy reforms aimed at strengthening the regulatory framework for supervising banks and SCAs.

   There were four prior actions: (i) The parliament enacts legislation for commercial banks’ resolution
   framework, that was in line with the European Union (EU) Recovery and Resolution Directive; (ii) The Bank
   of Albania completes evaluation of systemic banks’ recovery plans for 2015 crisis management; (iii) The
   parliament enacts legislation for strengthening the regulation and supervision of SCAs; and (iv) The Bank of
   Albania adopts new licensing, reporting and risk management regulations for SCAs.

   3. Strengthening the regulation and supervision of investment funds. This pillar supported policy
   reforms aimed at improving the regulation of investment funds.

   There were two prior actions. (i) The parliament approves legislation for strengthening the Albania Financial
   Supervisory Authority’s (AFSA’s) enforcement powers and (ii) The AFSA adopts new regulations on liquidity
   requirements.


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AL Financial Sector DPL(P152064)




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates

   The DPL operation was financed by an IBRD loan of US$100.00 million. The operation was approved by
   the Board on May 13, 2017 and closed as scheduled on March 31, 2018. The loan amount was fully
   disbursed.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives


  Country context

  Since the early 2000s, Albania had undertaken several reforms, which enabled the country to attain candidate
  status for the European Union (EU) in June 2014. Economic growth in Albania, in the years before appraisal
  was however affected in the wake of the global financial crisis in 2008 and subsequently by anemic growth in
  the euro area, given Albania’s close economic and financial links to Europe’s poorer performing economies
  (Italy and Greece). Although Albania was able to avoid the recession seen elsewhere in Europe, the
  deceleration of growth, coupled with fiscal indiscipline, had resulted in severe macroeconomic imbalances,
  with a rapid escalation of public debt and financial sector shortcomings.

  Financial Sector Context

  The financial sector (the banking and the nonbank sector) faced challenges, in the wake of the global financial
  crisis in 2008. The challenges included rising share of NPLs - with the NPL ratio to the total loans rising from
  6.5% in 2008 to 21% in September 2016 -, due to factors such as, large age government
  arrears, overexposure to sectors such as construction, loans in foreign currency to unhedged borrowers
  and judiciary process which prolonged the collateral execution process. Regarding the insurance market, the
  insurance companies had not financed their outstanding liabilities for many years. The SCAs which
  provided financial services to small farmers and low-income people in the rural areas was fragmented, with
  more than 100 SCAs. The operation's objectives of promoting a stable financial sector through providing
  an enabling environment for banks and nonbanks to expand credit, were important in the country context.

  Government Strategy

  The program objectives are highly relevant to the government strategy. The first pillar of the government's
  National Strategy for Development and Integration (NSDI), approved in 2016 for 2015-2020, highlighted
  the importance of macroeconomic stability for ensuring the predictability of the economic environment
  and enabling long-term capital allocation. The policy measures supported under this operation also included

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AL Financial Sector DPL(P152064)



  key components of the government's NPL Plan, endorsed by the Prime Minister and the Bank of Albania, for
  reducing NPLs. The objectives continued to be relevant to the government strategy, given the ongoing efforts
  by the government to operationalize the measures and improve the reforms.

  Bank strategy

  The objectives are highly relevant to the priorities outlined in the Bank's Country Partnership Framework
  (CPF) for 2015-2019. The first focus area of the CPF called for restoring macroeconomic imbalances. This
  focus area also considered “macro-fiscal sustainability and financial sustainability to be the highest priority
  and having a fundamental impact on the country’s ability to an accelerated and sustainable growth model."
  (ICR, page 8) The ICR (page 8) notes that though preparation of a new CPF has not yet started to
  date, maintaining macro and financial stability is expected to be an important pillar of the upcoming Bank
  strategy for Albania. This DPL was one of several other World Bank policy lending operations to Albania in
  recent years, including the 2014 Financial Sector Modernization (FSM) DPL, aimed at supporting a wide
  range of reforms aiming to restore macro-financial stability and rekindling economic growth.

  Given that the objectives of improving the resiliency of the financial sector continues to be relevant to both the
  Government and bank strategy, relevance of objectives is rated as High.



  Rating
  High

b. Relevance of Design


  Albania's macroeconomic framework, when this DPL was prepared, was satisfactory (Program Document,
  paragraph 16). Following weak economic growth in 2012 and 2013 due to downturns in neighboring Greece
  and Italy, real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew by 1.8%, 2.6% and 3.2% in 2014, 2015 and 2016,
  respectively. The annual average inflation at 1.9% in 2016 was lower than the target band, due to lower oil
  and food prices. The current account deficit, mainly financed by worker remittances, was projected to
  increase to 12% of GDP in 2016 (up from 10.8% in 2015). Although public external debt was increasing from
  2008 to 2015, where it reached the peak at 73.7% of GDP, it had started falling and as at the end of 2016,
  stood at 72.7% of GDP. A review of Albania's Extended Fund Facility (EFF) arrangement conducted by the
  International Monetary Fund (IMF) in January 2017 (for a three year EFF arrangement for supporting the
  government's reform program, approved on February 28, 2014), concluded that most quantitative
  performance criteria had been met and that there was overall good progress in implementing the structural
  reform agenda (Program Document, paragraphs 31 and 32). The economy however remained vulnerable to
  external risks, given Albania's high exposure to Greece and Italy through workers' remittances, exports and
  direct foreign investment.

  There is logical causal relationship between the prior actions and the intended achievement of objectives.
  Reforms aimed at improving the framework for addressing bankruptcies and collateral execution through

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            AL Financial Sector DPL(P152064)



       bailiff reforms can be expected to lead to the achievement of the program objectives of reducing the extent of
       NPLs of the banking system. Reforms aimed at extending deposit insurance coverage to SCAs can directly
       lead to the enhancement of the financial safety nets of small enterprises. Reforms aimed providing
       a resolution framework and recovery planning of systemic banks would provide the basis leading
       to improvements in the banking system’s ability for crises management. Reforms aimed at licensing and
       reporting and risk management requirements for SCAs are linked directly to strengthening the regulation of
       SCAs. Similarly, reforms aimed at strengthening the enforcement powers of the Albania Financial
       Supervisory Authority for investment funds and liquidity regulations were directly relevant for strengthening
       the regulation of investment funds. The combination of these activities can be expected to contribute causally
       to strengthening the resiliency of the banking sector and the regulation and supervision of nonbank financial
       institutions.

       Unlike in the prior Bank-financed Financial Sector Modernization DPL, the design of this DPL included prior
       actions that were more binding and required parliamentary approval of legislation (rather than just
       submission to the parliament). The three pillars were complementary and mutually reinforcing on addressing
       the key constraints faced by the financial sector. The results indicators appropriately included both
       quantitative and qualitative indicators, where actions supported by the DPL would take longer to materialize,
       given that the time frame for this operation was a year (discussed in section 9a of this review).




       Rating
       Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To enhance the financial safety net by adopting policy measures to reduce NPLs.

    Rationale
    This pillar supported reforms aimed at expediting bankruptcy proceedings of the banking sector and thereby
    reducing the extent of NPLs of banks and extending the financial safety net through extending deposit
    insurance coverage to SCAs.

    Sub-objective 1. Adopting policy measures to reduce NPLs. There were three prior actions. One. the
    Parliament enacted the new Bankruptcy law in 2016 (Law # 110, prior action) (ICR, page 9). Regulations
    were established for the Bankruptcy agency and to facilitate out-of-court settlements. The ICR notes that a
    complete evaluation of the new law was not possible, as it became effective only on May 2017 and only 16
    cases were filed between May 2017 and December 2018 under the law. (Bankruptcy cases which started


                                                                                                        Page 5 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            AL Financial Sector DPL(P152064)



    before were being tried under the old Law). Two, the Parliament amended the Civil Procedures Code (Law
    # 114) and the Private Bailiffs Law (Law # 109, prior actions) on 2016 (ICR, page 10). These legislations
    aimed at addressing deficiencies of the collateral auction process and regulating bailiffs, by introducing the
    concept of the success fee (Before the amendment, bailiffs’ fees were fixed and payable in advance and
    hence there were no incentives for bailiffs to perform their functions with due diligence). Under the new
    arrangement, bailiff’s fees were contingent upon completion of the collateral process. The ICR (page 10)
    notes that there was a policy reversal in 2017 due to the appeal by private bailiffs, which was eventually
    overturned by the Administrative Appeals Court. Three, the Parliament established the Public Oversight
    Board (POB, prior action) in 2017, following the amendments to the Law on Statutory Audit (Law # 47) in
    2016. Funding for POB came from fees on statutory bank audits, insurance companies, investment
    companies, large non-financial companies and from professional organizations. This self-financing
    arrangement allowed the POB to hire its own staff thereby minimize potential conflicts of interest.

    There was one outcome target: decrease in the number of NPLs. The ratio of NPLs of banks decreased from
    20% in June 2016 to 13.4% in March 2018, exceeding the target of 16% (ICR, page 9). The NPL
    ratio declined further to 12.7% by November 2018. This reduction came in the backdrop of negative credit
    growth and hence represented reduction in the stock of NPLs (the NPLs decreased from 110 billion Albanian
    Lek (ALL) in December 2016 to ALL 77 billion in June 2018). The reduction of NPLs was due to factors, such
    as loan restructurings, loan repayments to various classes of the NPL portfolio and write-offs of loans (Since
    2015, banks were required by the Bank of Albania to write-off loans that were classified as loss for more than
    three years).

    Sub-objective 2. Enhancing the financial safety net. The Parliament enacted amendments to the Law on
    Deposit Insurance (Law # 39) on 2016. This law aimed at tightening requirements for licensing, reporting and
    risk management of SCAs. Following this amendment, there was a consolidation of SCAs, with the number
    of SCAs declining from 108 in 2015 to 13 in 2018. Out of the 13 SCAs, eight were licensed by the Bank of
    Albania and covered by deposit insurance when the operation closed (ICR, page 12).

    There was one outcome target. 100% of eligible legal entities' deposits were covered by deposit insurance
    coverage by March 31, 2018, as targeted. The deposit insurance coverage represented an improvement of
    the financial safety net, as 90% of the eligible entities covered represented small and medium-size
    enterprises.

    In summary, given that the two targets were achieved, efficacy of this objective is rated as substantial.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL




                                                                                                         Page 6 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            AL Financial Sector DPL(P152064)




    Objective 2
    Objective
     To strengthen regulation, supervision and resolution regime of banks and SCAs.


    Rationale
    This pillar supported reforms aimed at addressing issues pertaining to strengthening the regulatory oversight
    of banks and SCAs.

    Sub-objective 1. Strengthening regulation, supervision and resolution regime of banks. There were
    two prior actions. First, the parliament enacted the Bank resolution law (Law # 133) in 2016. This law was in
    line with the European Union's Bank "Recovery and Resolution Directive'. Following this, a resolution unit
    was established in the Bank of Albania. The unit had finalized by-laws for a resolution fund and resolution
    plans. The ICR (page 11) notes that a resolution fund was established in January 2018, with assets of ALL
    600 million and the unit signed a cooperation agreement with the European Systemic Risk Board. Two, the
    Bank of Albania adopted the regulation "on recovery plans of banks" by decision # 72 (prior action) in
    December 2017. This regulation required the banks to submit details such as, the minimum requirements for
    recovery plans, bank's governance structure and recovery measures.

    As an outcome indicator, all banks submitted annual recovery plans that were in accordance with the
    new regulation issued by the Bank of Albania, when the operation closed.

    Sub-objective 2. Strengthening regulation, supervision and resolution regime of SCAs. There were
    two prior actions. First, the parliament enacted the SCA law (Law # 52) in 2016 for strengthening the
    regulation and supervision of SCAs.and second, the Bank of Albania adopted the new licensing, reporting
    and risk management regulations for SCAs, by adopting Board Decisions #s 104, 105 and 106 respectively.

    There was one outcome target, pertaining to consolidation of SCAs. The number of SCAs declined from 108
    in 2015 to 13 in 2018. This exceeded the target of 20 SCAs. Of the 13 SCAs, eight were licensed and
    covered by deposit insurance when the operation closed. The ICR (page 12) notes that Bank of Albania was
    in the process of licensing two more SCAs, thereby bringing the number of SCAs to ten. The ICR notes that
    the remaining three SCAs were under liquidation, with no active operations or depositors and that the Bank
    of Albania conducted on-site inspections of the SCAs.

    Given that the targets had been achieved when the operation closed, efficacy of this objective is rated as
    substantial.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL



                                                                                                       Page 7 of 14
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               AL Financial Sector DPL(P152064)




    Objective 3
    Objective

     To strengthen the regulation and supervision of investment funds.

    Rationale
    This pillar aimed at strengthening the enforcement powers of the Albania Financial Supervisory Authority
    and introducing new liquidity regulations.

    There were two pillars. One, the parliament enacted amendments to the Collective Investment Undertakings
    Law (Law # 36) in 2016. This law aimed at strengthening Albania Financial Authority's (AFSA's) enforcement
    powers. The ICR notes that AFSA regularly conducted on-site inspections to ensure compliance with the
    regulations. Two, the AFSA adopted new regulations on liquidity management (Decision # 45, prior action).
    This decision mandated that investment funds to keep at least 10% of their portfolio in liquid assets (Five
    percent of total assets were to be kept either as cash or financial instruments with a residual maturity of no
    longer than seven days and another five percent of assets in financial instruments with residual maturity up
    to one month). The definition of liquid assets did not include longer-term Albanian bonds due to the lack of a
    liquid secondary market. The liquidity regulation was extended in February 2018 by adding past gross
    redemptions as an additional threshold (ICR, page 13).

    There was one outcome target, namely, increase in the liquid assets of investment funds. The liquid assets
    of investment funds increased from 5% in 2015 to 14% in 2018. This exceeded the target of 10%.

    Given that the target was exceeded, efficacy of this objective is rated as substantial.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  The relevance of the DPL's objectives to the strategies of the Government and the Bank is high. The relevance
  of design is substantial, given the logical and causal relationship between the prior actions and achievement of
  objectives and the complementarity of reforms supported by the operation. The DPL's efficacy is substantial in
  achieving the three objectives - to reduce NPLs and enhance the financial safety net, to strengthen regulation,
  supervision and resolution regime of banks and SCAs, and to strengthen the regulation and supervision of
  investment funds - since the quantitative targets were exceeded, and the qualitative targets met. The overall
  DPL outcome is satisfactory.


                                                                                                       Page 8 of 14
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        AL Financial Sector DPL(P152064)




a.     Outcome Rating
       Satisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

Government commitment. The risk associated with government commitment to the reforms is rated as Low,
given that open and transparent financial sector is a key part of European Union (EU) eligibility and hence
important for Albania's efforts for EU accession, a priority for the country.

Political risk. There is moderate risk associated with contract enforcement arrangements and collateral
execution process. The team clarified that the deficiencies included issues associated with bailiffs’
fees. Although this issue has been resolved for now following the appellate court decision, there
remained other deficiencies in the auction process, such as lack of standardized real estate evaluation
methodology and professional qualification of bankruptcy administrations. The bankruptcy administrators
needed to be trained to apply the requirements of the new law. The team further clarified that the regulations
(under the new law) on the functioning bankruptcy agency still needed approval by the Ministry of Justice.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
       Modest

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     Several analytical works underpinned the operation. These included, the prior Bank-financed 2014
     Financial Sector Modernization DPL, the Financial Sector Assessment Program of 2013, technical
     assistance by the Bank on building institutional capacities to regulate the investment funds sector and
     technical assistance from the Financial Sector Advisory Center (a consultative entity to assist in the
     coordination of policies among its members (the Ministry of Finance, the Bank of Albania, the Albania
     Deposit Insurance Authority and the Albania Financial Supervisory Authority). Lessons incorporated at
     design included, requiring parliamentary approval of laws as prior actions, addressing the key regulatory
     gaps for the bank and nonbank sectors and collaboration with interested parties (banks, bailiffs and
     SCAs). The operation was prepared in collaboration with the International Monetary Fund on aspects
     pertaining to financial reforms, the European Commission to ensure that the proposed measures are in line
     with Albania's EU commitments, the Swiss Secretariat for Economic Affairs on financial reporting reforms
     and the United States Agency for International Development, which had an ongoing country financial
     sector development program. Several risks were identified at appraisal, including substantial risk
     associated with governance and uncertainties pertaining to upcoming elections in October 2017 and
     moderate risks associated with spillovers from weaker euro growth in general and political developments


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AL Financial Sector DPL(P152064)



  in neighboring Italy, in particular. Mitigation reassures included consultations with relevant ministries and
  regulators. With the mitigation measures, the operation risk was rated as moderate (PD, paragraph 93).

  There were shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in section 9a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The ICR provides little details (ICR, page 16) but notes that the supervision team provided active support
  to the implementation of this operation. The team included appropriate experts and held frequent
  missions. The missions helped in maintaining high quality dialogue with the authorities. The location of a
  team member in Tirana helped in maintaining close contact with the counterpart agencies. The supervision
  team aided in monitoring the operations objectives both through supervision missions from headquarters
  and regular communication with authorities by the country office. The supervision team along with the
  Albanian Banking Association aided in resolving the issue associated with policy reversal by the interim
  government formed before the elections (of increasing the front-end fee for bailiffs by about 200%) (ICR,
  page 10). The supervision team collected the required information from stakeholders during
  implementation.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  As indicated in Section 3a, the objectives of the DPL were closely related to the national development
  strategies and government's priorities in view of Albania's commitments to EU accession. Following the
  parliamentary approval of the laws, the authorities implemented the necessary next steps (by laws and
  regulations) to operationalize the measures. The government agencies demonstrated strong
  commitment to reforms supported by the DPL, given that the supported prior actions were prepared in
  close cooperation with senior leadership of the implementing agencies (ICR, page 6). There was policy
  reversal relating to the changes to the regulation for bailiff fees made by the interim government in June
  2017. This issue was however resolved with the government with the new government reversing this
  decision.




                                                                                                      Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AL Financial Sector DPL(P152064)



  Government Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  The government implemented the program, and there is no separate assessment of implementing agency
  performance.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The results indicators included both quantitative outcome indicators (such as, the NPL ratio, the number of
  recovery plans submitted, the coverage of deposit coverage to SCAs and increase in the number of liquid
  assets of investment funds) and qualitative output indicators where actions supported by the DPL would take
  longer to materialize (such as establishment of a well-funded Public Oversight Board and a resolution unit),
  The proxies used for some indicators were appropriate (For instance, the number of SCAs was appropriate
  for the reforms aimed at consolidation of the SCA sector). (ICR, page 6).

  One shortcoming at design was the indicator associated with the ratio of NPLs to total loans for monitoring
  the Bankruptcy law. Since the law was only effective for cases started after May 2017, it had been applied to
  a limited number of cases. It is hence not clear as to what extent the large observed reduction in NPLs can
  be attributed to the new Bankruptcy law.

  Baseline data and target values for all indicators were included in the Program Document.



b. M&E Implementation
  The information provided in the ICR on M&E implementation is sparse. The ICR (page 7) notes that
  the Ministry of Finance, the Bank of Albania, the Ministry of Justice, the Financial Supervisory Authority and
  the Deposit Insurance Agency were responsible for overall coordination of data collection on M&E
  indicators.



c. M&E Utilization



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AL Financial Sector DPL(P152064)



  The ICR provides no indication that the indicators were used for purposes other than monitoring
  performance of this operation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  The Program Document (paragraph 80) notes that policies supported by the operation were not expected to
  have environmental impact, as the policies focused on legal, regulatory and supervisory reforms in the
  financial sector. The Program Document also notes that the operation did not modify the existing
  environmental regulatory framework in any way or facilitate the circumvention of any environmental
  regulations. The ICR (page 14) notes that the policies supported by the DPL did not have environmental
  impacts.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

No issues with fiduciary compliance are reported in the ICR.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                      ICR                      IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                      Satisfactory            Satisfactory               ---
Risk to Development
                             Modest                  Modest                     ---
Outcome
Bank Performance             Satisfactory            Satisfactory               ---


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AL Financial Sector DPL(P152064)



Borrower Performance           Highly Satisfactory     Highly Satisfactory         ---
Quality of ICR                                         Substantial                 ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following two lessons from the experience of implementing this operation, with some
adaptation of language.

(1) A quick and comprehensive response to a crisis can lead to sustainable improvements in financial
stability. This operation was in response to the crisis due to the high NPLs. The urgency created by the crisis
facilitated in the passing of complex pieces of legislation.

(2) Continuous engagement with the authorities during the program design and implementation phase
and a strong on the ground support can help in program implementation. In this operation, this aided in
providing timely support to react to problems (such as the bailiff reform setbacks during implementation).




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise, well-written and provides a good description of the problems that were encountered during
implementation (such as the issues pertaining to policy reversals on bailiff reforms). It discusses financial
sector issues in a clear way. The ICR is consistent with the guidelines and the ratings for the most part is well-
reasoned.

On the other hand, while the ICR has the merit of being brief, it would have been more useful to provide more
information on aspects pertaining to Bank supervision and M&E implementation.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
AL Financial Sector DPL(P152064)




                                                                  Page 14 of 14
