     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021650

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P085009                                  TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Tanzania                                 Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-41360,IDA-53260,TF-94620             30-Jun-2012                                        168,885,104.94

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Dec-2005                              31-Jul-2018

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            95,000,000.00                                 15,754,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            170,954,000.00                                 15,754,000.00

 Actual                                        168,885,104.94                                 15,754,000.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                John R. Eriksson            Christopher David Nelson       IEGFP (Unit 3)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the March 9, 2006, Development Credit Agreement
   (DCA) (Schedule 2, page 24):




                                                                                                Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)



   "To assist the borrower in creating sustainable conditions for enterprise creation and growth by: (i)
   reducing the cost of doing business; (ii) increasing the capacity of the local private sector to
   participate in domestic and international markets; and (iii) improving access to financial services".

   The PDO as stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 12) was " to create sustainable conditions
   for enterprise creation". The PAD states that the project's progress in achieving this objective was to be
   measured by the increase in the number of formal enterprises, the increase in the value of titled land relative
   to untitled land, and growth in sales and assets of firms participating in the project.

   The revised PDO was, as stated in the January 17, 2014, Additional Financing (AF) agreement (Financing
   Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4),

   "To strengthen business environment in Tanzania, including land administration reform, and improve
   access to financial services."

   This Review is based on a split rating of objectives, with the three sub-objectives as stated in the DCA
   agreement and the two sub-objectives stated in the AF.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  27-Dec-2013

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components


   There were three components (PAD, pages 12-16). The appraisal estimate of components with AF is from
   the ICR (page 17). The actual cost of each component is from Annex 7 (ICR, page 56).



   1. Strengthening the Business Environment. Appraisal estimate US$51.80 million. AF estimate
   US$49.20 million. Cumulative estimate US$101.00 million. Actual cost US$101.00 million. The increase in
   actual cost as compared to the appraisal estimate was due to the increase in the scope of activities with AF
   (discussed below). This component supported the Business Environment Strengthening for Tanzania
   (BEST) program, aimed at lowering the costs of establishing and operating a business, through eliminating
   the policy, legal, regulatory and institutional constraints. There were three sub-components; (1)



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)



improving regulation; (2) improving commercial disputes resolution; (3) strengthening the Tanzania
Investment Center.



These activities were added with AF ICR, page 23). (i) infrastructural interventions (such as the new
geodetic surveying infrastructure and a Land Management Information System); (ii) strengthening the land
management regulatory framework; (iii) land use planning in urban areas; (iv) preparing inventories of
government land: (v) simplifying the land administration regulatory process; and (vi) business registration
reform through a One Stop Shop system and training staff for using the system.



2. Enterprise Development. Appraisal estimate US$38.90 million. Actual cost US$38.90 million. This
component aimed at improving private sector capacity to participate in domestic and international markets
and strengthening the Tanzania Private Sector Foundation. There were four sub-components; (1) technical
assistance (TA) on cluster competitiveness and business school linkages and strengthening the Tanzania
Private Sector foundation's capacity to monitor sector developments, promoting dialogue between the
government and the private sector and training local entrepreneurs; (2) matching grants to enterprises
through the Tanzanian Business Development Scheme; (3) grants for a business plan competition through
the Business Development Gateway; and (4) capacity building of the Technical Innovation Research
Scheme.



3. Improving Access to Finance. Appraisal estimate US$5.00 million. AF estimate US$10.00 million.
Cumulative estimate US$15.00 million. Actual cost US$15.00 million. This component aimed at
improving access to financial services through the Financial Services Deepening Trust (FSDT) and TA. The
FSDT was to provide matching grants for activities aimed at low income groups and develop financial
products for Medium, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). The TA activities included funding for (1)
two long-term technical experts (one specialized in MSME finance and the other in new product
development); and (2) industry assessments and case studies on expanding finance for MSMEs.



These activities were added with AF; (i) strengthening financial sector regulation; (ii) supporting deposit
insurance; (iii) developing micro finance reporting standards; (iv) addressing collateral system
weaknesses; (v) developing standards for mobile financial services infrastructure; and (vi) developing new
financial products.



Project Implementation. The ICR (page 56) notes that under the original project, project management
cost was covered under Business Environment Strengthening (component one). AF estimate US$1.00
million. Following AF, a dedicated Project Implementation Unit was set up. Actual cost US$1.00 million.




                                                                                                Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


   Project cost. Appraisal estimate US$232.95 million. AF estimate US$170.95 million. Actual
   cost US$168.88 million. The difference of US$62.00 million between the appraisal estimate and actual cost
   was due to the lack of borrower contribution during implementation.



   Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA Credit of US$95.00 million. AF of US$60.20 million
   was approved on January 17.2014. With this the total credit for the project was US$155.20 million. Amount
   disbursed US$153.32 million. An unutilized amount of US$1.45 million was cancelled. There was co-
   financing through a Trust Fund. Appraisal estimate US$15.75. This amount was fully disbursed.



   Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution at appraisal was estimated at US$62.00 million. There
   was no borrower contribution when the project closed. The ICR does not provide any reason for the lack of
   borrower contribution.



   Dates. The original project approved on December 15, 2005, became effective on July 5, 2006 and was
   scheduled to close on June 30, 2012. AF was approved on 27th December 2013. Both the original and AF
   projects were restructured twice through Level 2 restructurings.

         The first restructuring May 14, 2013, extended the original project closing date by a year, due to the
            delays during implementation.
           The second restructuring on December 12,2013, extended the original project closing date by six
            months for preparing the AF documents for scaling up project activities.
           These changes were made with the AF approved on January 17, 2014., through a Level 1
            restructuring: (i) The development objectives were changed; (ii) Some intermediate indicators were
            dropped, as the underlying actions had already been completed (discussed in section 4); (ii) Some
            outcome indicators were dropped; (iii) The project scope was expanded; and (iv) a two year
            extension was provided for implementing the scaled up activities.
           The fourth restructuring on October 15,2015, extended the closing date by 18 months for
            completing ongoing activities associated with installing the Integrated Land Management System.
           The fifth restructuring on November 30, 2016, extended the closing date by 14 months for
            completing the scaled-up activities under AF. The project closed on July 31,2018.

   Split rating. Given that the PDOs were changed, this review is based on a split rating of objectives, when
   US$100.68 million (59%) of the original project was disbursed and after AF when US$69.80 million (41%)
   was disbursed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)




               Rationale


               The PDOs are highly relevant to the government strategy. Despite a growth rate of 6.7% between 2000 and
               2005, Tanzania is one the poorest countries in the world, with an estimated per capita income of
               US$330.00 in 2004. At appraisal, Tanzania was transitioning from being a public sector dominated
               economy. Private sector contributed just about 10 to 12% of GDP in 2004. The PDOs, which aimed at
               creating an enabling environment for private sector development through mutually reinforcing
               components were relevant in the country context. The government's long-term strategy, articulated in the
               National Vision 2025, highlighted the need for transforming an agricultural-based economy to an export-
               led semi-industrial economy. The first phase (2005-2010) of the strategy, articulated in the National
               Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty for the 2005-2010 period, emphasized the need for (i) broad-
               based and equitable growth and (ii) an export-driven economic transformation.



               The PDOs are aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal, the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS)
               approved in 2000 (relevant when this project was prepared), was aligned with the country's development
               goals detailed in the government strategy. The original project and the AF project was consistent with the
               CAS for 2012-2015 period. The CAS identified the need for promoting inclusive and sustainable private-
               sector led growth. The PDOs are relevant to the Bank's current (2018-2022) Country Partnership
               Framework's (CPF) goals of promoting inclusive and sustainable private sector-led growth. The first focus
               area of the CPF highlighted the need for structural transformation through strengthening the business
               environment for job creation and improving access to credit of MSMEs.



               The original objective "creating sustainable conditions for enterprise creation and growth" was broad in
               relation to the actual focus of the operation. The revised objectives were better aligned with the project
               activities. Since some activities under the original project were complete, the revised objectives focused on
               emerging priorities in areas, pertaining to land administration reforms and access to financial
               services. Therefore, the relevance of the revised objective to the government and Bank strategy is rated as
               High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1

                                                                                                                       Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)




Objective

To create sustainable conditions for enterprise creation and growth by (i) reducing the cost of doing business.

Rationale


Theory of change. Activities aimed at business reforms (such as better regulatory oversight, a mechanism
for resolving commercial disputes, strengthening the Tanzania Investment Center, matching grants
to entrepreneurs and One stop Shop) and land reforms (conversion of the old mapping system to new
geodetic surveying infrastructure, installing a land management system, land use planning in urban areas and
simplifying the land administration regulatory process, were relevant for reducing the cost of doing
business. This along with activities aimed at financial sector reforms (such as matching grants to low-income
groups and developing new financial products for MSME's), were relevant for improving access to
finance. The combination of these activities were relevant for strengthening the business environment and to
the long-term development challenge of structural transformation from a public-sector dominated economy.



Outputs.

These activities were completed as targeted.

      The Business Registration and Licensing Agency's (BRELA's) registries were digitized. 88,700 files
       from the Company registry and 191,243 from the Business Names Registry were scanned, indexed
       and digitized. A record management system was installed and on line names search data base for
       companies and business names were established on their website (ICR, page 72).
      The Parliament approved amendments to these acts of 2002; (i) Business Names Act; (ii) Companies
       Act; (iii) Tanzania Trade Development Authority Act; and (iv) Merchandise act.
      National Individual Identification Database was established.
      A Growth Unit in the President's Office Planning and Privatization was established.

Outcomes.

      The number of days to complete mortgage registration was reduced from 61 days in 2006 to seven,
       exceeding the target of 20 (ICR, page 20). The days to resolve a dispute on overdue debt in court
       decreased to 260 as compared to the target of 365 days (ICR, page 20). The official cost (as
       percentage of debt) to complete a dispute on overdue debt in court decreased by 40% at project
       closure. This exceeded the target of 39%.
      The number of days to complete registration of a certificate of occupancy reduced from 61 at the
       baseline to 30 days as targeted.The number of formal business enterprises increased from 50,000 at
       the baseline to 98,202, meeting the target. The gross revenue of firms supported by the project
       increased by 17% relative to the baseline, exceeding the target of 15%.
      The number of days to formally start a business declined from 35 at the baseline to 28 days. This was
       short of the target of 20 days (ICR, page 21).
      The number of steps to formally start a business were reduced from 13 at the baseline to nine days.
       This was short of the target of seven days. (ICR, page 21).

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)




      The rigidity of employment index did not change relative to the baseline. (This index measures the
       regulation of employment, specifically pertaining to the hiring and firing of workers and the rigidity of
       working hours).
      35,000 people benefited from project activities, exceeding the target of 170,000. 45% of the
       beneficiaries were women as compared to the target of 41%.

The main results of a beneficiary survey conducted at project closure were (ICR, page 86); (i) On average,
the number of business licenses and title deeds issued by local government authorities increased by 50%
annually and by 123% between 2005 and 2017; (ii) The time to issue a license decreased from three days on
average in 2005 to 1.7 days in 2017 and revenue from business licenses increased by 53%. This survey
however found that participation by rural enterprises was lower as compared to urban enterprises. The ICR
provides no details of the methodology followed in administering the survey.

Given that overall outcomes of reducing the cost of doing business were realized for the most part, this review
concludes that the project contributed significantly to realizing the outcome..



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective

To strengthen business environment in Tanzania

Revised Rationale
The outputs and outcomes discussed above were relevant to this objective.

Given that the outcomes were realized for the most part, this review concludes that the project significantly
contributed to strengthening the business environment in Tanzania.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the capacity of the local private sector to participate in domestic and international markets;

Rationale


Outputs


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)



In addition to the outputs discussed above, the following outputs were relevant to this objective.

      910 matching grants (worth US$13.89 million) were provided to MSMEs for either upgrading their
       business or start their own business. 16,784 men and women were trained in business-related skills,
       exceeding the target of 1,000. 2.010 micro enterprises and their employees were trained in
       entrepreneurship, exceeding the of 1.000 (ICR, page 81).
      50 new degrees and diploma courses were established in technical institutions as part of the
       Technical Innovation and Applied Research Scheme. 9,240 students were enrolled in these
       institutions. 16,784 men and women were trained on various technical skills and over 10,304 people
       were employed in the beneficiary companies and institutions. There were no targets for these
       indicators (ICR, page 82).
      One stop center for issuing building permits under one roof were established in Local Governments
       (ICR, page 74).

Outcomes.

The outcomes (such as matching grants for business enterprises and establishment of one-stop business)
were output oriented.

With no appropriate outcome indicators, it is not clear the extent to which these activities contributed to the
overall outcome of "creating sustainable conditions for enterprise creation and growth".



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To strengthen the business environment, including land administration reform

Revised Rationale


Outputs.

      These land reform legislation were enacted: The land use planning act of 2007 for efficient land
       use; The Urban Planning Act of 2007 for sustainable use of urban land; The Unit Titles
       (Condominium) Act of 2008 for efficient housing; The Land Law Miscellaneous Amendments Act
       Number Three in 2009 for protecting the legal rights of untitled properties in urban informal
       settlements;
      22 district housing and land tribunals were established. (There were no targets for this indicator). Of
       this, 12 were provided with office and operational facilities to support a special program for reducing
       backlogs of land cases in key municipalities. (ICR, page 24).
      The geodetic infrastructure system for modern land surveys was installed. The village titling process
       was improved.

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)




      The Integrated Land Management Information System (ILMIS) was installed at the Ministry
       headquarters and the Coastal Zone Office in Dar es Salaam for registering land. Multi purpose maps
       for Dar es Salaam and surrounding areas were developed as targeted. Alternative resolution
       mechanism for land disputes were established and the National Land Information Center was
       established (ICR, page 75).
      A Customer Service Center was established at the Ministry of Lands as targeted (ICR, page 46).
      Six Legal bills relating to land administration were drafted as compared to the target of two.

Outcomes.

      The value of titled land relative to untitled land increased from US$1.2/ square meter at the baseline
       US$31/square meter, exceeding the target of US$7.76/ square meter. The value of untitled land
       increased from US$0.08/ square meter in 2007 to US$21/square meter, exceeding the target of
       US$7.70/square meter (ICR, page 19).
      The number of title deeds increased by 190% (from an average of 180 per year to 517) and the time
       to issue a title declined by 40% (from an average of 340 days in 2005 to 37 days in 2017).

The results of the beneficiary survey discussed above with respect to the land reform agenda were; (i) 70% of
the respondents of the sample survey in both households and firms reported that it was easier to acquire land
in 2018 as compare to the past ten years due to a combination of factors, including decrease in price for
getting a title, increased awareness and knowledge, less time taken for securing a title and low level of
corruption. (ii) 84% of households reported no gender bias in owning land. (iii) 87% of the respondents
reported no bias in obtaining land titles.

Given that the outcomes were realized, this review concludes that the project significantly contributed to
realizing the project development outcome.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To assist the borrower in improving access to financial services.

Rationale
Outputs.

      Tanzania Mercantile Exchange (TMX) was established as a company under Public Private
       Partnership between the Government, public institutions and the private sector. TMX was incorporated
       on August 25,2014 under the Companies Act, 2002. The staff for TMX was recruited. Commodity
       contract specifications were prepared for these crops sesame seeds, sunflower, cashew nut, maize,
       pigeon peas and cow peas (ICR, page 26).
      The Dar es Salaam Automated Trading System and the Central Depository Security System were
       upgraded (ICR, page 27)..

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)




      The legal and regulatory frameworks for 25 new financial products were completed, exceeding
       the target of two.
      New financial products for money transfer services were introduced by mobile network operators in
       2008 by the Bank of Tanzania. These were operated by a network of agents across the country (as
       compared to the traditional bank-dominated financial system which was urban-based and not
       affordable for majority of Tanzanians (ICR, page 84).
      The framework for Deposit Insurance was created and the financial reporting standard for micro
       finance institutions were developed as targeted (ICR, page 23).
      There were no public private partnership projects when the project closed (target three).

Outcomes.

      26,698 Small and Medium Size Enterprises had active loan accounts at closure, short of the target of
         34,440. 80% of project supported institutions reported on this indicator when the project closed, short
         of the target of 100% (ICR, page 21).
        There were 951,404 active micro savings accounts when the project closed, short of the target of
         1,396,000. 75% of project supported institutions reported on this indicator, short of the target of 100%.
        42% of these accounts were held by women as compared to the target of 58%. 80% of project
         supported institutions were reporting on this indicator, short of the target of 100% (ICR, page
         21). .
        The sales of firms supported under the project increased from US$0.19 million to US$627.30 million,
         exceeding the target of US$562.50 million. The assets of firms supported under the project increased
         from US$57.08 million to US$627.30 million when the project closed, exceeding the target of
         US$562.50 million.
        Proportion of adult population that used financial services provided by formal financial service
         providers increased from 9% in 2006 to 57% in 2013, exceeding the target of 18%. Proportion of adult
         population classified as unserved/excluded reduced from 54% in 2006 to 16% in 2009. This was short
         of the target of 48.5% (ICR, page 84).
        Credit extended to the private sector as a percentage of Gross Domestic Product increased from 9%
         in 2006 to 16% in 2009, exceeding the 13% (ICR, page 84).

The results of the beneficiary survey discussed above indicated that only 27% of the respondent firms and
21% of the households surveyed received bank loans in the last year mostly from Commercial banks, Village
community banks and Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies, due to a combination of factors, including
high interest rates, lack of collateral and the high cost of procurement of Electronic Fiscal Devices machine
for SMEs.

Given that outcomes were realized although less than targeted, this review concludes that the project
activities significantly contributed to realizing the outcome.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
                                                                                                   Page 10 of 18
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)




                      Revised Objective

                      To improve access to financial services.

                      Revised Rationale


                      The outputs and outcomes discussed above were relevant to this objective.

                      Given that outcomes were realized, this review concludes that the project activities significantly contributed to
                      realizing this development outcome.



                      Revised Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale




Given that outcomes of two out of the three sub-objectives of the original project and the two sub-objectives after
AF were largely realized, this review concludes that the project activities significantly contributed to realizing the
project development objectives.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial


      5. Efficiency


Economic analysis. A Cost-Benefit analysis was conducted at appraisal and at completion, for activities
associated with: (i) strengthening the business environment and (ii) enterprise development
competitiveness. These activities accounted for 95% of the appraisal estimate and 90% of the actual cost. The
economic benefits were expected to come through increase in jobs created by the Tanzania Business
Development Scheme. The Net Present Value at US$8.50 million at a 15% discount rate at closure compared to
the NPV of US$56.00 million for a 12% discount rate at appraisal. The ex post Economic Rate of Return (ERR)
was estimated at 19% as compared to the ex ante ERR of 27%. The results of the ex post and ex ante analysis
were not comparable, given that the project was extended several times. However, both results were above



                                                                                                                        Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)



their respective discount rates and the corresponding Benefit-to-Cost ratio for the project was estimated at 118%
at project closure.



Administrative and Operational Issues. Delays associated with implementing some activities (such as the
geodetic network, renovation of office building and preparing the Dar es Salaam Master Plan), contributed to the
extension of the original project closing date. Some planned activities were not implemented when the project
closed (such as the activity associated with strengthening the legal and regulatory framework, capacity building
for consumer protection and addressing weakness of the collateral system).

Although there were moderate administrative and operation shortcomings, given the economic analysis, this
review assesses the efficiency to be substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      95.00
 Appraisal                                                  27.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      90.00
 ICR Estimate                                               19.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



Original objective. The original PDO, broad in relation to the activities supported by the project, is rated as
Substantial. Efficacy of two of the three sub-objectives – reducing the cost of doing business and improving
access to financial services is rated as Substantial, given that the outcomes were largely realized. Efficacy of
the second sub-objective - increasing the capacity of the local private sector to participate in domestic and
international markets - is rated as Modest, in view of the limited evidence. Efficiency is rated Substantial, given
the relatively strong economic analysis. Outcome before restructuring was moderately satisfactory.




                                                                                                      Page 12 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)



Revised objective. The revised PDO was more focused and realistic, is rated as High. Efficacy of the two sub-
objectives - is rated as Substantial, as the outcomes were largely realized. The outcome of the revised project is
rated as Satisfactory.



Considering the ratings discussed above and weighing them by the shares of Bank disbursement before and
after AF (0.59*4 + 0.41*5 = 4.41), the overall rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



Political risk. There is risk to ongoing benefits due to the possibility of policy reversals and backtracking of
reforms. The ICR (paragraph 109) states that recent legislative changes in mining and Public Private
Partnerships have sent negative signals to foreign investors. This along with abrupt policy changes, certain
policy measures aimed at strengthening state controls over private sector activities and stalling of the
National public-private dialogue process, had contributed to erosion of business confidence.



Technical risk. It is also not clear if the government will provide the necessary resources required for
updating technology and conducting training programs.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  The preparation of this project benefited from analytical studies by the Bank and the Government
  (Country Economic Memorandum on Growth, Diagnostic and Trade Integration Study, the Investment
  Climate Assessment, the Cost of Doing Business Survey and the value chain analysis of four sub
  sectors) (PAD, page 16). Lessons incorporated included: (i) Unlike traditional approaches for providing
  matching grants, grants provided to enterprises in this project were temporary and partial and enterprises
  were expected to contribute upfront; (ii) Capacity building of the Tanzania Private Sector Foundation for
  facilitating public-private sector dialogue: (iii) addressing constraints through mutually reinforcing
  components; and (iv) community approaches for building land registration systems (PAD, pages 16 and
  17). The project was prepared in collaboration with donors financing complementary activities of
  the BEST program. Several risks were identified at preparation, including High risk associated with

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)



  procurement, given the unfamiliarity of the implementation agencies with Bank procedures. Mitigation
  measures incorporated included hiring additional procurement staff and training the project entities.
  With mitigation measures, the project risk was rated as Moderate (PAD, page 25). The implementation
  arrangements were appropriate, with the Project Implementation Unit in the Prime Minister's Office (the
  main implementing agency). The arrangements made at appraisal for fiduciary compliance were
  appropriate (discussed in section 10b).



  There were moderate shortcomings in design. As indicated in section 3, the original PDO was broad in
  relation to the project activities. The revised PDO was more focused and realistic. The design
  underestimated the risk associated with many implementing agencies, given the weak institutional
  capacity of the government (discussed in section 100. This contributed to procurement delays during
  implementation. There were M&E shortcomings (discussed in section 9a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


 Supervision missions were held on average twice a year (ICR, page 3). The continuity of leadership WAS
 maintained, with three Task Team Leaders (TTLs) over the 12-year lifetime of the project. The ICR (page
 40) notes that the supervision team included technical experts, financial management and procurement
 specialists and consultants. The AF project built upon the original project to address identified weaknesses
 in key areas of Tanzania's business environment (land reforms and access to finance). The supervision
 team ensured smooth transition from the original to the AF project. The team provided active support to
 address the procurement challenges during implementation. According to the Borrower's ICR (ICR, page
 71), the team demonstrated flexibility and disbursed funds in a timely fashion. The Borrower's ICR also
 states that the Bank team addressed the challenges associated with procurement delays, through
 streamlining and coordinating procurement functions between the participating ministries, department and
 agencies and this aided in fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10b).

 There were moderate shortcomings. The implementation of key activities remained behind schedule
 halfway during implementation. There were procurement delays during implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                  Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 There were three original key outcome indicators - Increase in the number of formal enterprises. Increase
 in the value of titled land to untitled land through time and growth of sales and assets of beneficiary
 firms. There were however no appropriate indicators for monitoring the overall original PDO pertaining to
 creating sustainable conditions for enterprise creation and growth. There were no baselines for the
 indicators associated with the value of titled land and increase in the growth of sales and assets of
 beneficiary firms, Following the restructuring of the project after AF, the PDO indicators were replaced with
 new indicators such as the number of beneficiaries and the percentage of women who benefited from
 project activities.

 The project coordination unit in the President's Office of Planning and Privatization, the agency responsible
 for overall project coordination, was responsible for data collection for monitoring performance. Targets
 were provided for all outcome indicators at M&E design.



b. M&E Implementation


  The ICR (paragraph 38) provides little detail but notes that standard formulas and guidelines for data
  collection were established during implementation. The ICR also notes that the task team collected data
  for monitoring performance in a timely fashion.



c. M&E Utilization


  Data collected during implementation was used to inform decision-makers on project performance. The
  ICR does not provide any information on whether the M&E data was used for purposes other than
  monitoring performance of this project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)



   The project was classified as a Category C project. No safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal (PAD,
   page 29). The ICR (paragraph 100) notes that the project did not have any activities that impacted on
   environmental and social safeguards during implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


   Financial management. An assessment of the financial management arrangements of the President's
   Office of Planning and Privatization, conducted by the Bank, concluded that the arrangements were
   satisfactory (PAD, page 90). The ICR (paragraph 101) reports that the project complied with all financial
   requirements during implementation and the financial audits were unqualified (Borrower's ICR, page 67).



   Procurement. The PAD (page 94) reports that procurement activities were to be carried out by three
   entities; (I) The Better Regulation Unit located in the President's Office for Planning and Privatization; (ii)
   Tanzania Private Sector Foundation; and (iii) Financial Sector Deepening Trust. The Bank carried out
   an assessment of the implementing agencies capacity to address procurement issues at appraisal. The
   assessment concluded that procurement risk was High, due to the lack of experience of the implementing
   agencies with Bank's procedures. Risk mitigation measures included hiring a short-term consultant to
   provide hands on training to the staff and at least twice a year supervision missions by the Bank team
   (PAD, page 95-96). The ICR (paragraph 103) notes that there were procurement delays primarily due to
   the limited procurement capacity on the government side. These were however rectified and the ICR does
   not report any case of mis-procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)




d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)



                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                   There were shortcomings in
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Modest
                                                                                   M&E design.
Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons



The ICR (pages 42-43) draws the following three lessons from implementing this project (with some
adaptation of language).



1. Sequencing sector reforms and using a piloting approach can be useful for later
implementation of sector activities. In this project, the first phase of the project focused on
infrastructure for the Integrated Land Management Information System and piloting of systematic
registration of land in rural and urban areas. The activities pertaining to land registration were later
scaled up in the next phase.



(2) The capacity of the implementing agencies needs to be carefully considered, especially
when multiple implementing agencies are involved. Closely related to this lesson is that for
projects involving multiple implementing agencies, procurement issues could be more effectively
addressed by centralizing procurement in one implementing agency and by strengthening the
capacity of that agency at an early stage of the project.



(3) South-South Cooperation and peer to peer learning can be effective for knowledge
exchange and transfer. The government in this project developed its own integrated land
management system based on Uganda's land information system under the Competitiveness and
Enterprise Development in Uganda.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                      Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Private Sector/MSME Competitiveness (P085009)



The ICR is clear and provides a helpful narrative of events during implementation. For instance, it clearly
discusses the problems associated with procurement in a project involving many implementing agencies. The
ICR is consistent with the guidelines and draws reasonably good lessons from the experience of implementing
this project. The Borrower's ICR provided in Appendix 1 provided useful additional information.

The ICR could have provided more details on the methodology followed in administering the beneficiary survey,
as a separate annex. The ICR is unduly long and could have benefitted by better editing (The main text of the
ICR at 43 pages, is almost three times the recommended length of 15 pages).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                               Page 18 of 18
