     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB-Municipal Services Emergency Project (P149724)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021508

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P149724                                    LB-Municipal Services Emergency Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Lebanon                                    Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-17510                                   30-Dec-2017                                            9,994,074.23

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Jun-2014                                30-Jun-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           10,000,000.00                                      10,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            10,000,000.00                                       9,994,074.23

 Actual                                         9,994,074.23                                       9,994,074.23




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Maria Elena Pinglo         Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   The specific project development objectives stated in both the Grant Agreement (Schedule 1) and the Project
   Appraisal Document statement of objectives is (p. 5):




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB-Municipal Services Emergency Project (P149724)



   "The project development objective is to address urgent community priorities in selected municipal
   services, targeting areas most affected by the influx of Syrian refugees.”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   Component 1: Emergency Response (estimated cost: US$3.5 million; completion: US$3.6 million). This
   component financed the provision of high priority municipal services (Subcomponent 1A) and initiatives that
   promote social interaction and collaboration (Subcomponent 1B) in the eleven participating unions of
   municipalities. Allocation of resources among unions would be based on the share of Syrian population (as
   a proxy of the additional stress on local communities). Initiatives would be selected in consultation with
   municipalities and communities, with a decentralized approach to decision-making. These initiatives aimed
   to provide non-exclusionary benefits, addressing some of the most immediate service needs in the unions
   most affected by the crisis: (i) improving safety and mobility; (ii) mitigating the increasing health and
   environmental risks associated with the deterioration of water, waste, and sanitation services; and (iii)
   increasing collaboration and interaction amongst the communities.



   Subcomponent 1A Service Delivery focused on improving municipal service delivery in areas such as water
   supply and wastewater, solid waste management, roads improvement, and recreational facilities and
   community centers. Sub-projects were small in scale and required only simple preparation.



   Subcomponent 1B Community Activities financed activities that the communities found conducive to
   reducing social tensions that stemmed from cohabitation of hosts and refugees. Activities were designed to
   be inclusive and socially cohesive, with a particular focus on women, children and the youth, covering skills
   exchange, learning, youth employment training, environmental campaigns, etc., as prioritized by
   communities.



   Component 2: Rehabilitation of Critical Infrastructure (estimated cost: US$5.5 million; completion:
   US$5.9 million). This component financed mid-size works to rehabilitate and/or develop critical
   infrastructure in sectors such as solid waste management, roads improvement, water and sanitation, and
   community facilities. Due to the larger scale and costs of these works, and given the financing envelope, the
   number of unions benefitting from this component was limited and priority was given to demand-driven
   projects contributing to the highest number of beneficiaries. The investments would be identified through



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB-Municipal Services Emergency Project (P149724)



   consultations among elected officials and community representatives, consolidated at the union level and
   coordinated with relevant ministries to ensure coherence with sectoral policies.



   Component 3: Project Implementation Support (estimated cost: US$1.0 million; completion: US$0.5
   million). This component financed project management and covered the costs of the Project Management
   Unit (PMU) housed in the Lebanon Council for Development and Reconstruction (CDR), which was
   responsible for implementing the Project. This component also funded support needed for implementation
   of the decentralized, consultative approach. The consultation process was carried out by unions and
   municipalities, with facilitation support provided by teams of social and technical experts within the PMU,
   who helped communities translate the identified challenges into concrete proposals for infrastructure and
   social activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


   Project Cost: The project was appraised at US$ 10 million. Actual project cost reached US$ 9.99 million or
   about 99.9% of total costs.



   Financing: The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development acted as an administrator of the
   Lebanon Syrian Crisis Trust Fund grant.



   Dates: The project was approved on September 2014 and became effective in February 2015. It was due
   for completion by December 2017 (FA, p,3). Considering the volatility of the security situation and the
   region, a request for a six-month extension came during a Bank supervision mission and through a
   communication from The Council for Development and Reconstruction of the Republic of Lebanon, the
   responsible agency, dated October 26, 2017. The project was first extended to be completed by June 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


The project objective remains relevant to the national development priorities. This plan outlines
objectives and policies that will improve the quality of urban infrastructure, improve municipal services, and
promote sustainable cities as contained in a section entitled “Livable Places, Sustainable
Environment” (Tenth Development Plan, p. 117 -140). In addition, the project development objective is
relevant to the Government's Integrated Urban Development Strategy and Action Plan (2010-2023), built on

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       LB-Municipal Services Emergency Project (P149724)



the structural reform introduced during project implementation and informed by the results of the project
such as reducing non-revenue water losses.



The PDO is also relevant to the WBG engagement strategy for the Middle East and North Africa
(MENA) region and the country partnership framework (2017-2022). The overarching project objective
of the regional strategy is to contribute to building peace and stability by tackling the social, economic and
institutional drivers of conflict. More specifically the strategy is aligned through two main pillars. The first
pillar, “renewing social contract” is addressed through the quality service provision and citizen engagement,
and the third pillar of “resilience to shocks of refugees” is addressed through supporting host
governments. The PDO objectives are also relevant to the two focus areas of the World Bank Country
Partnership Framework (2017-2022) of (i) expanding access to and quality of service delivery through its
support to water, urban transport and waste management; and (ii) expanding economic opportunities and
increase human capital through its efforts to support the communities with inclusive and socially cohesive
activities aimed at reducing social tensions that stemmed from cohabitation of hosts and refugees. Through
these two focus areas, the WBG will help Lebanon mitigate the economic and social impact of the Syria
crisis, safeguard the country’s development gains, and enhance the prospects for stability and development
in the coming years.



However, while there is clear alignment between the project’s development objectives and the
country- and World Bank strategies, the relevance of the objectives is pitched at a level that does
not adequately reflect a potential solution to a development problem. While acknowledging the
difficulty of the emergency environment, a shortcoming here is the lack of clarity in the PDO formulation
around what outcomes would be achieved through addressing community priorities in community services.
Focusing on “addressing urgent community priorities in selected community services" alone is not outcome
focused and doesn't sufficiently illustrate what development results were expected as a consequence of the
project interventions. The objective was not defined such that its achievements would be plausibly traceable
to improvements envisioned to arise from addressing community priorities in selected community services,
whether they would be expected to lead to beneficiaries’ improved health, improved income and improved
social stability in the communities. These may be longer term objectives but tracking them and identifying
them is an important aspect of a successful development operation even in emergency type projects.
Furthermore, the PDO does not cover the full range of expected outcomes from the project activities.
Component 1B financing “activities conducive to reduce social tension” is not captured in the PDO
statement and the clear representation of this in the theory of change limits the project's ability to engage in
this important aspect of the design.

Thus, the project relevance is rated Substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                         Page 4 of 14
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  LB-Municipal Services Emergency Project (P149724)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               The project aimed at addressing urgent community priorities in selected municipal services, targeting areas
               most affected by the influx of Syrian refugees

               Rationale
               Theory of Change. Activities associated with addressing urgent community priorities through selected
               municipal services, aimed at physical (improving water and waste water services, solid waste management,
               roads and community infrastructure) and social (raising environmental awareness, skills development and
               employment training and enhancing health care facilities) interventions in targeted areas with a high influx of
               refugees in urban areas of Lebanon. These outputs in turn were expected to contribute to the following
               outcomes: improve access of Lebanese host communities and refugees in providing water connections, solid
               waste collection and enhance mobility and thereby generate cost savings to beneficiaries and improve water
               continuity.

               Outputs

                     Small-scale Water Supply and Waste Water: installed 8 generators (1,700 kva for water pumping);
                        3 pumps for wells; 1 concrete water tank (total capacity of 500m3); 3 plastic water tanks; 2 water tank
                        trucks (total capacity of 12.5 m3); 4,000 m of water supply pipes; 46 water filters; and 2,500 m sewer
                        mains.
                       Solid Waste: Installed 970 garbage containers (total capacity of 262,200 Liters); provided 5
                        compactor garbage trucks (total capacity of 38m3); 5 skid steer loaders with brooms; and 1 street
                        sweeper.
                       Recreational and Community Facilities: 2 public gardens of 1,750m2 in total; Installation of fences
                        in 2 public gardens; and Renovation of 1 public hall.
                       Trainings and Community Outreach: Environmental training (four participating unions):64 training
                        sessions on sorting, recycling and reusing of solid waste, as well as reforestation and 442
                        environmental awareness campaigns for school children, youth, women, and men. Employment
                        training (two participating unions): 123 vocational training sessions on professional sewing, business
                        operations, IT, accounting, management, and communication. Skills development (two participating
                        unions): 531 training sessions and workshops on crafts, art, tailoring, knitting, foreign languages,
                        culture, IT, academic subjects, and sports and 120 classes on science, math, environment, health,
                        conflict resolution. Art program of Lebanese and Syrian children (all the 11 participating unions):
                        Organized a 3-month highly collaborative art program among 500 children from 22 schools in 11
                        unions, including both Lebanese and Syrians, in partnership with UNESCO. Health training (three
                        participating unions): 314 training and community outreach sessions on health.
                       Health Equipment (three participating unions): Provided 1 mobile clinic and its initial O&M, serving
                        remote municipalities; Supplied equipment for 1 clinic focusing on poor women; Provided 1
                        ambulance.

               Outcomes: Achievement of the PDO was measured through the following outcome indicators (OIs):



                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LB-Municipal Services Emergency Project (P149724)




      The project benefitted nearly 475,700 people directly, including Lebanese and Syrians, men and
         women, compared to targets of 300,000.
        In the first year, over 300,700 conflict affected people (including Lebanese and Syrians) received
         benefits from the project, surpassing the end target of 80,000 by 276%. These first-year beneficiaries
         included over 159,300 (53%) female, over 204,400 (68%) host population, and over 96,300 (32%)
         displaced population, far outperforming the end sub-targets of 40,000, 60,000, and 20,000
         respectively
        100% of implemented sub-projects corresponded to the priorities identified by unions of municipalities
         under the project all the sub-projects were identified through consultations), exceeding the end target
         of 80%.
        72% of beneficiaries were satisfied with improved sanitary and/or mobility conditions, exceeding the
         target of 50%.
        The project benefitted 1.4 million people indirectly including Lebanese and Syrians, men and women,
         compared to targets of 1.35 million.

While the indicators above show achievement over targets, these results are in themselves insufficient to
show that the project was able to improve access to municipal services as they are mostly focused on the
number of beneficiaries. While the ICR shows additional information in the positive results from perception
surveys and some unintended outcomes (eg. the cost savings to beneficiaries of water supply), this does only
in part provide evidence of outcome achievement. But the following results go some way towards identifying
the project's outcomes.

      Improve access and generated cost savings to beneficiaries of water supply: Provided and
       distributed 12,423m3/day of municipal water to 124,572 beneficiaries at US$175/HH/year for
       municipal water compared to US$1,200/HH/year on average from private suppliers resulting in total
       savings US$1,025/HH/year. Prior to the project water in schools was not potable. The project
       provided safe, potable water to 13,902 students in 45 schools, which enable them to save
       US$154/student/year from buying bottled water. While quality of water was improved as prior to the
       project water was not potable. There is no evidence data provided in the ICR.Overall, 77%
       beneficiaries were satisfied with improved water and sanitation (no targets).
      Increased Solid Waste Collection: Collected 79 tons/day of SW for 42,584 beneficiaries, equivalent
       to approximately 23% of total solid waste generated in project municipalities; Compacted and
       transported 41 tons/day of garbage to solid waste treatment plants, equivalent to approximately 16%
       of total solid waste collected in the project unions, benefitting 68,966 people; and Swept the streets of
       city centers and villages in project municipalities. Prior to the project, participating municipalities faced
       enormous challenges in SW collection, especially after the Syrian crisis. Streets in cities and villages
       had ubiquitous garbage due to the lack of SW collection and sweeping facilities. Overall, 79% of
       beneficiaries were satisfied with improved solid waste collection (no targets)
      Enhanced access and mobility: for 62,481 beneficiaries in 14 municipalities by connecting and
       rehabilitating existing roads to improve access to markets, schools, clinics, playgrounds, and
       community facilities; Street lighting for 9 km of roads for 43,360 beneficiaries to enhance safety and
       access to shops and public spaces at night. Overall, 74% of beneficiaries were satisfied with improved
       roads and street lighting (no targets)
      Enhanced Access to recreational activities: Created public spaces for 4,000 beneficiaries; Prior to
       the project, participating municipalities lacked public spaces for recreational activities. Enhanced
       access of community facility: through the renovation of public hall for 2,250 beneficiaries. Overall,
       64% of beneficiaries were satisfied with improved parks and public facilities (no targets)

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 14
                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                        LB-Municipal Services Emergency Project (P149724)




                              Employment Creation (two participating unions): Provided certified vocational training for 240
                               young people, women and men, including Lebanese, Syrians, and disabled and 18 trainees found
                               jobs shortly after the training. Skills development (Two participating unions): trained 1518 people and
                               created two jobs. However, it is unclear how the vocational training activities led to employment
                               creation in 18 cases.



                      Rating
                      High


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale
The results framework indicators show achievement over targets. While these achievements are sufficient to
justify a High rating for Efficacy and show that the project was actively and sustainably responding to urgent
community priorities, they only go a small way towards illustrating the broader mandate outlined in the theory of
change which seeks to mitigate conflict and improve the extent of service delivery. The ICR shows additional
outcomes outside the results framework that provides some additional evidence of improvements in key areas of
municipal services.



Overall Efficacy Rating
High


 5. Efficiency
At appraisal, due to its emergency and consultative nature, the project did not carry out ex-ante economic
analysis. However, methods for the economic analysis were set at appraisal. Given their diverse scope,
analytical tools were tailored to each component. Additionally, the appraisal stated that an analysis of a sample
of 20 percent of these small investments will be carried out at the mid-term and at Project closure. Medium-sized
infrastructure investments financed under component two will be subject to prior feasibility and cost benefit
analyses, including calculation of Net Present Value, Financial Internal Rate of Return and Economic Internal
Rate of Return. Benefits justifying the investment in service delivery and social activities were captured during
project preparation. Tangible benefits include better services, an improved enabling environment for business
development and positive externalities for local economic development. Intangible benefits include enhanced
social capital through the social activities and the consultative processes underlying service delivery at the local
level.

The ex-post analysis included the results based on 79% of total investments through cost-benefit analysis, cost-
effectiveness analysis, and cost comparisons. The results show high or substantial economic rates of return
including under adverse scenarios, as well as value-for-money. According to the ICR, the Internal Rates of
Return (IRR) estimates for interventions are economically viable, but its ICR Estimate point values vary
significantly from a range of 108% for water filters in schools to 19% for road rehabilitation. A sensitivity analysis
indicates that all interventions remain economically viable even under scenarios of a 20% increase in capital

                                                                                                                          Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LB-Municipal Services Emergency Project (P149724)



costs, a 20% reduction in benefits, and a combination of both. While the economic analysis is helpful in
providing a rough overview of the likely returns from the different investments, there are limitations in the
analysis with considerable optimism in the infrastructure longevity, limited explanation on O&M for purchased
equipment and unrealized claims against environment benefits. While these evidently exist, the presumptions
around behavior are particularly important to the efficiency rates being realized. This is certainly not a given in
an environment with a large itinerant population.

According to the ICR (pg 18), tangible benefits are the creation of over 21,000 workdays of permanent
employment per year for Lebanese workers and over 25,600 non-permanent workdays per year for Syrian
workers in operation of the infrastructure and equipment. But the ICR does not provide evidence of how these
forecasts were realized, nor detail on where and how they were applied. Focus group discussions under the
beneficiary survey and interviews contributed to better operation of local businesses. In addition, investments
contribute to climate change and environmental benefits such as 1. Investments in solar systems contributed to
an estimated 1500 tons/year reduction in CO2 and 2. Investments to enhance composting and recycling to
reduce in solid waste and waste water without treatment. Intangible benefits are the citizen engagement which
included active consultation by CDR, unions and municipalities which laid the foundation for designing activities
that met citizen needs and possibly led to sustainable results over time. Again, while potentially helpful, these
forecasts are largely speculative.

There were minimal operational and administrative inefficiencies. The closing date was extended six months
to allow completion of project activities as per the original design. Investments were prioritized through a highly
participatory process that involved 55 consultations with stakeholders. According to the ICR (p. 17) only five
percent of the Grant was used for project management to undertake systematic consultations and a beneficiary
survey, as well as to maintain a fully functional PMU.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        79.00
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

This is a project with innovative features for community consultations with both the host community and the
Syrian refugees, that was prepared and implemented under emergency procedures in difficult country


                                                                                                        Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB-Municipal Services Emergency Project (P149724)



conditions. Based on the discussion outlined above and the ratings of substantial for Relevance of PDO, high
for efficacy and substantial for efficiency, the overall outcome of the project is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political & Macroeconomic Risk: While O&M arrangements are in place, risks remain in maintaining
development outcomes. the political and macroeconomic instability in Lebanon, national fragility and regional
security issues, and fiscal constraints pose risks to maintaining the development outcomes. Close follow up
from the central government and from the Bank/donor community is needed to address the sustainability of
project outcomes.

Social Risk: The impact of the refugee crises continues beyond project closure. Despite project,
Lebanon’s residency policy makes it difficult for Syrians to maintain legal status, heightening risks of
exploitation and abuse and restricting refugees’ access to work, education, and healthcare. This will continue
to add pressure to the country and municipalities in terms of service delivery.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design incorporated relevant global lessons of engaging municipalities and citizens, benefitting both
  refugees and host communities, and allowing flexibility. The design integrated physical and social
  interventions to address the multi-dimensional challenges of the fragile, stressed country context during
  the refugee crisis. Given the emergency and the need for consultations, the project adopted an effective
  framework approach that allowed flexibility during implementation.

  Targeted areas were adequately identified through a pilot consultative approach at a level of unions and
  municipalities following a systematic four step criteria for selection.

  The institutional responsibility for M&E was placed with the PMU which collected the information from
  unions and municipalities. Despite the emergency nature, the results framework shows targets set up at
  approval in 2014 (based on additional information provided by the team in an email dated June 25th).
  However, the majority of indicators as well as the PDO formulation were for the most part output-based
  and not designed to measure development outcomes of the project.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB-Municipal Services Emergency Project (P149724)




b. Quality of supervision
 The supervision team provided support and proactive supervision in difficult country conditions in the
 following areas: (i) bringing stakeholders together and facilitating discussions to expedite implementation,
 (ii) providing technical support to change plans to replace proposed solid waste treatment to a solar lighting
 due to unavailability of land, (iii) bank playing a key role in facilitating O&M arrangements.

 The Mid-Term review was not conducted. While not many changes happened during implementation, a
 midterm review is a useful tool to monitor project progress and make course corrections if needed.

 The Bank’s team mobilized additional support to help the client with support needed to achieve the PDO.
 The Bank strengthened technical support to the implementing agency in engineering and social
 development by mobilizing local consultants and technical experts.

 Frequent supervision (11 missions), and close coordination with the implementing agencies throughout the
 project cycle allowed the project to be implemented in a very volatile environment.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were unclear. More specifically there is lack of clarity in the PDO formulation around what
 outcomes would be achieved through addressing community priorities in community services. In addition,
 most of the indicators (especially at the outcome level) did not cover anything other than the number of
 beneficiaries – which is inadequate to document and report on relevant achievements reflected by those
 objectives.

 While the ICR reports (pg.21) that infrastructure targets were to be set and defined during implementation
 due to the demand driven nature of the project, there is limited use and articulation of what this meant in
 terms of longer term intended outcomes. Appropriate proxy measures for community cohesion and
 benchmarks for different infrastructure options were unfortunately not included in the design limiting the
 ability of with and without project scenarios.

 The project management unit (PMU) had the prime responsibility for M&E. The PMU was given overall
 responsibility to collect information from the unions and municipalities were the activities were planned.




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB-Municipal Services Emergency Project (P149724)




b. M&E Implementation
  The PMU was responsible for the implementation of the M&E system. Data sources and responsible
  agencies for data collection were defined for all indicators. The data was collected, and indicators were
  updated as per the agreed frequency. Semi-annual progress reports on key activities, progress, and
  results were submitted to the Bank on time.




c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was used to monitor project progress, subprojects databases and to prepare reports to
  donors. There were some implementation delays with component 2 that affected progress in indicators
  of component 2. These caused remedial measures to accelerate the progress of this component.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was categorized as a Category ‘B’ project, and OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment (OP
   4.11) and OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement safeguard policies were triggered.

   Environmental Safeguards. The Project triggered OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and was
   classified as Category B. An Environmental and Social Safeguards Documents (ESMF) was prepared which
   included an Environmental and social screening tool to exclude all Category A projects, identify the types of
   risks and incorporate mitigation measures. The ICR does not have a statement of compliance.

   Social Safeguards. The PAD triggered OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). A Resettlement Policy
   Framework (RPF) was prepared bases in the requirements of OP 4.12 and Lebanese laws and regulations.
   The RPF identified procedures and measures to be put in place in case of impacts on squatters or
   encroachers or the involuntary taking of land. The overall safeguards performance was consistently rated
   satisfactory throughout project implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). The ICR reports that Financial Management was assessed as satisfactory
   (ICR p.23). An independent auditor carried out the Audits. All audit reports had unqualified clean auditor’s


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB-Municipal Services Emergency Project (P149724)



   opinions. Adequate FM arrangements were in place during project implementation to ensure proper use
   and accountability of project funds. A dedicated financial officer, financed by the grant, was assigned to the
   project, due to the large number of small contracts. The project experienced some delays in disbursement
   as funds were requested to flow through the MoF treasury account to the project Designated Account.

   Procurement. The ICR reports that procurement was handled satisfactorily (ICR p 23). All contracts were
   procured based on the Bank’s Procurement and Consultant Guidelines. The project was prepared under
   OP8.00 (Rapid response to crises and emergencies), which enabled the CDR to award two contracts to
   contractors who had already been selected competitively under a previous project. A total of 46 contracts
   for works, goods and consultancy services were procured and successfully implemented. Procurement
   plans were prepared and adhered to diligently. Prior and post reviews carried out by the Bank found that
   procurement processing and contract management were overall satisfactory. Recommendations provided
   by the Bank were taken on board (for example, technical specifications of equipment were upgraded as
   per Bank recommendation to reduce O&M costs). The complaint mechanism was in place and the
   complaint received on the solar pumping contract was resolved within 90 days.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 The ratings for relevance and
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory               efficiency were both Substantial
                                                                                 with minor shortcomings
                                                                                 There were moderate
Bank Performance                Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory               shortcomings in quality of
                                                                                 design.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provided a series of lessons. The most important are the following:

For a successful intervention for effective emergency response, it is critical to intervene at
the local/municipal levels. Local authorities are on the frontlines of emergency responses. The
local authorities play the main role in managing the increased demand for services, jobs and the rise
of social tensions due to the rapid influx of refugees. The project worked closely with local


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LB-Municipal Services Emergency Project (P149724)



governments through CDR in identifying and responding to local needs. Through this process, the
project also built the capacity of the local governments in establishing an inclusive decision-making
mechanism, as well as in implementing community-level sub-projects.

A consultative decision making system and framework approach, rather than relying on a
centralized plan of pre-defined solutions, may work well in implementing local solutions in
emergency situations. The combination of a consultative decision-making system and a framework
approach adopted by the project was critical in identifying the needs of communities and in
responding to these needs in a rapidly changing context. The decentralized, participatory approach
also resulted in high ownership and satisfaction from beneficiaries, though sufficient time needed to
be allocated for an effective consultative process. Defining the scope of the project clearly and
allowing for flexibility facilitated the successful achievement of results.

Both quick wins and mid-/long-term improvements are necessary to restore trust and the
social contract. In an emergency context, where there is mounting pressure and perceived
competition over resources and services, quick, visible improvements in municipal services were
critical for building trust in local authorities. On the other hand, mid-size, developmental solutions,
though taking longer time to prepare, provided larger, more lasting impacts. The two-pronged
approach adopted by the project was a meaningful model, as evidenced by high beneficiary
satisfaction. But it is important these intentions and approaches are suitably captured in the PDO for
the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and well written, provides good coverage of most important subjects and uses all available
data instead of relying on indicators. The report is candid, engages effectively with the challenges of emergency
project efficiency analysis, and makes a strong case for the additionality that was clearly evident in this type of
project. However, there were minor shortcomings. In some instances, the ICR did not use adequate evidence to
substantiate it's claims. In addition, the report would benefit from a stronger adherence and reference to the
excellent theory of change presented in the report. Closer linking to the theory of change would have helped
clarify the substantial link between the projects outputs and intended outcomes.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
LB-Municipal Services Emergency Project (P149724)




                                                                                 Page 14 of 14
