     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Institutional Capacity and (P123315)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021714

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P123315                                      Strengthening Institutional Capacity and

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Djibouti                                     Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H7770                                    31-Aug-2017                                           5,449,394.61

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Jun-2012                                  31-Aug-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               6,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                                6,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                            5,449,394.61                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Anthony Martin Tyrrell       Eduardo Fernandez             Joy Behrens                    IEGHC (Unit 2)
                              Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project objective as stated in the Financing Agreement (p. 5) of August 21, 2012 is to strengthen the
   institutional capacity of the Ministry of National Education and Vocational Training (MENFOP) for improved
   management of the education system. The same objective is repeated in the Project Appraisal Document
   (PAD, p. 3) and the Implementation Completion Report (ICR, p. 1).




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Institutional Capacity and (P123315)



   There was no change to the project objective or PDO indicators during implementation; however, the target
   for one of the PDO indicators was revised upwards as part of a May 2017 restructuring, which also extended
   the closing date by 12 months. The ICR provides the following rationale for the upward revision: (a) despite
   initial delays, MENFOP had made significant progress after the mid‐term review in the development of Annual
   Work Plans (AWPs) across all its departments, and was confident of enhanced performance by the closing
   date; and (b) MENFOP also saw the higher target as confirmation of its sustained commitment to a
   results‐based way of working. A split evaluation is not performed here as the altered target was made more
   ambitious to reflect the additional time made available for project completion.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Reinforcing institutional capacity and performance of the education system (Planned:
   US$4.0 million; Actual US$3.6 million) – this component reinforced the capacity of the MENFOP at the
   central, regional, and school levels to improve performance and management of the education system
   through technical assistance, training, and the provision of furniture, vehicles, and equipment, as detailed in
   the Procurement Plan. Component 1 was implemented through four sub-components as follows:



         Subcomponent 1.1. Improving management and accountability provided technical assistance,
          training, and equipment to various departments at the central, regional and school levels to help the
          MENFOP in: (a) defining roles and accountability structures and developing procedures that
          introduce performance‐based management tools; (b) strengthening planning and management of
          financial, material, and human resources; and (c) supporting the systematic collection, analysis, and
          sharing of information, and harmonization of the various information systems to monitor and
          evaluate the performance of the MENFOP in delivering education services.



         Subcomponent 1.2. Supporting the establishment of a new governance structure for TVET
          provided technical assistance, training, and equipment to the new Directorate for TVET that was
          established before project effectiveness. Through support to this directorate, the project promoted
          the establishment of a national authority for TVET with public and private sector participation that
          facilitated the links between the education system and the labor market.



         Subcomponent 1.3. Strengthening efficient management of textbooks. This subcomponent
          supported the National Education Research and Information Production Center (CRIPEN) in the
          management of textbooks through technical assistance and training, in planning, costing, budgeting,
          procurement, stock control, distribution and maintenance of textbooks, and in implementing a

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Strengthening Institutional Capacity and (P123315)



         sustainable system of cost recovery which does not exclude the rural poor from access to learning
         materials. It provided technical assistance to conduct studies to assess the use of textbooks before
         and after the project and sought to conduct a pilot experiment on the use of digital textbooks through
         e‐tablets at the secondary level. The project also provided IT equipment and minor rehabilitation for
         the offset printing and storage facility.



        Subcomponent 1.4. Enhancing project management, which strengthened the capacity of
         MENFOP to manage education projects, in general, and this project, in particular, by providing
         technical assistance and training to the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in procurement, financial
         management, and monitoring and evaluation. It also provided technical assistance to support the
         Project Steering Committee. The project financed furniture, equipment, vehicles and incremental
         operating costs for the PIU.



  Component 2: Increase the quality of the learning environment (Planned US$2.0 million; Actual
  US$1.7 million) This component supported activities to improve the quality of the school environment by
  ensuring minimum learning and working conditions through: (a) the upgrading and rehabilitation of the
  technical colleges and provision of didactic equipment; and (b) the completion of the Hodan 3 lower
  secondary school and provision of equipment and learning material.



  We note that this second Component is unrelated to the PDO, which focuses on improved system capacity.
  This activities supported in this component are more closely related to improving education quality and/or
  conditions.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: Estimated cost at appraisal was US$6 million of which US$5,449,394.61 was disbursed at
  project close.



  Financing: This Specific Investment Loan was supported with IDA funding of US$6 million.



  Borrower Contribution: There was no Borrower contribution planned or made.




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Institutional Capacity and (P123315)



   Dates: The project was approved June 12, 2012 and became effective seven months later on January 15,
   2013. The Mid-term Review was completed March 7, 2016. The project closed on August 31, 2018, exactly
   one year after the original planned closing date. The project underwent two level two restructurings:



         First restructuring (May 31, 2017): Change in Results Framework; Change in Components and Cost;
          Change in Loan Closing Date(s); Change in Legal Covenants; Change in Institutional Arrangements;
          Change in Implementation Schedule; Other Change(s). The restructuring extended project closing
          date by one year (to August 31, 2018) to allow for completion of project activities (mitigating early
          delays), and a new activity was introduced under component 1 (i.e., the provision of school grants to
          30 schools to extend the results‐based approach (RBA) down to the school level) to empower
          schools to identify key constraints to learning (e.g., remedial programs, minor repairs, equipment,
          supplies, etc.), develop and manage improvement plans and to be accountable for these activities.
          The schools were selected among the poorest communities, and with the lowest education
          performance. The restructure also involved revision of the results framework to shift the end target
          dates for all indicators in line with the revised Closing Date and to adjust some end targets, again
          reflecting the longer time frame for delivery. Adjustment to the overall funds available and
          component costs were made to reflect losses due to exchange rate fluctuations. Funds were
          reallocated between activities to reflect support from other donors or the government for certain
          activities and the cost of revised activities: the cost of Component 1 was reduced from US$4 million
          to US$3.6 million equivalent and the cost of Component 2 was reduced from US$2 million to US$1.7
          million equivalent.



         Second restructuring (November 14, 2017): Change in Results Framework (RF); Reallocation
          between Disbursement Categories Change in Disbursements Arrangements; Change in Institutional
          Arrangements. This restructuring was to permit an increase in the school grants funding envelope
          from US$50,000 (as stated in the first restructuring) to US$150,000, and was necessary due to the
          government’s decision to include lower secondary schools that had more significant resource
          constraints - 21 primary schools and 9 lower secondary schools were to benefit from school grants.
          The additional US$100,000 came from the planned household survey for which other funding had
          been identified through the Resident Mission. The RF was amended to add secondary schools to
          the target.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project contributed to the priorities and objectives highlighted in Djibouti’s National Development
Initiative (INDS), the National Education Strategy 2010-19, and the associated National Education Action
Plan (PAEFPT) for 2011-2016. The PAD notes that Djibouti acknowledges the important role of education –
in 2010, 19.8 percent of the national budget went to education. The INDS highlights improvement in
management of the sector to increase access, quality and relevance of education as a priority. The National
Education Strategy focused on improving the efficiency of the education system and the quality and

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Strengthening Institutional Capacity and (P123315)



               relevance of education with a focus on results. A series of diagnostic studies that supported the strategy
               included in-depth analyses of all levels of education as well as study of the administrative structure and its
               management capacity, including an organizational audit of the Ministry of Education. The project was
               designed to support the National Education Strategy’s emphasis on access, equity, quality, focus on results
               and good governance as major priorities for the sector. The project was also in line with the 2009-12
               Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) that highlighted improvements of the education sector as one of the key
               national priorities. The Performance Learning Review of the 2014-17 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
               brought about a change in focus for Pillar 2 from “strengthening the business environment” to
               “strengthening public and private sector capacity for service delivery”, thereby reconfirming the relevance of
               the project objective. The PDO remains consistent with the World Bank CPS and the Government's
               Education Sector Strategy 2010‐2019. Relevance was reconfirmed in the Systematic Country Diagnostic
               (2018) that identified capacity and governance constraints in Djibouti and recommended continued focus on
               these areas.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             to strengthen the institutional capacity of the Ministry of National Education and Vocational Training
                             (MENFOP) for improved management of the education system

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (ToC) focused on improving education sector management by providing support to
                             several priority areas in the sector including training of staff at various levels, purchase of equipment to
                             strengthen the institutional capacity for improved management of the education system, and a focus
                             on instituting results‐based annual work plans, a governance structure for technical and vocational training,
                             more efficient management of learning materials and increasing the capacity to manage education projects.
                             The results framework was built on output and activity type indicators, including the PDO indicators. This was
                             in recognition of fragile country context and limitations in capacity. The indicators suggest activities and output
                             that one would expect to be associated with enhanced capacity in the Ministry - the introduction of a certain
                             discipline in planning - but they do not demonstrate enhanced capacity i.e., the production of a work plan is
                             no guarantee that the plan contains the appropriate content and, even if it did, no guarantee that required
                             actions are implemented to a satisfactory standard. However, taking the context and conservative build of the
                             project as given, targets for the two PDO indicators - percentage of departments have Annual Work Plan
                             (AWP) developed and agreed and approved; and, percentage of AWP implemented – were exceeded as
                             were those for six out of the eight intermediate indicators. The ICR also presents information regarding other
                             project achievements relating, for example, to institutional strengthening and private sector participation as
                             set out below.


                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Strengthening Institutional Capacity and (P123315)




Intermediate Indicators and Outputs

Timely production and dissemination of semi‐annual reports on school performance. Original target (8)
increased to 10 at the first restructuring and actual was 12.



Annual statistical reports with key indicators. Original target (4) increased to 5 at the first restructuring, and
that target was achieved.



Number of partnerships with private sector firms to train and/or recruit students has increased from 1 in 2011
to at least 6 (increased from 4 at first restructuring) by the end of the Project. The actual achievement was 15.



The level of satisfaction of TVET students and firms has increased by at least 10 percent (decreased from 30
percent at first restructuring) by the end of the Project. The original indicator included the qualifier, (compared
to baseline); however, there was no baseline available. Actual rates of satisfaction 85.5 percent for firms, and
89 percent for students.



Number of schools receiving school grants (which was added at the second restructuring) had a target of 30
that was achieved.



The National Education Research and Information Production Center (CRIPEN) consistently collected
information on number of books sent, delivered and received at the primary, lower secondary and secondary
levels, and tracked the textbook stock at the beginning and the end of the school year, both at the center as
well as in schools.



A total of 204,477 textbooks distributed in 2017/2018.



Number (stock) of books available in schools at the beginning of the school year (June 2017): 83 198



Number (stock) of books available at the end of the school year (June 2018): 13 6039



                                                                                                       Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Strengthening Institutional Capacity and (P123315)




Total number of students using new computer rooms in Hodan 3 schools. The original target
(2,200) increased to 2,500 at the second restructure. Actual achievement was 2,861.



Total number of students using didactic equipment in technical colleges increases. Actual achievement was
818 against a target of 800.



Under Component 1 (Reinforcing Institutional Capacity and Performance of the Education System) the
following outputs are noted: 626 Ministry staff trained, including, for example, 97 trained on planning,
management, budgeting and MTEF, 75 staff were trained on applying a RBA and management, 9 statistics
staff at central and regional levels, and 130 school heads trained; administrative manual with clear roles and
responsibilities, and performance management tools produced; dashboard for Minister established; online
depository of workplans established; geo‐mapping included in all schools; Management information system
harmonized; National directorate for TVET supported through capacity building and equipment; over 600
TVET students trained as part of the partnerships; 132 private firms participated through the 15
partnerships; 204,477 textbooks distributed 2017/2018; annual data on textbooks printed, delivered and
received by schools, as well as stock at beginning and end of school year available.



Under Component 2 (Increase the Quality of the Learning Environment) the following outputs are noted: 5
technical colleges rehabilitated and equipped; 6 computer rooms constructed; 1 multipurpose room
constructed; 2 housing quarters for school director and assistant school director constructed



Outcomes / PDO

The target for the first PDO indicator - percentage of departments with Annual Work Programs (AWP) agreed
and approved by the beginning of the fiscal year – was increased from 75 percent to 90 percent at the first
restructuring (May 2017) to reflect the extended timeframe for the project. At project close, 96 percent of
departments had an AWP agreed and approved.



By 2017, the AWPs were based on results and their introduction helped the Ministry to identify and be
accountable for clear targets directly linked to the Education Sector Plan (ESP, 2017-20) indicators, ensure
that the sector priorities of increased access, improved equity and retention were embedded across all
ministry departments’ work plans, and strengthen its capacity to coordinate and manage different
interventions by donors and government agencies to avoid duplication and therefore maximize synergies . In
2018, a total 48 out of 50 departments produced results based AWPs.




                                                                                                  Page 7 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Strengthening Institutional Capacity and (P123315)




The target for the second PDO indicator - departments with an AWP that was implemented - was 70 percent,
and the actual achievement was 90 percent, which suggests an upward trend in the ministry’s capacity to
implement activities it set out to achieve at the beginning of the year. The ICR reports that the Ministry was
able to complete 572 activities out of 697 in 2018 across all areas, including human resource management
(professional development, deployment of teaching and non‐teaching staff); student and sectoral
performance assessments (administration and analysis of key exams, monitoring and evaluation,
development of annual statistical reports harmonization of information systems); planning and policy making
(development of a pre‐school strategy, introduction of ICT into schools, review and update of curriculum,
textbook management, project management, school management, governance of TVET, improvement of the
learning environment etc.).



The ICR also notes that the Ministry’s strengthened capacity to manage the education sector is also
supported by undertaking two early grade math assessments (EGMA) for Grade 2 in 2017 and 2018. The
2018 assessment revealed that most teachers applied the new teaching practices and CRIPEN developed
supplemental math booklets based on the 2017 results, which led to children’s increased performance. Gross
enrollment rates went from 78 percent to 89 percent 2016-19, and the number of schools built increased from
133 to 141 over the same period.



Training and expert support to the Ministry to engender a mentality of RBA formed a significant part of the
project and that units within the ministry now focus AWPs on results rather than (as in the past) completed
actions, thereby becoming more transparent and accountable. The M&E system was enhanced with online
tools for better monitoring of sector performance and the development of a dashboard helped to focus units
on results and link their work plans to the ESP. The ICR also notes that the quality of materials coming from
CRIPEN has improved significantly and the different trainings and capacity building activities strengthened
assessment and exam capacity of relevant directorates and units which has led to increased interest in
rigorous student evaluation approaches. Strengthening the TVET directorate helped create “incubator”
centers where young people choose a profession/skills, receive three‐month training on business
development and life skills and 9 months of center‐based practical experience.



The ICR also reports that, although the project did not mobilize private sector financing, it did mobilize private
sector participation, which was facilitated by the establishment of and support to the National directorate for
TVET, which includes private sector representatives. Private firms were also involved in improving the quality
and relevance of TVET. The project also supported MENFOP in its data collection and analysis such that all
major reports can be provide gender disaggregated data. The ICR reports that several of the key department
heads were female and activities supported through the project were led by women (the directorate for
inspection, the evaluation department and teacher training center), 27 percent of all school heads receiving
inputs on RBA were female, and 40 percent of students benefitting from school grant interventions were girls.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 15
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Strengthening Institutional Capacity and (P123315)




                      Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale


Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial


 5. Efficiency
The PAD (p.12) stated that the project was not amenable to a cost-benefit analysis as the principal benefits from
the project are not quantifiable noting the successful implementation of the project is expected to improve
efficiency in the management and use of resources. The ICR (p.17) states that all activities were more or less
implemented within the extended timeframe and indicators were met or exceeded by project closing
notwithstanding the availability of a reduced budget due to exchange rate fluctuations.



On the other hand, implementation progress was mixed. Rated satisfactory for the first two of 14 ISRs,
implementation progress dipped to moderately satisfactory for the next three ISRs and moderately
unsatisfactory for the subsequent three ISRs before recovering to moderately satisfactory for all but one – where
implementation progress dipped once more to moderately unsatisfactory - of the remaining six ISRs. The ICR
suggests that project outcomes and outputs point towards more efficient use of resources, that the project
leveraged additional donor funding and promoted greater sector alignment, which, taken together points to
increased efficiency. The ICR recognizes that delays in implementation prohibit a high efficiency rating.


Efficiency Rating
      Substantial


      a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
        and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                                   Rate Available?            Point value (%)       *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                                    0
             Appraisal                                                        0
                                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                                    0
             ICR Estimate                                                     0
                                                                                                     Not Applicable

      * Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

                                                                                                                    Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Institutional Capacity and (P123315)




6. Outcome

The relevance of the objectives is High given alignment with country context and strategy and with the Bank’s
country strategies over time. Efficiency is rated Substantial reflecting solid achievement of outputs with a
reduced budget, but also reflecting delays in implementation. Efficacy is rated Substantial given the
achievement of almost all targets. The overall outcome rating is therefore Satisfactory, consistent with only
minor shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Notwithstanding some ongoing implementation challenges, the results based approach (RBA) is now used
throughout the ministry, which is the only ministry in Djibouti to either apply a RBA or have such detailed
information made publicly available. The ministry has also invested to further improve the ICT‐enabled
system so that it can become fully web‐based and show information in real time. The ministry has also
requested to continue and expand the results based approach under a planned basic education project,
which will allow for further consolidation of achievements made under this project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank worked closely with the government and other donors to support the implementation of
  government strategy and action plans (as referenced above under Relevance). The Bank agreed with
  government that it would support strategic components of reform, although certain activities under
  Component 2, such as finishing and equipping the Hodan 3 appear more pragmatic than strategic in
  intent. In fact, Component 2 is more closely tied to an objective such as 'improving learning conditions'
  rather than the PDO as stated which focused on development of system capacity. The project was also
  designed to respond to findings from an organizational audit completed in 2009 under an earlier Bank
  project (Second School Access and Improvement Program (P086994)). The audit had identified
  weaknesses in the decision‐making system process, and in the process of planning and conducting
  reforms and in implementing corrective actions. The project also built on lessons and achievements of
  the earlier multi‐donor funded Primary Education Support Program, EFA‐FTI Catalytic Fund.



  The project was conservatively designed taking into account the country context and local capacity.
  Indicators were output and activity oriented and were unambitious as evident by the fact that targets were
  later raised despite reduced budget (given exchange rate movements) albeit with an additional year of

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Institutional Capacity and (P123315)



  implementation agreed through restructurings. The ICR notes some shortcomings in design of the results
  framework i.e., some of the results indicators were not clearly specified and that ambiguity meant the PIU
  and the ministry were not fully geared up to measure the results of some project activities relating to
  TVET student and firm satisfaction.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank maintained close contact with the project and counterparts throughout. An early change in
 ministerial leadership slowed implementation, but the Bank team continued to promote dialogue and, as
 noted in the ICR, find common ground that would assuage new political priorities while supporting the
 project’s objectives. Fourteen ISRs were implemented and there was consistent reporting on financial
 management and procurement progress. The Bank also hired a consultant (July 2017) who was based at
 the Djibouti Country Office and who worked with the PIU team to build capacity - frequent staff turn‐over
 and prolonged vacancies had weakened PIU effectiveness to implement project activities. The two
 restructurings were well managed and the additional time for project implementation meant that planned
 activities were completed e.g., full completion of Hodan 3 lower secondary school, procurement of a used
 Offset Printing Machine for CRIPEN, 30 pilot schools received increased financing for their school
 improvement projects.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Theory of Change set out how activities and intermediate outcomes would lead to outcomes for
 strengthening the institutional capacity of Ministry for enhanced management and planning. Design
 included measures to ensure effective M&E such as the development of an internal M&E framework,
 guidelines, manuals and related capacity building and training of respective staff, as well as strengthening
 information management systems with clear linkage to AWPs. The project also envisaged a pre‐ and
 postsurvey of schools to confirm receipt of textbooks by students and satisfaction by TVET students and
 firms. That said, PDO indicators related to Component 1.1 were framed only with reference to the
 development and implementation of AWPs noting, as in the Quality at Entry Section above, that indicators
 were relatively low level and intermediate reflecting the context and timeframe of the project. The ICR notes



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Institutional Capacity and (P123315)



 that the indicator for TVET satisfaction rate was ambiguous and difficult to measure in the absence of a
 baseline.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Ministry maintained regular reporting of project progress and efforts were made between the
  Ministry and the M&E consultant to resolve challenges relating to design of surveys for TVET students,
  firm satisfaction and textbook distribution. The ICR notes that project M&E benefited from the fact that
  capacity was supported by other projects for which the PIU was responsible. The results framework was
  strengthened with the addition of a dashboard to facilitate monitoring and reporting. The PIU produced
  detailed semi‐annual progress reports on project activities.



c. M&E Utilization
  Improved M&E provided the government and the Bank with information to support a reasonable
  expectation that a one‐year extension of the project closing date would lead to the successful completion
  of remaining actions. The system also allowed calibration of targets to reflect the additional time and
  allowed for rebalancing of funding across activities to support additional funds to extend grants to more
  schools. The ICR notes that there continues to be areas for improvement in terms of data gathering,
  analysis and reporting, although it is proposed to address these as part of a new Bank/GPE‐supported
  project under negotiation. Semi‐annual progress reports were instrumental in updating the results
  framework, developing the restructuring proposals and measuring progress towards project objectives
  achievements. Changes to the survey instrument (pre/post) meant that results could not be compared.
  Survey information on textbooks received by students was not available at the time of the ICR writing
  but was provided by the TTL during IEG's review process and relevant results are reflected in
  the Efficacy section.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The PAD (p.15) notes that, based on an assessment by the team's safeguards specialists, and taking into
   account the limited financing amount as well as experience from earlier projects – School Access and
   Improvement Program (P044585), and Second School Access and Improvement Program (P086994) - the
   environment safeguards category for the project has been downgraded from B to C. The project did not
   trigger any social safeguards.




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Institutional Capacity and (P123315)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Project preparation was informed by the organizational audit of the ministry that was supported by a
   previous Bank‐supported project and that set clear priorities and recommendations to improve education
   sector management. The current project focused on technical assistance and training for sector staff to
   strengthen implementation capacity through knowledge transfer and fiduciary functions of the PIU. The
   project used the existing project implementation unit which already had experience in managing Bank
   financed projects. The World Bank team assessed the financial management system for the PIU and
   identified risks associated with staff capacity, certain fiduciary management procedures, and the fact that
   the PIU was entrusted with several projects financed by other donors, which might have made external
   audit complex. Actions were agreed to address these potential shortcomings. Field‐based and
   Washington‐based staff carried out regular supervision missions and found that, overall, the system was
   robust. Financial covenants were complied with by and large in a timely manner, an adequate FM system
   and internal controls were in place, and the action plan was being implemented. Audit reports and Interim
   Financial Reports were submitted in a timely manner. An internal auditor performed independent and
   objective internal audit activities including inspections and verification of the use of funds at the sub‐project
   level. Procurement guidelines were generally followed, and procurement processes completed in a
   satisfactory manner albeit with some delays. Procurement decisions were transparent, but at times slow.
   The ICR reports one instance where the Bank procurement specialist was concerned about a potential
   conflict of interest on a bid for a construction project, which was referred to the Bank’s integrity unit but was
   found to be unsubstantiated. Notwithstanding, the Bank team strengthened its support to the PIU, and
   procurement performance remained acceptable through the end of the Project.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No unintended outcomes or impacts are identified.



d. Other
   N/a



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory             Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                          Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                      High




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Strengthening Institutional Capacity and (P123315)



12. Lessons

The ICR provides useful lessons of which IEG notes, in summary, the following:



Sound analytical underpinning is critical to identifying key areas of intervention: the institutional audit
of the Ministry carried out at the end of an earlier project was key to laying out priorities that led to
the main design features of the current project.



To effect progress towards results‐based management, it is important to align Annual Work Plans
(AWPs) with the national strategy and the minister’s management needs. Such alignment gives a
sense of clarity, importance and accountability to the staff who are responsible for the AWPs. Putting
in place a dashboard for the Minister provided him with timely information on the status of activities
on a timely basis, which helped improve accountability and the focus on results.



Continued support is critical especially in a low capacity context: the hiring of a local, independent
consultant who was located in the Bank’s country office in Djibouti was a key factor in ensuring
end‐of‐project implementation success.



IEG adds the following:

This project demonstrates how management of the political economy is critical to successful project
implementation. The project started out with strong political and administrative support; however,
shortly after preparation, the project’s champion was transferred out of the ministry and this
impacted progress. For example, regular donor meetings at the Ministry ceased, project progress
and disbursement slowed. However, the Bank team remained in contact and dialogue with the new
administration and, ultimately, worked with the Government to request a Level 2 restructuring that
extended the project closing date by twelve months and allowed for the achievement of almost all
results targets.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well written, and consistent in its internal logic. The ICR presented a concise presentation of what
was a relatively uncomplicated project that included a succinct background piece and rationale for Bank

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Strengthening Institutional Capacity and (P123315)



involvement together with a suitably simple theory of change that reflected the largely output-type focus of the
project indicators. The ICR was candid in its assessment of the project, noting, for example, limitations in M&E
design. The ICR also provided adequate evidence to assess achievement with reference to relatively simple
output-type indicators, and provided additional information on related contextual developments, for example in
relation to gender. Finally, the ICR presented a significant number of valuable and well-articulated lessons that
were based in the project experience



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 15
