          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          1st Programmatic Resilience Building DPC(P147152)



                                                                                     Report Number : ICRR0021519

   1. Project Data



    Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
    Grenada                                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


    Programmatic DPL
    Planned Operations:          3               Approved Operations:         3

    Operation ID                                Operation Name
    P147152                                     1st Programmatic Resilience Building DPC


     L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
     IDA-55230                                  29-Jun-2015                                         14,991,447.00

     Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
     30-Jun-2014                                29-Jun-2015

                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                            15,000,000.00                                             0.00

     Revised Commitment                             15,000,000.00                                             0.00

     Actual                                         14,991,447.00                                             0.00




     Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
     Paul Holden                 Robert Mark Lacey            Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)


PHPROJECTDATATBL




     Operation ID                               Operation Name
     P156761                                    Grenada Resilience Building DPC 3 ( P156761 )



                                                                                                      Page 1 of 15
          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          1st Programmatic Resilience Building DPC(P147152)




     L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
     IDA-55230,IDA-59340                       30-Nov-2017                                             9,088,880.00

     Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
     16-Dec-2016                               30-Nov-2017

                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                             9,340,000.00                                               0.00

     Revised Commitment                              9,340,000.00                                               0.00

     Actual                                          9,088,880.00                                               0.00


PHPROJECTDATATBL




     Operation ID                                Operation Name
     P151821                                     Grenada Resilience Building DPC 2 ( P151821 )


     L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
     IBRD-85460,IDA-55230,IDA-57340            30-Nov-2016                                           14,993,960.00

     Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
     28-Oct-2015                               30-Nov-2016

                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                            15,000,000.00                                               0.00

     Revised Commitment                             15,000,000.00                                               0.00

     Actual                                         14,993,960.00                                               0.00




   2. Program Objectives and Policy Areas

   a. Objectives
        This was a series of three development policy operations. The Program Development Objective (PDO) for the
        first operation (DPO-1) as stated in the first Program Document (PD1, p. vi)) was to: (i) create conditions for
        private investment in a sustainable manner; (ii) support improved public sector management (PFM) and better

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     1st Programmatic Resilience Building DPC(P147152)



   targeting of social safety net programs; (iii) enhance resilience against natural disasters; and (iv) facilitate debt
   portfolio restructuring and enhance debt management.
   The PDO for DPO-2 (PD2 p. vi) was identical for the first two elements, with (iii) changed to (iii) enhance
   resilience against natural disasters and key elements of resilience in the banking sector (i.e., adding reference
   to resilience of the banking sector). The fourth element was dropped.
   For DPO-3 (PD3 p. vii) the PDOs were reworded again to: (i) improve the investment climate and
   competitiveness; (ii) improve public resource management; and (iii) enhance resilience against natural
   disasters. The goal of increasing the resilience of the banking sector became a sub-objective of objective (i).
   There are no substantive differences between the three sets of objectives, the reasons for the rewording are
   unclear and add very little to refining the development objectives. This Review will be based on the statement
   of objectives in PD3.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   There were three pillars:
   Pillar 1 focused on creating conditions favorable to private investment through strengthening the governance
   of the tourism sector, improving competitiveness of agribusinesses, improving trade logistics, developing a
   public-private partnership (PPP) policy framework, and strengthening the regulatory environment in the
   energy sector.
   Pillar 2 supported fiscal consolidation by reducing fiscal, financial and social vulnerability through public
   service modernization; strengthening public procurement; strengthening the regulation and supervision of the
   financial sector; strengthening social safety nets; and enhancing the capacity to manage institutional debt
   and the restructuring of the public debt portfolio.
   Pillar 3 focused on enhancing natural disaster resilience through a strengthened regulatory system
   governing physical planning.　




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   The first operation (P147152) was approved on June 30, 2014 in the amount of an IDA credit of SDR9.7
   million (US$15 million equivalent). It became effective on July 9, 2014 and closed on schedule on June 29,
   2015.　
   　
   The second operation (P151821) was approved on October 28, 2015 in the amount of an IDA credit of
   SDR7.2 million (US$10 million equivalent) and an IBRD loan of US$5 million. It became effective on
   November 19, 2015 and closed on schedule on November 30, 2016.　
   　
   The third operation (P156761) was approved on December 16, 2016 in the amount of an IDA credit of
   SDR6.8 million (US$9.34 million equivalent). It became effective on December 23, 2016 and closed on
   schedule on November 30, 2017.　


                                                                                                        Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     1st Programmatic Resilience Building DPC(P147152)



   All Credits and the Loan were fully disbursed.
   　




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  Instead of a strategy framework specific to Grenada, the World Bank Group has a Country Partnership
  Strategy (CPS) for the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS), of which Grenada is a member.
  The PDOs were and remain relevant to the two main pillars of this strategy: (i) building resilience, including
  climate resilience, debt and fiscal sustainability, and human capital, and (ii) enhancing competitiveness and
  stimulating growth through strengthening the financial sector and improved business environments. The
  PDOs are also relevant to the three areas of engagement of the Bank’s OECS Regional Partnership Strategy
  FY2015-FY2019 - competitiveness, public sector modernization and resilience. They were also consistent
  with Grenada’s 2014-2018 Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy, which had as its pillars, building
  resilience, developing competitiveness, reducing vulnerability and improving governance.　



  Rating
  Modest

b. Relevance of Design
  The causal chain between the series-supported actions and the intended results was partly convincing.
  Regarding the first objective of an improved investment climate and competitiveness, establishing an effective
  Tourism Authority might be expected to contribute to improving the sector’s institutional governance
  framework (the ICR points out that, prior to the series, the lack of a governance mechanism for the tourism
  sector impeded the development of a shared and holistic vision and common implementation strategy),
  However, agricultural productivity and competitiveness would not necessarily improve by leasing out
  inefficient government-owned estates and strengthening the marketing board, in the absence of
  accompanying measures to ensure that private sector lessees instituted productivity enhancing measures. It
  is plausible that better quality infrastructure through public-private partnerships, modernized trade logistics,
  and reduced electricity costs, would make Grenada more competitive, although it was less clear whether the
  specific prior actions would be strong enough to achieve such results (see Section 4 below). The second
  objective – improved public resource management – focused on reducing costs (better human resource
  management to lower the wage bill, more competitive procurement, better targeting of social safety net
  programs) and potential future liabilities (debt restructuring, financial sector reform). Again, while the causal
  chain may be persuasive in principal, there could be questions concerning the adequacy of specific prior
  actions. Similarly, with the third objective – it is unlikely that new building codes and establishing procedures
  for the professional practice of architects and engineers would suffice to enhance resilience against natural
  disasters.

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            1st Programmatic Resilience Building DPC(P147152)




       The program is also very wide ranging, covering tourism, agriculture, trade logistics, electricity, the financial
       sector, public human resource and expenditure management, resilience to natural disasters, and other areas,
       thereby increasing the coordination and implementation burden for a relatively weak administration. Provision
       for technical assistance was inadequate, notably in the areas of public sector management, trade logistics
       and physical planning regulation (ICR, page 7).

       The macroeconomic framework, while initially weak, benefited from IMF support and was considered
       adequate for program purposes. Following an extended period of low growth, Grenada faced large fiscal and
       balance of payments deficits, with a concomitant debt burden, when DPO1 was approved. The authorities
       had, however, sought assistance from the IMF, and a 36-month arrangement under the Extended Credit
       Facility was approved in June 2014. By 2015, growth had resumed. Fiscal consolidation and debt
       restructuring had yielded a primary surplus. Growth continued into 2017, and the budget primary surplus
       expanded, but the current account deficit was still about 16% of GDP, and the risk of renewed debt distress
       remained significant.
       The speed with which the program was prepared and the need to coordinate with other donors provides
       justification for a rating of substantial for relevance of design.　




       Rating
       Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     Improve the investment climate and competitiveness.

     This PDO had 5 sub-objectives: Improving the governance of the tourism sector; increasing the productivity
     and competitiveness of agriculture; improving trade logistics; promoting investment through public private
     partnerships; strengthening the policy and regulatory environment for the energy sector.


    Rationale
    The development of tourism, accounting for about a quarter of Grenada’s GDP and employment, was
    thought to be impeded by the lack of a governance mechanism to encourage a shared and holistic vision
    and an agreed implementation strategy, outlined in the Government’s Tourism Strategic Plan (ICR, page
    12). To address this, the Grenada Tourism Authority Act was passed (prior action, DPO-1), and a new


                                                                                                          Page 5 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    1st Programmatic Resilience Building DPC(P147152)



regulatory framework established (prior action, DPO-2). The associated results target was an increase in
tourism receipts from a baseline of EC$307 million to EC$332 million in 2018. This was exceeded (receipts
were EC$448 million), and Grenada's tourism performance was substantially better than regional
competitors.

The Government considered that low agricultural productivity stemmed in part from inefficient publicly-owned
estates and an ineffective marketing board. It was decided, therefore, to lease the estates to private
operators, and to transform the marketing board into a service organization providing commercial
information, product standards and logistics. A leasing oversight committee and criteria for
commercialization of the estates were established (prior actions, DPO-1); and two agreements with private
entities for 20 leases were entered into (prior action, DPO-3), A strategic plan was approved for the
transformation of the marketing board (prior action, DPO-2). Bank staff expected that these measures, by
increasing agricultural productivity, would enable agribusinesses to be become more competitive. This was
to be assisted by the passage of the Food Safety Act (prior action, DPO -3) empowering the inspection and
licensing of food premises by the newly-established Food Authority. There were four targets in the results
framework. First, by series closure, at least three out of four estates would have been leased; this was not
achieved – two estates were leased. Second, the area leased on estates would be at least 186 acres out of
a potential 379; this was exceeded, with 205 acres leased. Third, the number of farmers served by the
marketing board would rise from 1,623 to at least 2,500; this was not achieved – by series closure, 2,000
farmers were so served. Fourth, the output of crops produced by the leased estates would double from 350
tons to 700 tons; this target was revised to 500 tons under DPO-2 and the indicator was dropped altogether
under DPO-3. Despite modest success in meeting the outcome targets, there are issues with the targets
themselves. It is questionable whether there would be sufficient time for private operators to achieve the
expected impact on output; and the marketing board target consisted of a strategic plan indicating the
number of farmers who would be served, but with no indication of whether or how it would be implemented.
Any impact of the Food Safety Act on output and competitiveness would be difficult to achieve by series
closure, since it was a prior action for the third and last operation.　
　
The Authorities considered that Grenada’s outdated trade logistics were an impediment to competitiveness.
A draft Law to modernize and automate the Customs Administration was presented to Parliament (prior
action, DPO-1), The Bureau of Standards in the Ministry of Finance was connected to the Automated
Customs Clearing System (ASYCUDA, World), and the Inland Revenue Department, and the Central Office
of Statistics were provided with data access to ASUCUDA (prior actions, DPO-3) These measures were
intended to reduce Customs clearance time from six to three days, but this results indicator was dropped
during DPO-3 because of slow progress in adopting ASYCUDA. It was replaced by a results indicator on the
number of agencies using ASYCUDA with a target to increase the number from two to six, and the number
of agencies sharing information through ASYCUDA from which was to increase from zero to two. 　Neither
was achieved. These are, in any event, input targets that reveal little about the system’s efficiency. The
number of transactions processed, and the time taken to clear goods (the dropped indicator) would have
been more appropriate. According to the ICR, technical assistance from the World Bank for the use of
ASYCUDA was inadequate.




                                                                                                 Page 6 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            1st Programmatic Resilience Building DPC(P147152)



    To promote new investment through PPPs,　the government developed in 2015 "principles and processes"
    for developing and implementing PPPs (prior action, DPO-2). A PPP Unit was established in the Ministry of
    Finance (prior action, DPO-3). The chosen results indicator target – conformity by all new PPP projects with
    the new policy framework – was met. However, only one　project materialized (a telephone service
    provider).　
    High and volatile electricity costs (stemming from dependence on imported diesel) and reduced
    competitiveness. To address this, the Public Utilities Regulatory Commission Act was approved, and the
    Ministry of Finance’s participation in the Eastern Caribbean Regulatory Agency was endorsed (prior actions,
    DPO-3). The aims of the new policy were to reduce tariffs and promote renewable energy investments.
    There is little evidence of attributable progress towards these aims. The Public Utilities Commission was not
    fully operational by 2018 as intended, though the ICR states that it would be by January 2019. A targeted
    increase from 1% to 2.3% in the share of renewable energy in total power generation was exceeded (the
    actual share in 2018 was 6.3%). However, the causal chain from the prior actions to this achievement is not
    clearly set out in the ICR. There were no targets related to the cost of electricity.

    In summary, evidence of an improved investment climate resulting from series-supported actions is weak.
    The policy framework for the tourism sector improved, but attribution of increased tourist numbers is unclear.
    There is no evidence that agricultural productivity improved, nor that customs clearing times fell. ASYCUDA
    was not operational at series closure. Only one PPP was underway at the closing of the third operation. 　
    There are no indications of declining electricity costs. Efficacy of this objective is rated modest.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     Improve public resource management

    Rationale
    The program aimed to improve public resource management through (i) modernizing public service
    personnel policies, (ii) better procurement processes, (iii) stronger financial sector supervision (to reduce
    fiscal risks), (iv) reducing ineligible participants in social safety nets, and (v) restructuring public debt.　
    The Authorities endorsed a policy to modernize the public sector by realigning employment, strengthening
    management of key agencies, and developing results-focused planning and budgeting (prior action, DPO1).
    There were no series-supported measures to implement this policy except establishing computerizing
    personnel records and job descriptions (prior action, DPO3). Although the single chosen results indicator
    target (formally established job descriptions) was met, this is clearly insufficient to modernize public service
    management.　




                                                                                                         Page 7 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            1st Programmatic Resilience Building DPC(P147152)



    A new Procurement Law, "consistent with international best practices" was approved, a Chief Procurement
    Officer appointed, and a Public Procurement Board established (prior actions, DPOs 2 and 3). The results
    indicator target - the publication of all contract awards by 2018 (2013 baseline zero) - was not met.　

    To enhance financial sector stability, Grenada participated, with the series’ support, in efforts to bolster the
    resolution powers, loan classification, and provisioning requirements of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank
    (ECCB). These were encapsulated in a uniform Banking Act and Amendment to the ECCB Agreement Act,
    approved in 2015 (prior action, DPO2). By June 2018, provisioning as a percentage of non-performing loans
    (NPLs) had risen to 71% from 30% in 2013, exceeding the target of 60%.　

    Given the sensitivity of the social program reform, it was implemented gradually: a policy framework was
    adopted (prior action, DPO1), eligibility criteria began to be systematically enforced (prior action, DPO2), and
    a phase out plan executed (prior action, DPO3). By 2018, all ineligible recipients had been removed,
    exceeding the target of 95%. This was expected to allow increased coverage of the poorest households,
    though no data are available.　

    Restructuring public debt had become urgent by 2013 - the debt to GDP ratio was 107%, 17% of outstanding
    debt had a maturity of 90 days or less, and there had already been a default on dollar-denominated bond
    coupon payments. A medium-term debt strategy was approved (prior action, DPO2). Negotiations with
    creditors led to a 50% repudiation of principal. Debt falling due within 90　days was reduced to 4.2% of the
    total　in 2018, below the target of 10%.　

    In summary, there is evidence that the program succeeded in reducing financial sector risks, removing
    ineligible participants from social programs, and in restructuring public debt. However, there is little indication
    of improved public service and procurement management.
    　




    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective
     Enhance resilience against natural disasters


    Rationale
    This objective was to be achieved by improving the quality of new construction through improved building
    standards, better zoning and planning, and by professionalizing engineers and architects. A new building
    code was approved and legislation to professionalize architects and engineers submitted to Parliament (prior


                                                                                                           Page 8 of 15
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               1st Programmatic Resilience Building DPC(P147152)



    actions, DPO-1). A physical planning bill incorporating the approval of building codes and guidelines was
    enacted (prior action, DPO-3). It was expected that these measures would increase the share of engineers
    that were members of the Grenada Institute of Professional Engineers from zero in 2013 to 40% of practicing
    engineers in 2018, and to the establishment of a Building Inspection Unit in the Ministry of Finance.
    However, due to delays in harmonizing building codes within the OECS, and the lack of qualified personnel
    to staff the Building Inspection Unit, these expectations were not met. The ICR (p. 23) reports that in a pilot
    project, only 2% of buildings constructed under permits issued from 2017 onward were inspected for
    compliance with the codes. However, more generally, in the period following the adoption of the new codes,
    65% of buildings constructed in 2017 were inspected.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  The relevance of objectives was rated substantial given consistency with the Bank strategy for the Eastern
  Caribbean and was germane with respect to country priorities, although the rewording of objectives in
  successive loans seemed unnecessary. Relevance of design is rated substantial although the theory of change
  was less than robust for several objectives, the breadth of the series’ scope presented coordination and
  implementation challenges for the government’s limited capacity, and provisions for technical assistance were
  inadequate. Nevertheless, the need for rapid preparation of the series to coordinate with development partners
  was a positive. Efficacy of the first objective - improving the investment climate and competitiveness – is rated
  modest in view of the weakness of evidence concerning achievement of results and their attribution to series-
  supported actions., Efficacy of the second objective – better public resource management - is assessed as
  substantial given reduced financial sector risks, removal of ineligible participants from social programs, and a
  restructuring of public debt. The efficacy of the third objective is rated negligible since there is no evidence of
  improved resilience to natural disasters. Shortcomings are considered significant, and outcome is assessed as
  moderately unsatisfactory.


  a.      Outcome Rating
          Moderately Unsatisfactory


  6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating




                                                                                                        Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     1st Programmatic Resilience Building DPC(P147152)



The risk to development outcome declined as the operations unfolded. At the outset Grenada faced serious
debt and macroeconomic imbalances, and there was substantial global uncertainty that threatened tourism and
the revival of remittances. Subsequently, macroeconomic risk fell as the budget improved and public debt was
reduced. Grenada, however, like most small, open economies in the Caribbean, remains highly vulnerable to
international commercial vicissitudes and to natural disasters. The ICR (p. 25) considers that the government
remains committed to the objectives of the series and has continued to pursue reform under follow-on
operations Many reforms supported by the series are grounded in legislation, which needs to be applied for
them to bear full fruit. The main domestic risk to sustainability is limited institutional capacity.　


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
    Modest

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The series was designed to respond to Bank and government priorities and to Grenada’s difficult
  macroeconomic circumstances. The areas covered had been identified in earlier analytical work.
  Coordination with other external partners, notably the IMF and the Caribbean Development Bank, was
  adequate.
  There were some shortcomings in Quality at Entry. First, lessons from previous operations included the
  need for simple program design focused on a relatively select set of issues, this program ranged over a
  wide range of sectors and policy areas, thereby adding to coordination and implementation challenges.
  Moreover, Bank plans for technical and advisory support, and interventions from other partners were to
  prove insufficient to address capacity weaknesses. Several policy areas needed more hands-on assistance
  that was not foreseen at the preparation stage (for instance, processing trade transactions through
  AYSCUDA would require extensive coordination and negotiation and inter-agency agreements, and
  sufficient funds to finance the necessary technical assistance. Second, although the ICR reports that there
  were extensive consultations, political resistance was a delaying factor for some reforms, notably public
  employment management and the phasing out of ineligible beneficiaries from social programs. Third, the
  causal chain between the prior actions and the intended results was less than fully convincing in a number
  of cases (see Section 3b above). Fourth, there were serious weaknesses in M&E design, especially with
  regard to the choice of indicators (see Section 9a below); several of the targets were over-ambitious.　
  Nevertheless, the program was prepared against a background of crisis in Grenada, and the need to
  coordinate with development partners. The Bank team was rolling out the CDF in the Caribbean region at
  the time the first operation was prepared, and the Grenada authorities requested this approach to
  complement the IMF program. Bank performance is therefore rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                 Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     1st Programmatic Resilience Building DPC(P147152)



 The ICR (p. 26) states that supervision was timely in preparing the second and third operations, and
 pragmatic in adjusting targets to what might realistically be achieved in the program’s time frame. However,
 there were shortcomings. First, little was done to address the problems related to the results framework,
 which persisted until series closure. Second, the team could have been more proactive in mobilizing
 technical assistance in certain key areas, and more could have been done to leverage IDA’s investment
 portfolio to support capacity building. Third, the ICR refers to lack of continuity in the World Bank task team,
 especially in terms of leadership, after the approval of DPO-2. No details are provided, but there is a
 reference in the lessons to the need for "a solid handover [from one task team leader to another] to ensure
 sustained technical support throughout implementation and especially in the final phases through
 completion." The ICR refers specifically to the "lack of implementation support in the final phase of the
 program, due to staff illness;" clearly steps could and should have been taken to substitute for staff unable
 to perform their duties.　
 With a split rating of moderately satisfactory for Quality at Entry and moderately unsatisfactory for Quality of
 Supervision, IEG rates Bank Performance as moderately satisfactory.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  According to the ICR, , the government remained committed throughout the program to achieving its
  objectives, and ensured the passage of key legislation that provided a foundation for many of the
  reforms. There was continuity in the personnel connected with the program and government officials
  pushed back against some of the design complexity (ICR p. 27). Lack of technical and institutional
  capacity to pursue some of the reforms, together with difficulties in recruiting qualified staff, were the
  principal negative dimensions. 　These led to delays in implementing reforms in Customs, agriculture
  and the promotion of PPPs.　
  The scope and range of the program proved challenging. As main interlocutor with the World Bank, the
  Ministry of Finance and Energy (MoFE) had to coordinate activities across ten sectors and thirteen
  agencies. Despite the inherent difficulties, some political resistance, and lack of adequate technical
  support, the Ministry’s efforts were sufficient to elicit some degree of response in most areas except for
  the Physical Planning Unit, which remained virtually inactive in implementing the natural disaster
  resilience program. They could not, however, lead to the attainment of most of the program's goals.
  Overall, shortcomings in government performance are considered moderate.


  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     1st Programmatic Resilience Building DPC(P147152)



b. Implementing Agency Performance
  The program was implemented by the government as a whole, and there is no separate assessment of
  implementing agency performance


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The design of the M&E framework contained weaknesses in several of the indicators or did not use indicators
  that would have identified the success of the reforms. For example, attributing an increase in tourist numbers to
  the series is clearly deficient because they are affected by exogenous factors in originating countries. The
  performance of Grenada’s tourist arrivals relative to other countries in the Eastern Caribbean might have been
  more appropriate. There was no indicator that would have measured the quality of service to farmers; useful
  measures of improved trade logistics were either not included (for example, the number of transactions being
  processed through the ASYCUDA system) or dropped (the number of days to clear goods); instead of one PPP
  that was in accordance with the processes established, the number of PPPs initiated would have been a clearer
  indication of the program’s success or otherwise; and there was no link established between series-supported
  actions and the specified goal of reducing electricity tariffs, for which no measure was included in the results
  framework.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (p. 8) provides little information on M&E implementation, beyond saying that it was "carried out
  through ongoing dialogue with the government and was supported by complementary investment projects,
  hands-on technical assistance and analytical activities."　Having to deal with thirteen　different agencies
  across such a wide-ranging program must have presented considerable coordination difficulties in the
  collection, analysis and presentation of M&E-related data. However, no details are presented on this. It is
  striking that little, if any, attempt appears to have been made to address the design weaknesses outlined in
  Section 9a above.



c. M&E Utilization
  As the programmatic operation evolved, M&E was used to modify the prior actions and indicators in the
  policy matrix.



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     1st Programmatic Resilience Building DPC(P147152)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  No safeguard policies were triggered. Reforms to the social safety net would in principal allow increased
  benefits to the poor.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  No fiduciary compliance issues were reported.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  N/A



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                      ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  There were significant design
                                                                                  shortcomings leading to
                             Moderately              Moderately
Outcome                                                                           modest and negligible efficacy
                             Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  ratings for two out of three
                                                                                  objectives.
Risk to Development
                             Modest                  Modest                       ---
Outcome
                                                                                  There were significant
                             Moderately                                           shortcomings in both Quality
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                             Satisfactory                                         at Entry and Quality of
                                                                                  Supervision
                                                                                  Technical and institutional
Borrower Performance         Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  capacity weaknesses and the

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       1st Programmatic Resilience Building DPC(P147152)



                                                                                    coordination challenges of
                                                                                    such a wide-ranging series,
                                                                                    led to delays; Some reforms
                                                                                    foundered against political
                                                                                    opposition.
Quality of ICR                                         Substantial                  ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

 The following two lessons are taken from the ICR with some adaptation of language:

 • When designing a programmatic series, it is important at the outset to be realistic about what can be
 accomplished, taking into account capacity of government counterparts. Excessive optimism or complexity,
 such as that involved in the design of some components of this programmatic series, results in having to
 adjust subsequent operations to reflect the reality on the ground. Political economy factors in small countries,
 such as Grenada, may be of an order of magnitude different from those in large economies. For example,
 downsizing government departments must take account of scarce alternative opportunities; only a limited pool
 of potential investors might be interested in investing in PPP projects in a small economy; and skills and
 capacity may be scarcer.
 • Creation of new administrative agencies can lead to mission overlap and higher fixed costs. This series
 required the creation of numerous new units and agencies, where assigning responsibilities to dedicated staff
 in existing units might well have sufficed.

 IEG draws the following three additional lessons:　

 • Adequate recognition at the design stage for technical assistance (TA) requirements can assist the
 successful development and implementation of a reform program. In this case, relying on "regular" support
 from the World Bank team, and other external partners proved insufficient. More could have been done to
 mobilize resources for targeted TA for certain particularly complex initiatives, and through leverage of the
 investment lending portfolio.
 • While including legislation, new regulations, and other "pieces of paper" within prior actions is appropriate, a
 program that does more to ensure practical application on the ground stands a greater chance of success.
 Here, much new legislation was approved, but in several cases the capacity or political will to apply the
 modified legal and regulatory framework was not manifest.
 • Particularly in small economies with limited implementation and coordination capacity, a relatively simple
 reform program focused on a few key areas stands a greater chance of success than a wider-ranging
 initiative. In this case, the relative lack of success was due in no small part to an over-ambitious design
 involving ten sectors and thirteen agencies.


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 15
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         1st Programmatic Resilience Building DPC(P147152)




     •




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR rated achievement of objectives in terms of pillars rather than development objectives. However, the
analysis and description of a complex series of operations is clear and given the fact that it was a series of
three operations, the document is relatively concise. It does outline the issues well and explains clearly the
challenges confronting Grenada that the DPL series was designed to address. Nevertheless, the treatment of
M&E issues is weak, in that it does not assess　fully the quality of the M&E framework or implementation
challenges. The discussion of the program indicators is incomplete. The ICR’s assertion that the achievements
of the program led to the strong macroeconomic performance is not based on analysis and is hard to justify.　



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 15
