     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL-Public Sector Pay & Performance(FY12) (P128208)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0021636

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P128208                                    SL-Public Sector Pay & Performance(FY12)

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Sierra Leone                               Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51220                                  31-Oct-2015                                           13,970,761.52

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 31-May-2012                                30-Jun-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            17,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             17,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         13,970,761.52                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Robert Mark Lacey            Malathi S. Jayawickrama         IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 4), the Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Public
   Sector Pay and Performance Project (PSPP) was to improve competitiveness in pay, performance
   management and accountability of, and increase staffing of middle and senior staff in, the Civil Service in the
   territory of the Recipient.

   The Project Appraisal Report (PAD) has the same PDO (page 10 of the PAD).


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL-Public Sector Pay & Performance(FY12) (P128208)



   Achievement of the PDO will be assessed against four sub-objectives: (i) improvements in the
   competitiveness of civil service pay; (ii) improvements in performance management of the civil service; (iii)
   improvements in the accountability of the civil service; and (iv) increased staffing of middle- and senior levels
   in the civil service.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were two components:

   Component 1: support to the government’s public sector reform program (cost estimate at appraisal
   US$15 million; actual cost US$11.97 million). The component supported the three reform areas
   specified in the PDO: pay reform, recruitment and staffing, and performance management and
   accountability. Disbursements on the component were to be made against the achievement of selected
   “milestones” (disbursement-linked indicators, DLIs) attached to each reform area. Each DLI was part of a
   step-by-step sequential reform path to achieve the objectives of its respective reform area and the
   PDO. The project initially had 15 DLIs at US$1 million each, with the option of disbursing 50 percent in
   advance against each DLI.

   Reform area 1 - pay reform. In order to attract and retain key professional and managerial staff, a more
   equitable and competitive pay structure for the civil service was to be introduced. It was to be based on a
   remuneration survey for establishing salary ranges for each grade, and supplements to be paid for specific
   jobs. The survey would also offer a perspective on the evolution of demand for skills in the civil service over
   the longer term.

   Three DLIs supported progress in this area: completion of the survey; all civil service jobs evaluated and
   assigned to an approved pay structure; and all civil servants in Grade 6 and above (middle and high level
   civil servants, representing some 12 percent of the civil service) paid in accordance with the approved pay
   structure.

   Reform area 2 – recruitment and staffing. The objective was to right-size and right-skill the civil
   service. To this end, the government’s Human Resources Management Office (HRMO) was to develop
   open, competitive, and competency-based recruitment procedures, as well as explicit criteria for recruitment
   into managerial, professional, and technical grades. Processes were to be established to identify and
   develop current civil servants who had the potential to take on greater responsibilities in the future. The
   processes were to be accompanied by a development scheme for high potential junior and mid-level
   professionals, as well as new promotion procedures.

   Six DLIs supported progress in this area: recruitment procedures designed and approved; seven staff
   recruited and trained to manage the recruitment and selection process; at least 60 percent of priority
   vacancies filled in Project year 1 according to approved recruitment procedures; at least 80 percent in



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 13
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SL-Public Sector Pay & Performance(FY12) (P128208)



  Project year 2; and at least 90 percent in Project year 3; and donor-recruited local technical assistants (LTA)
  integrated into the civil service.

  Reform area 3 – performance management and accountability. In order to improve performance in the
  civil service, increase citizens’ trust in government, and strengthen accountability of ministries to the
  executive and to citizens. To this end, guidelines for performance contract management were to be
  developed and applied to annual output-based performance targets and work plans; regular performance
  reports were to be generated; and corrective action taken to bring actual performance closer to targeted
  performance. Individual performance appraisals were to be piloted and subsequently rolled out in all
  ministries. Human resource and performance management units in all ministries were to be fully staffed
  and trained to facilitate the introduction of performance appraisals. The HRMO was to have completed the
  design, guidelines, and database on the functioning of the new processes in each ministry, and provided
  them with feedback. Managers were to be trained in setting individual targets and undertaking effective
  appraisal discussions.

  Six DLIs were to support progress in this area: guidelines approved for performance contract management
  for civil servants at the senior level (Grade 11 and above); one annual cycle of the performance appraisal
  process for civil servants at the middle level (Grade 7 and above) completed in pilot ministries; at least 80
  percent of annual performance appraisal reports for CY 2014 for civil servants in Grade 11 and above,
  respectively, in pilot ministries are of appropriate quality; and all ministries’ performance against
  performance targets evaluated, and results published.

  Component 2 – technical assistance (estimate at appraisal US$2.0 million; actual cost US$2.0
  million). The component was to finance a communications program, set up a website for disclosing reform-
  related information, conduct job evaluations and labor market surveys, and provide technical advisory
  services on project implementation.

  Three adjustments were made in March, 2014, to the DLI time frame and the content of some DLIs due to
  implementation delays: the evaluation of all ministries' performance against performance targets, and the
  annual performance appraisal reports for civil servants in grades 7 to 10, were dropped, and the retention of
  recruits to priority vacancies was added.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost and financing. At appraisal, the total cost of the project was estimated at US$17.0 million to be
  financed through an IDA Credit of US$17.0 million equivalent. Actual project cost at completion was
  US$13.97 million. For Component 1, U$15 million had been allocated (US$1 million for each of the 15
  DLIs). At closure, US$11.97 million had been disbursed for Component 1 - US$10 million against 10
  completed DLIs. In addition, advances of US$1.5 million against incomplete DLIs, and US$0.5 million
  against one of the two dropped DLIs, were disbursed. (As noted in Section 2d above, each DLI was valued
  at US$1.0 million, with an option to disburse 50 percent of that value as an advance.) The ICR (page 13)
  states that tracking of the advances for the three unachieved and one dropped DLI was inadequate;
  subsequent adjustments were not made (see Section 8b below for further details). The allocated US$2.0
  million for Component 2 was fully disbursed.

  Borrower contribution. No Borrower contribution was planned or materialized.


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 13
                                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                        SL-Public Sector Pay & Performance(FY12) (P128208)



                                      Dates. The project was approved on May 31, 2012. It became effective on October 23, 2012. The
                                      original Closing Date of October 31, 2015 was extended three times: (I) to October 31, 2016 due to
                                      significant delays in achieving the Year 2 targets; (ii) to October 31, 2017, since many key activities were
                                      proceeding at a slower pace due to an Ebola epidemic; and (iii) to June 30,2018, to provide more time to
                                      complete the project in the aftermath of the Ebola crisis. The total implementation period was 73 months,
                                      nearly 80 percent longer than the originally planned 41 months.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               The project objectives remain relevant to the country situation, government policy and World Bank
               strategy. Coming out of a decade-long civil war and facing serious development challenges, there was
               a need to rebuild a civil service badly weakened during the conflict, and with severe gaps especially among
               middle level professional and technical staff. To address the issue, the government drew up a medium
               term public sector reform program covering the years 2011-2015 and focusing on pay reforms, skills gaps,
               institutional capacity, and performance management. The World Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy
               Progress Report for Sierra Leone (FY10-13), still valid at project closure, emphasized the need to build
               capacity for improved governance and service delivery within government. While it did not explicitly
               address public sector reform, it recognized the need for such reform – it was a cross-cutting issue that
               concerned the whole administration, and it was likely to be critical as government resources increased with
               rising iron ore exports. It was also important for improving performance across the Bank’s portfolio:
               according to the ICR, task teams were signaling capacity problems in public services as a key constraint in
               delivering operations. As a consequence, the Bank operation was designed to support the last three years
               of the government's public sector reform program.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             improved competitiveness of civil service pay (pay reform)

                             Rationale




                                                                                                                                       Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SL-Public Sector Pay & Performance(FY12) (P128208)



The objective was to be achieved by pay reform that would ensure civil servants are paid more equitably and
competitively. Pay reform was to include a reevaluation of civil service jobs, development of a new pay
structure, and application of the new pay structure to civil servants.

Planned remuneration and job evaluation surveys were completed, albeit with delays in the hiring of
consultants for the job evaluation survey. However, translation of survey results into a new pay structure has
been held up for fiscal reasons. The necessary fiscal space, which was expected to be generated by rising
iron ore exports, has not yet materialized. The IMF and other development partners have also been calling
for greater control of the wage bill, reducing room to maneuver on pay reform. Consequently, this objective
has not been met.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improved performance management in the civil service

Rationale
The objective was to be achieved by the introduction of performance appraisal and contract management
processes focused on mid- and higher level civil servants; by setting performance targets for all ministries;
and by introducing a performance appraisal and performance contract management process for civil service
managers; setting performance targets in all ministries; and evaluating staff performance with that of relevant
non-state actors.

The following rules-based performance management tools at the ministerial and individual levels were
introduced:

      Guidelines for performance appraisal of civil servants in grades 7 to 10, and for contract management
       for civil servants at grade 11 and above;
      Supervisors in pilot ministries at central, regional and district level were trained in performance
       appraisal skills; and
      All pilot ministries have agreed annual performance targets for individual civil servants in grade 7 and
       above.

Some elements of a performance management system have been introduced. However, there is no evidence
provided that they have contributed to improved human resource management or of tangible enhancements
in civil service performance or productivity.



Rating
Modest



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 13
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         SL-Public Sector Pay & Performance(FY12) (P128208)




                      OBJECTIVE 3
                      Objective
                      Improved accountability in the civil service

                      Rationale
                      The objective was to be achieved by publishing ministries’ performance targets and their achievements, as
                      well as comparing performance to that of relevant non-state actors. However, the primary activities under this
                      objective – evaluation of ministry staff performance and comparing the results with the performance of
                      comparable non-state actors - was dropped during the May 2014 restructuring, as was the DLI on publication
                      of such performance targets.



                      Rating
                      Negligible


                      OBJECTIVE 4
                      Objective
                      Increased staffing of middle and senior levels in the civil service

                      Rationale
                      The objective was to be achieved by developing appropriate recruitment procedures, filling Grade 6+
                      vacancies in accordance with annual recruitment plans, and integrating local technical assistants (LTA) into
                      the civil service system.

                      Open, competitive, merit-based recruitment procedures were put into place, drawing on a human resource
                      plan based on the medium-term expenditure framework, and on annual recruitment plans for the period 2013-
                      2015. Seven staff were recruited to the Public Services Commission to manage recruitment and selection,
                      meeting the outcome target. LTAs were integrated into the civil service system. Although the vacancies were
                      filled in accordance with procedures that had been put into place under the project to enable competitive
                      recruitment, there is no direct evidence regarding the qualifications and quality of the recruits.




                      Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale
Efficacy of the first and third objectives is rated negligible - a more competitive pay structure could not be
introduced due to fiscal constraints, while the key activities that were to lead to improved civil service
accountability were dropped. The second objective is rated modest - performance appraisal and contract
management processes were put in place, but there is no evidence of tangible changes in performance or


                                                                                                                          Page 6 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SL-Public Sector Pay & Performance(FY12) (P128208)



productivity. Efficacy of the fourth objective - increased staffing of middle and senior levels - achieved its targets
and is rated substantial.



Overall Efficacy Rating                                      Primary reason
Modest                                                       Low achievement

 5. Efficiency
Neither an ex ante, nor an ex post, quantitative analysis of project costs and benefits was undertaken. There
were considerable operational and administrative inefficiencies. First, US$2 million was disbursed as 50 percent
advances against DLIs that were not achieved. The advances were not recovered. While advances of up to 50
percent were allowed by the Financing Agreement, the latter stipulates that withdrawals would be conditional on
satisfactory evidence that DLIs are achieved in order to be deemed eligible expenditures. The advances were
not systematically tracked to prevent ineligible expenditures from occurring. Second, there were serious delays,
amounting to nearly 80 percent of the original time allowed for implementation. These were partly due to political
and macroeconomic factors, and to the consequences of the Ebola epidemic. However, they also reflected
design deficiencies. There were fifteen DLIs divided into four sets, each set linked sequentially - there would be
no disbursements against a DLI until the indicators for the previous one had been met. Confronting this
encouraged the advances already alluded to. Despite the advances and the delays, 12 percent of the IDA credit
remained undisbursed at closure. Third, efficiency was negatively affected by a lack of strategic leadership on
the part of the Authorities. Leadership Team meetings that were to be chaired by the Minister of Finance
occurred infrequently, thereby impeding adaptability to changing circumstances. Numerous implementing
agencies reported that sufficient funds to enable them to engage in project activities were not made available
(ICR, page 30)




Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.




                                                                                                        Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SL-Public Sector Pay & Performance(FY12) (P128208)



6. Outcome

The project's objectives addressed a significant development challenge that was recognized both by the
government and the Bank, and their relevance is rated high. Efficacy is rated modest: Achievements under
the first and third sub-objectives - a more competitive pay structure and improved civil service accountability -
were negligible. Under the second sub-objective - enhanced performance management - procedures were put
in place, but there is little tangible evidence as yet that they have led to better performance management;
efficacy is, therefore, rated modest Under the fourth sub-objective - increased staffing of middle and senior
levels - the targets were achieved, and efficacy is rated substantial. Efficiency is rated negligible: there were
grave operational deficiencies, including US$2 million of unrecovered advances for DLIs that were not
achieved. Overall, shortcomings are considered major, and outcome is assessed as unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Based on the mostly incomplete record of achievement of important elements of the reform targets under the
project, it does appear that there still is significant risk to reaching satisfactory outcomes in key areas –
compliance and quality, the recruitment process, and pay reform. Here, the absence of strategic leadership
of the reform process probably represents the greatest risk. The team believes that the achievements, such
as elements of a performance management system, and recruitment procedures, are unlikely to be reversed.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically relevant in that it recognized the need to build capacity in the civil service to
  better manage expected growth in public resources. The results framework embodied a reasonably
  robust causal chain linking activities to expected outcomes. M&E design developed key indicators that
  were measurable and relevant to outcomes.

  There were, however, a number of major weaknesses in Quality at Entry. First, preparation and design
  did not sufficiently factor in the need for training and guidance in the implementation of DLI-based
  disbursements and related advance payments. This lending modality had only recently been introduced
  to World Bank operations in the Africa Region, and for Sierra Leone, an institutionally challenged country,
  it was completely new. The PAD and other documents contained inadequate practical guidelines, while
  provision for training, both for Bank and client staff, was insufficient. The PAD assumed that there would
  be frequent and intense supervision, but this did not materialize (see Section 8b below). Second, the
  results-based financing model would also contribute to implementation delays, as many activities
  proceeded at a slower pace than anticipated, in turn holding back others that could have gone ahead in
  the absence of sequencing. It did not, therefore, fulfill expectations that it would reduce the risk of slow


                                                                                                        Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL-Public Sector Pay & Performance(FY12) (P128208)



  and uneven progress in a weak institutional environment. Third, risks related to the uncertain political
  climate and macroeconomic situation were not fully factored in or mitigated. They were to have a serious
  negative impact on project achievements. Fourth, the three year implementation period was chosen to fit
  the government’s reform timetable rather than the country's institutional and capacity constraints. It
  proved to be far too short.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 While the Ebola epidemic caused significant disruptions, there were also major shortcomings in the Quality
 of Supervision. It was seriously under-resourced. Not only did the more than usually intensive effort
 foreseen in the PAD not materialize, but resources were only marginally increased (by seven percent) to
 cope with almost three additional years of implementation. This had a number of consequences. First,
 advance disbursements against DLIs were not systematically tracked, so that ineligible expenditures
 (expenditures that should not have been made under the DLI system) arose from non-achievement of
 some indicators (see Section 5 above). Second, the supervision team could have been more proactive in
 discussing with the government the need for a level one restructuring, after key assumptions made at
 appraisal (for example, concerning the fiscal space needed for the establishment of a competitive pay
 scale) proved to be no longer valid. Third, although changes to the results framework were captured in the
 Project Paper and Amendments to the Financing Agreement following the March 2014 level two
 restructuring, they were not formalized into the Bank’s monitoring system. All subsequent Implementation
 Status and Results Reports (ISRs), therefore, continued to use the initial results framework, thereby further
 complicating the systematic tracking of the 50 percent advances against achievements of the DLIs. Fourth,
 again as part of the March 2014 restructuring, the number of DLIs was reduced from 15 to 13, but without
 any corresponding adjustments to the “value” of each DLI. Fifth, while the supervision team drew attention
 in ISRs to implementation challenges, there is little indication of action taken to address them.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 A detailed results framework and monitoring plan were developed during preparation. Six outcome
 indicators were to be tracked, two covering each of the reform areas. All indicators were relevant to their

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL-Public Sector Pay & Performance(FY12) (P128208)



 purpose and included targets; no baselines were calculated, as the project was introducing new
 processes. Responsibility for overall monitoring of the results framework lay with the project
 implementation agency, the Public Sector Reform Unit (PSRU). The PSRU was to coordinate the reporting
 of four key implementing agencies, each one responsible for a reform area.



b. M&E Implementation
  The PSRU produced progress reports of varying timeliness and quality (ICR (page 33). However, there
  were significant weaknesses in this process: The PSRU's capacity was weak; monitoring by the
  government's leadership team, intended to be quarterly, was irregular and infrequent; and the results
  framework and monitoring plan were not updated following disruptions to the timetable. As noted in
  Section 8b above, the results framework was not updated following the March 2014 restructuring, and
  Bank supervision reports continued to rely on the original one. According to the ICR, the PSRU did not
  use the results framework, and their quarterly reports did not include updates on its status. Throughout
  implementation, the Unit focused on the attainment of DLI targets. Nonetheless, DLI achievements
  against advances were not properly tracked. The project's gender target (30 percent of direct project
  beneficiaries should be women) was not monitored, and at project closure, no gender breakdown was
  available (it was subsequently estimated by the ICR team).



c. M&E Utilization
  Neither project management nor government decision-makers appear to have made use of the M&E
  system (ICR, page 34).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   No social or environmental safeguard policies were triggered by the project, which was classified as a
   Category C project for purposes of environmental assessment.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. Portfolio and Risk Management (PRIMA) assessments during preparation and
   implementation consistently rated the project’s financial management as satisfactory. Still, financial
   management does raise some questions:




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL-Public Sector Pay & Performance(FY12) (P128208)



         the ICR notes that the Bank did not track progress on advances to DLIs; still, advances were made
           against four DLIs that were either never achieved or cancelled during the first restructuring.
         the annual external audit only covered expenditures undertaken within the TA Component of the
           project.
         The Audit Service of Sierra Leone reported on the project, but it did not make a distinction between
           disbursements recorded as advances against non-achieved DLIs and disbursements recorded as
           reimbursements on achieved and verified DLIs.

   Procurement. A procurement assessment during appraisal found that the PSRU had inadequate
   experience and capacity to conduct procurement activities under the project. The hiring of a part-time
   procurement specialist mitigated this risk, but a May 2017 Procurement Risk Assessment and
   Management System (PRAMS) rated project procurement Moderately Unsatisfactory. Procurement delays
   also contributed to a delay in activities, such as the hiring of the consultant for the job evaluation survey.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.



d. Other
   Gender. Based on analysis undertaken by the ICR team, the gender target was not met. Female
   beneficiaries of the recruitment process averaged 18 percent. Only in the case of human resources
   officers did female recruitment exceed the target, reaching 32 percent. In fact, there appears to have been
   a deterioration - an analysis undertaken by the Public Service Commission , noted that, in 2015, a quarter of
   appointees were women.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   Efficacy was modest, with two
                                Moderately                                         out of four objectives rated
Outcome                                                Unsatisfactory
                                Unsatisfactory                                     negligible. Efficiency is also
                                                                                   rated negligible.
                                                                                   There were major shortcomings
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Unsatisfactory              in both Quality at Entry and
                                Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   Quality of Supervision.
                                                                                   There were major weaknesses
                                                                                   in M&E implementation. The
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Negligible
                                                                                   results framework was not
                                                                                   utilized.
Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SL-Public Sector Pay & Performance(FY12) (P128208)




12. Lessons

The first three lessons are taken from the ICR, with some adaptation of language, and the fourth is
drawn by IEG:

        Alertness to incentives can influence collaboration in results-based lending. Teams
         need to assess the incentive effects of individual DLIs on agency collaboration. In the Sierra
         Leone case, the client noted that the pay-off was a public good and achieving DLIs was
         unlikely to result in any proportionate budget increase for the agencies concerned.
        Changing country circumstances can affect project outcomes. Teams need to assess
         the economic and political circumstances that may disrupt project design and require
         adjustments, for instance during mid-term reviews. In Sierra Leone, the project could have
         benefited from an early realization of the implications on civil service reform of
         changing fiscal space.
        While focusing on DLIs, the results framework is also relevant. An exclusive focus on
         DLI sequencing when managing a DLI-based project may not sufficiently define the reform
         path. In Sierra Leone, a greater focus on the results framework and intermediate indicators
         might have better brought forth issues on the feasibility of certain reforms. It might have
         better focused the team's attention to changes in the results framework as DLIs were being
         adjusted (during the 2014 revisions).
        Introduction of new lending modalities, with which Bank staff are also unfamiliar, is
         best avoided in institutionally challenging contexts. If, nonetheless, they are utilized,
         then project outcomes require provision for adequate training on both the Bank and Borrower
         sides, and by enhanced resource availability for supervision. In this case, the use of the DLI
         model was not accompanied by sufficient training, and the allocations made for supervision
         would have been barely adequate even without the DLI model, given the difficulties of the
         operating environment.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a thorough assessment of the project. It covers most sections in sufficient detail, providing
enough evidence-based information and analysis to allow the ICRR to be completed. It draws some good
lessons, but in many instances they raise issues that don’t appear to be tackled in the text. This is notably the
case in reviewing the supervision process and (absence of) revisions to the results framework. Likewise, an
explanation of the external auditing arrangements would have been useful. The document is internally
consistent, but at 41 pages, it is too long.




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 13
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SL-Public Sector Pay & Performance(FY12) (P128208)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                    Page 13 of 13
