     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021704

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P122616                                    MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Malawi                                     Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-48970                                 31-Aug-2016                                          26,280,041.80

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Mar-2011                               29-Jun-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           28,200,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            28,200,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        26,280,041.80                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo         J. W. van Holst               Christopher David Nelson       IEGFP (Unit 3)
                            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Financing Agreement (FA) on page 5, the objective of the Financial Sector Technical Assistance
   Project ( FSTAP) was "to increase access to finance for the currently unbanked, but bankable, population of
   the Recipient". The PDO statement in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) was identical, and was not
   revised during project implementation.




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had five components as detailed below. Annex 3 in the ICR showed the costs at
   appraisal based on the PAD, but the actual costs shown in Annex 3 were the revised costs at
   restructuring. The Bank task team provided IEG with the data on actual costs.

   Component 1: Financial Sector Regulation and Supervision (cost at appraisal of US$5.32 million,
   revised cost of US$5.66 million, and actual cost of about US$5.6 million).

   Activities identified under this component are detailed below:

   (a) Carrying out of a program of activities designed to enhance the Reserve Bank of Malawi (RBM) legal
   and regulatory framework for the financial sector, including, inter alia, carrying out of a diagnostic review of
   the existing regulations, development of a new regulatory framework for capital markets, carrying out of
   capacity assessments for the Microfinance Institutions (MFIs) and the Savings and Credit Cooperatives
   (SACCOS), development of a dispute resolution framework in the insurance industry between the insurer
   and the insured, and design of a regulatory and supervisory framework for the pension industry, and

   (b) Carrying out of a program of activities designed to strengthen the supervisory capacity of the RBM,
   including: (i) design of new or amended prudential reports for the financial sector; (ii) development of off-site
   analytical tools for banking, insurance, microfinance institutions, savings and credit cooperatives, pension
   funds and capital markets; (iii) development of macro-prudential analytical tools; and (iv) provision of goods
   required for the purpose.

   Revisions to Component 1: In the context of the October 2015 restructuring, new activities were identified
   under this component (see Medium Term Review (MTR) Aide-memoire Annex 2) using savings from the
   cancelled procurement of a new supervisory technology system, and the decision to not proceed with
   establishing the Financial Sector Deepening Trust (FSDT). Final activities were not identified in the
   restructuring paper, but were to be selected on a case by case basis from a list of eligible activities identified
   during the November-December 2014 MTR mission.

   Component 2: Financial Infrastructure (cost at appraisal of US$13.22 million, revised cost of
   US$13.68 million, and actual cost of about US$11.4 million).

   Activities identified under this component were as follows: (a) upgrading of the existing real time gross
   settlement (RTGS) system and acquisition, installation and commissioning of a new RTGS system, (b)
   design, development and implementation of a central payments system platform under which banks settle
   their accounts (National Switch), (c) establishment of a microfinance institution transaction processing hub,
   (d) development of securities settlement and non-bank agency networks, (e) carrying out of a program of
   activities aimed at enhancing consumer understanding of payment products and services, the functioning of

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)



the credit reference bureau and the implications of the National Switch, and (f) provision of goods required
for the purpose.

Component 3: Financial Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy (cost at appraisal of US$3.02
million, revised cost of US$3.33 million, and actual cost of about US$2.6 million).

Activities identified under this component were: (a) carrying out of a program of activities aimed at
strengthening the legal and regulatory framework for protection of financial consumers, (b) carrying out of a
program of activities designed to enhance institutional arrangements for consumer protection in all financial
services, and (c) development of a consumer awareness and financial literacy program.

Component 4: Ministry of Finance's Financial Sector Policy and Governance Capacity and Long-
term Finance (cost at appraisal of US$3.39 million, revised cost of US$3.09 million, and actual
cost of about US$3.2 million).

The two categories of activities identified under this component are detailed below:

(a) carrying out of a program of activities aimed at enhancing the capacity of the Ministry of Finance for
formulation, implementation and monitoring of financial sector policies and regulations, and for overseeing
the Recipient’s interventions in the financial sector, including: (i) the development of an ownership policy of
state-owned financial institutions and programs; (ii) the publication and dissemination of ensuing policy
work; and (iii) the provision of goods required for the purpose, and

(b) development of a policy framework and a legal and institutional infrastructure for long-term finance,
including, inter alia: (i) preparation of a long-term finance policy and regulatory framework; (ii) carrying out of
a cost-benefit study on the maturity period of the Recipient’s debt; (iii) carrying out of an institutional review
of the operations and the investment policies of pension funds and life insurance companies; (iv) carrying
out of an assessment of the capacity of the capital markets and the Malawi Stock Exchange; (v)
establishment of a framework for leasing; (vi) carrying out of a feasibility study for establishing a
development bank; and (vii) undertaking of diagnostic studies on sustainability of a long-term finance
guarantee scheme.

Component 5: Implementation Support (cost at appraisal of US$3.26 million, revised cost of US$2.45
million, and actual cost of about US$2.9 million).

Activities under this component were as follows: (a) carrying out a program of activities aimed at improving
the capacity of the RBM for Project management, including establishment of the Project Implementation
Unit, recruitment of staff for the PIU and provision of goods required for the purpose, and (b) carrying out a
program of activities designed to enhance the RBM’s capacity in the administration of the Malawi Financial
Sector Deepening Trust, such activities to include the recruitment and maintenance of a procurement
specialist, a financial management specialist, a monitoring and evaluation specialist, a project coordinator
and support staff.

Revisions to Component 5: Following the October 2015 restructuring, the funds initially allocated to
establishing the FSDT were reallocated to other activities (MTR Aide-memoire Annex 2) that will help
achieving this goal. The final activities to be funded were not identified in the restructuring paper, but were
to be selected during implementation from a list of eligible activities identified during the November-
December 2014 MTR mission.


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost: The appraisal estimate was US$28.21 million, and the actual project cost amounted to US$26.3
   million.

   Financing: The project was funded by an IDA credit, with an appraisal amount of US$28.21 million, and an
   actual amount of US$26.3 million.

   Co-financing: Co-financing was expected from the Department of International Development (DFID) of the
   United Kingdom, but was later canceled because of internal policy changes and general public finance
   management concerns in Malawi. (ICR, para 64)

   Borrower Contribution: There was no planned borrower contribution, and none occurred during
   implementation.

   Dates and Restructuring: The project was approved on March 24, 2011, and made effective on March 7,
   2011. The project was restructured twice: (i) on October 29, 2015 to incorporate changes in the results
   framework, components and cost, in the reallocation between disbursement categories, in the
   implementation schedule, and the credit closing date, and (ii) on August 28, 2017 to make additional
   changes in the results framework, the implementation schedule, the credit closing date, and the legal
   covenants. However, changes in the results framework were unclear. The project was closed on June 29,
   2018, almost two years after the initial closing date.

   Changes in the components and their cost were mainly triggered by the decision to not proceed with
   establishing the Financial Sector Deepening Trust (FSDT), as the required co-financing to support the
   FSDT from the Department of International Development (DFID) was canceled. Restructuring documents
   did not provide a final description of revised components and their cost. This task was left to the Bank's
   team that finally selected from a list of eligible activities identified during the November-December 2014
   MTR mission.

   Changes in the results framework aimed to strengthen the M&E system by adding a few new PDO level
   indicators (three for a total of six), and some intermediate indicators to better measure the project's broader
   impact beyond access to finance, including stability of the financial system and its financial payments
   infrastructure, and financial literacy. As the PDO was unchanged, and that the change in the results
   framework was a refinement aimed at expanding the number of indicators to better capture the project's
   impact without changing the project's ambition, this review therefore did not consider there was any value
   added from applying a split assessment of overall outcome. The project's efficacy was assessed on the
   basis of the revised and strengthened results framework.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)



               The project objective was "to increase access to finance for the currently unbanked, but bankable,
               population of the Recipient". The relevance of objective is illustrated by its alignment with the Borrower's
               and World Bank's priorioties as described below.

               Alignment with the Borrower's priorities: The focus of the Malawi Growth and Development Strategy
               (MGDS III, 2017-2022) in the area of financial services aims to achieve financial inclusion, to be reflected
               by effective access by citizens to a range of quality financial services. The main goal of the strategy is to
               create a vibrant, efficient, stable and inclusive financial sector that will meet the financing needs of all in the
               country. Key outcomes of the strategy in the financial sector include the following: (i) an enhanced policy
               and regulatory framework for the financial sector, and (ii) an improved digital payments ecosystem in the
               financial service provision (MGDS III). All project activities were in support to the goal of the country's
               strategy, and in contribution to its outcomes. In response to the delicate financial situation of the
               country created by the 2013 public finance mismanagement (dubbed cash-gate), the project supported the
               completion of a pilot Government electronic fund transfer (EFT) program for civil servant salaries and
               pensions compliant with new financial control and reporting standards.

               Alignment with the World Bank's strategies:The PDO was in line with the latest the 2013 World Bank
               Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), specifically under its theme aimed at promoting sustainable,
               diversified, and inclusive growth. A 2017 CAS Performance and Learning Review specifically noted the
               importance of the project and how it continued “to help Malawi meet its financial inclusion targets by
               upgrading the national payments financial infrastructure". The project continued to remain relevant and
               flexible to accommodating the following three emerging priorities: (a) in the banking sector, Basel II
               implementation support and provision of a resident bank supervision advisor; (b) the move toward the use
               of electronic funds transfers (EFTs); and (c) transaction support to look at options for Government's
               divestiture from a number of financial institutions.

               There was a congruence between the country's priorities in the financial sector and the World Bank's
               strategy in that country as highlighted in the 2017 CAS Performance and Learning Review. More
               specifically, both the World Bank's strategy and the Government's priorities aimed to improve financial
               inclusion targets in Malawi, and this goal was at the core of the project's objective of increasing access to
               finance for the unbanked, but bankable population. The scope of the project activities was realistic,
               and most of them were implemented at project closure. Overall, the relevance of project objectives
               was rated high.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                         Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
The project objective was "to increase access to finance for the currently unbanked, but bankable, population
of the Recipient".

Rationale
Theory of change: The theory of change depicted in the ICR is sound, but could have been improved. There
is a logical link between the set of activities supported by the project, and the identified intermediate
outcomes. For instance, there is a strong linkage between the improvement of the country's financial
infrastructure, and the completion of (i) modernizing the real time gross settlement system, (ii) designing and
implementing the central switch for processing payments, (iii) improving processing efficiency for small value
payments, and (iv) reviewing the adequacy of the legal framework. The theory of change had two serious
weaknesses: (i) the link between the intermediate outcomes and the PDO was unclear (ICR, Figure 1, page
10), as it was not clear which intermediate outcomes resulted in the PDO and how, and (ii) the identified
underlying assumptions were too broad and needed to be disaggregated to pinpoint the more specific
conditions that had to be met for the PDO to be achieved. Two assumptions that could have been spelled
out were: (i) the Government's commitment to stay the course with the continuation and the coordination of
the reforms in the financial sector, and (ii) the importance of sustaining technical capacity both in the public
and private sectors to keep up with the ongoing changes in the financial sector, both on the domestic and the
international front.

Attribution and Counterfactuals: The ICR did not discuss these issues, but this review concluded that the
achieved outcomes were attributable to this project and the Government of Malawi. As the country's
economy was going through a difficult financial period (including the 2013 massive public finance
mismanagement, dubbed cash-gate scandal), the achieved outcomes could not have occurred without the
role played by the World Bank through this project, and the Government's commitment and coordination of
the modernization of the financial sector and its sector reform program. Increased access to finance
revealed by the increase of the population gaining access to formal finance, and the explosion of payments
transactions through the banking system could therefore not have occurred without the achievements
completed in the context of this project. The results are summarized below according to the themes of the
project's assistance.

Outputs

       Toward Strengthening the Financial Sector Regulation and Supervision

      The number of agency banking regulations that became operational was exceeded, reaching 468
       against a target of 450, and a baseline of 0. An increase in agency banking agreements represents
       an increase in availability of banking services especially in areas where banking services were not
       available and, therefore, impacting positively on financial inclusion;
      The Parliament passed a new Financial Crimes Bill (February 2017), and in May and June 2017,
       dissemination workshops on the new law were conducted, and guidelines on regulations of Islamic
       Finance were developed;
      Regulations related to the 10 laws that were passed from March 2009 have either been issued or are
       at gazetting stage when the project closed;


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)




  The RBM reviewed and finalized several directives/regulations on bank supervision for gazetting. As
     of the project closure date, a number of new directives and regulations had been gazetted or were in
     the process of being implemented;
    The Bank Supervision Application (BSA) was enhanced to include non-bank financial institutions, the
     enhancement was completed in June 2017, and the financial stability reports are regularly published;
    Growth strategies, regulatory and hedging instruments, and an action plan for bond market
     development were developed;
    Transaction support was provided to evaluate options for the Government's divestiture from a number
     of financial institutions, resulting in the Government selling off the majority stake in all financial
     institutions it previously controlled;
    Ownership regulations for statutory bodies in Malawi, state-owned enterprises (SOE) guidelines on
     overdraft limits, issuance of parastatal guarantees, indemnities, and letters of consent and comfort
     under implementation were promulgated;
    The Financial Services Appeals Committee (FSAC) was operationalized to hear appeals by financial
     institutions on decisions made by the Registrar of financial institutions, and rules of procedure for the
     operations of the committee were also established;
    Core functions of the Financial Sector Policy Unit (FSPU) were executed by appropriately trained
     staff. The FSPU has since been combined with the Government Pensions to form the Pensions and
     Financial Sector Policy Division headed by a Director;
    Policy frameworks for provision of long term financing were developed; including (i) equity and
     debt/leasing financing, (ii) public private partnership (PPP) for infrastructure, and (iii) development of
     long term savings and investment institutions;
    Detailed sectoral reviews were completed for pensions, credit guarantees and Islamic finance;
    Support was provided to third-party bank diagnostic audits for assessing the overall health of the bank
     sector;
    Automated tools for offsite surveillance and macro-prudential analysis were designed, acquired and
     implemented;
    The Reserve Bank of Malawi (RBM) staff were trained in using analytical tools and new regulations,
     and in particular the enhanced Bank Supervision Application (BSA); moreover, the project procured 30
     laptops on which the BSA application was installed to allow access to the BSA by staff at all times;
     and
    Basel II implementation was supported.

     Toward Strengthening the Financial Payments Infrastructure

  A new National Switch was procured, installed, and made operational in January 2015; and
   interoperability was achieved for automated teller machines (ATMs) and point-of sale (POS), and
   the MFI Hub was integrated on the national switch;
  The Microfinance Transaction Hub was deployed and is operational, and data migration and
   verification was completed for 16 pilot institutions, with the system software installed, and user
   acceptance testing (UAT) training conducted at nine MFIs and SACCOs;
  All commercial banks in Malawi are integrated into the National Switch (on ATMs), and five banks
   have been integrated on point of sale.




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)




  The EFT roadmap was finalized and its implementation commenced. Contracts for the development of
     various interfaces to secure government payment streams have been signed and are being
     implemented;
    The Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system was strengthened, and the automated transfer
     system (ATS/CSD) implementation was completed and the system is now considered stabilized;
    The Automated Trading System for the Malawi Stock Exchange (MSE) went live on June 7, 2018;
    The integration of mobile money services was approved for the switch and the use cases include
     Person-to-Person (P2P), Bill Payment, Cash-pull from bank account, and Cash-push to bank account;
    The hardware and the application services are ready for use. The data center at Globe Internet was
     selected for use and the application installed. The service-level agreements were finalized to cover
     three key relationships: hardware as a service (Haas) with Globe Internet, software as a service
     (Saas) with Fintech International, and service levels between participating financial institutions and the
     Hub Company. Seven MFIs and Savings and Credit Cooperatives (SACCOs) have also gone live;
    The design of the Centralized National Pensions Database was completed;
    Risk assessment was conducted to assess the move by the Government from checks to EFT and
     compatibility of public finance management system, including Integrated Financial Management
     Information System (IFMIS) to ATS;
    Government payments: all vendors are on the ground with user acceptance testing under way as of
     the project closure date, and integration implementation commenced and currently in progress. The
     expected changes relate to funding, payments, sweeping (domestic), rejections and resubmissions
     (cancellations and reversals), reconciliations, payments security, coding, and reports.

  Toward Improving the Financial Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy

  The Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy (CPFL) drafted the Financial Ombudsman Bill and
     the Financial Consumer Protection Bill for the Cabinet as a step towards the adoption of a Twin-Peak
     model to financial consumer protection;
    The Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Bill was drafted and stakeholder consultations were
     completed, and was submitted to the Ministry of Finance (MoF) for processing;
    The financial Ombudsman Bill was drafted and reviewed by the stakeholders. Stakeholder
     consultative workshops on financial consumer protection directives were held. Also, a financial literacy
     survey was conducted, and the final report was released;
    The legal and regulatory framework for consumer protection was prepared and presented to the
     Cabinet, and the third (final) priority regulations were drafted, including the market conduct risk-based
     supervisory guidelines; and
    The RBM institutional capacity has been enhanced for consumer protection supervision. Except for
     staff employed in the two years prior to the ICR, 100% of staff in the consumer protection unit was
     trained.

  Toward Improving Financial Sector Policy, Governance Capacity, and Long-term Finance

  The 2016-2020 National Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS) was launched in July 2017. The
     strategy identified six priority areas and specific approaches to increase financial inclusion: (i)
     expansion of the reach of digital payments; (ii) expansion of savings, especially through savings
     groups; (iii) targeted finance for micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and farmers; (iv)
     niche insurance opportunities to reduce vulnerability; (v) effective consumer empowerment and

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)



       education; and (vi) national coordination of financial inclusion. The Government has included a
       chapter on access to finance in the MGDS III and since launched the Malawi Financial Sector
       Development Strategy (MFSDS).

Outcomes

   Toward Increased Access to Finance

    The target to increase the adult population that uses formal financial institutions was largely exceeded,
     reaching 50.4 percent, compared with a target of 40 percent and a baseline of 19 percent;
    The target to increase the proportion of women within the adult population that is formally banked was
     also almost achieved, with an actual value of 38.5 percent, against a target of 40 percent, compared
     with a baseline of 17 percent;
    There was an increased use of mobile payments from about 186,000 transactions in December 2012
     to 4.5 million transactions in May 2018 (the month before project closed), and access to finance has
     significantly improved and people are able to perform financial transactions without going to banks. In
     particular, the rural population has benefited more from mobile technology.

  Toward Growth in Payments Transactions

    The volume and value of transactions processed in point-of-sale (POS) were largely exceeded
       reaching 2,556,541 and Malawi Kwacha (MK) 101,907 million, against a revised target of 245,570 and
       MK 6,286 million, and a baseline of 183,248 and MK3,548 million respectively;
      The volume and value of transactions processed through ATMs were exceeded,
       reaching 136,907,780 and MK 2,417 billion, against a target of 23,073,209 and MK0.302 billion, and a
       baseline of 17,217,584 and MK 0.170 billion respectively;
      The volume and value of transactions processed through MNO-led mobile payments were largely
       exceeded, reaching 333,395,067 and MK 1,022 billion against a target of 11,717,526 and MK 158.28
       billion, and a baseline of 698,419 and MK 1.40 billion respectively;
      The volume and value of transactions processed of Bank-led mobile payments were largely
       exceeded, reaching 75,072,703 and MK 462,439 million against a target of 4,869,216 and MK 5,731
       million, and a baseline of 3,633,484 and MK 3,235 million respectively;
      Targets for the transactions volume and value processed by the Automated Transfer System (ATS)
       were exceeded, as the transactions increased by 488% in volume and by 1,465% in value. Volume
       and value of transactions increased from 4,349,952 and MK 5,011 billion to 21,220,986 and MK
       73,415 billion respectively;
      The target of the transactions volume processed by the National Switch was virtually
       met, reaching 5,390,276 against a target of 5,399,428, and the value of transactions reached MK
       83.51 billion, with no target for the value of transactions set at approval;
      The target for the transactions volume and value processed by the MFI Hub was fully achieved, as
       five non-banking financial institutions (MFI and SACCOs) are using the hub software at project
       closure, against target of five, and a baseline of 0.

   Toward Financial Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy




                                                                                                Page 9 of 18
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)




                            The awareness of the RBM and its Consumer Protection Unit increased by 10 percentage points
                             (74.2% to 84%) and 3 percentage points (12.5% to 16%) respectively. Despite increased awareness
                             of Financial Consumer Protection institutions, 36.2% (in 2014) of consumers who had conflicts with
                             their financial providers were not aware of the existence of these consumer protection agencies, in
                             comparison to 44% in 2018;
                            The proportion of financially literate population was partially achieved, reaching an index value of
                             3.90 against a target of 4.80, and baseline of 0, based on an index that ranges from 0 (illiterate) to 7
                             (highly literate). The proportion of financially literate female population was also partially achieved, as
                             the achieved index was 3.60, against a target of 4.80, and a baseline of 0.




                      Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale
Overall efficacy: Increased access to finance was significant, and outcome targets were for all practical
purposes achieved. The growth in payments transactions exploded due to improvements in the financial sector
regulation and supervision, and most particularly in the strengthening of the financial payments infrastructure. In
the same vein, financial consumer protection and financial literacy improved significantly from a very low level
at project approval. In all, there was a substantial increase in the access to finance by the previously unbanked
country's population.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial


 5. Efficiency
This was a technical assistance project, and no quantitative economic and financial analysis was undertaken
at appraisal, nor in the ICR. Key findings from research that underpinned the project were as follows:
(i) the potential of an efficient financial sector to accelerate economic growth and poverty reduction, (ii) a well-
functioning financial system provides reliable and inexpensive payments services, makes available remunerative
and safe deposit facilities and offers entrepreneurs access to a suitable range of sources for short- and long-
term funds, and (iii) financial sector development is associated with beneficial distributional effects (PAD,
p.19). To illustrate efficiency of project implementation, the ICR underscored the efficient use of human and
financial resources during project implementation, and the timeliness in the implementation of the project's
activities.

Efficient use of project resources. The ICR indicated that preexisting entities with adequate human resources
were allocated responsibilities based on their area of expertise and comparative advantage, and new ones were

                                                                                                                          Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)



deliberately created (for example the creation of the Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy under the
component 3) and were provided the statutory mandate to execute specific activities of the project. For the most
part, the exploitation of existing structures contributed to the project's cost-effectiveness. Financial resources
were allocated to the most important activities toward achieving increased financial access for the "currently
unbanked, but bankable, population" In Malawi. Credit funds were disbursed at project closure.

Timeliness. The considerable training activities were centrally financed by the project, which served to cut
overhead costs, and to a large extent the outputs were achieved on time. Digitization, which was one of the core
project components was also efficiently implemented, resulting in the overall improvement of speed of
transactions to the mutual satisfaction of service providers and consumers. However, because of the challenges
facing the Government in handling the overall financial sector reform, the project's closing date was extended by
two years, but this did not reflect any shortcomings in the efficiency with which the financial sector reform was
being implemented.



For these reasons, the project's efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives was high, based on the congruence between the country's priorities and the World
Bank's strategies in promoting financial inclusion through an increased access to finance by a higher number of
the country's population. Efficacy was substantial, since the project achieved a strengthened financial payments
infrastructure, an increased access to finance, growth in payments transactions, an improved financial
consumer protection and financial literacy. The project's implementation efficiency was substantial.



The project had minor shortcomings, and therefore its overall outcome is rated satisfactory.


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project achieved significant progress in strengthening the financial payments infrastructure, in scaling
up access to finance, and in launching the financial consumer protection and financial literacy. This occurred
mainly because of strong commitment displayed the Government and the RBM management.



As the regulatory framework of the financial sector is in place and embedded in a well-established institution
(the RBM), there is a potential for the sophisticated infrastructure to increase financial institutions capability
and to improve financial products and innovate, as well as building the capacity of stakeholders and end-
users to encourage financial product uptake. These institutions benefited also from the existing maintenance
policy at the RBM for critical infrastructure and information systems. Likewise, the ATS is housed at the RBM
with adequate financial resources; its sustainability is therefore ensured. However, the ATS as well as the
legal and regulatory framework will need to be upgraded regularly to keep up with market and technological
developments.



However, as the ICR notes (para 78) there are aspects that need follow up. The oversight of the financial
market infrastructure handed to beneficiaries needs to be established. Regarding the achievements of the
MFI Hub, the innovation is not likely to be pursued if the unit costs for joining and maintenance are
high. Consequently, alternative financing already being considered by the authorities to enable more MFIs
and SACCOs to adopt the concept needs to be continued and this should also include commercial financing
options (ICR para 78).



The integration of mobile money services into the National Switch significantly expands the support base for
the sustainability of the platform and confirms the market relevance of the technical solution. The use cases
integrated include person-to-person (P2P) transfers, bill payments, cash-pull from bank account, and cash-
push to bank account. The National Switch) is likely to function using existing policies and handed over to
beneficiaries, who will manage it as owners of the assets and the liabilities of the facilities provided.



Finally, the ICR notes that the Government had requested for a successor World Bank project to FSTAP to
enhance private enterprise growth and job creation in Malawi by increasing MSME access to financial
services and improving their capabilities. A new project under preparation (P168577) aims to pursue the
scaling up of financial inclusion and entrepreneurship, and is likely to be approved in FY20. Key activities
envisioned include the following: (i) access to finance for entrepreneurs and MSMEs, (ii) entrepreneurship


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)



development focusing on youth and women, (iii) financial infrastructure and regulatory environment, and (iv)
financial education.



This review agrees with the ICR that the risk to development outcome is moderate.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At appraisal, the World Bank team reviewed the relevant aspects of the project, including the macro-
  financial context, as well as the technical, institutional, and procurement implications of the project
  activities. Major risk factors and lessons learned from earlier projects were incorporated into the design.
  The project was well grounded in the realities of Malawi and its problems in the financial sector at
  appraisal (ICR para 74).

  The project objective was precisely stated, and the components were realistic, measurable and
  achievable, and identified implementation arrangements were adequate. However, there were two
  categories of weaknesses: (i) the results framework had shortcomings that were corrected during two
  restructuring operations (2015 and 2017), and (ii) the risk of withdrawal of partners was not identified, and
  when the risk materialized, there were no mitigation measures to continue with identified activities. The
  overall quality of the World Bank’s performance in ensuring quality at entry was Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR noted (para 76) that the Bank Task Team Leader (TTL), technical experts, financial management
 and procurement specialists, and consultants consistently engaged closely with Government counterparts.
 The task team responded promptly to the requests of the Government of Malawi. The World Bank’s
 technical and fiduciary teams provided regular support to focus on maximizing the project’s development
 impact, which resulted in adjustments, including project restructurings and extensions of the closing
 dates. Moreover, the task team conducted regular supervision missions, on average twice a year, to take
 stock of progress, and the implementation status and results reports (ISRs) were candid, detailed,
 and outlining important events and providing a complete picture of the progress. The supervision teams
 also produced clear and detailed Aide Memoires.



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)



 Furthermore, the ICR indicated (para 76) that three TTLs managed the project, including one co-TTL based
 in the local country office, who followed up on ground implementation progress, and the turnover of project
 TTLs was within norms of other projects in the portfolio that were approved at the same time (e.g. energy
 and mining projects). A special emphasis went into having in-country support to the PIU teams and
 beneficiary institutions. The regular supervision missions, meetings and technical guidance helped a lot to
 reach the project purpose. Changes in TTLs were undertaken carefully and field supervision was carried
 out with an adequate skills mix at critical project implementation periods to address problems identified. It
 is worth noting that the turnover in TTLs caused anxieties for the client even though this did not disrupt
 implementation.

 However, the ICR questioned the efficacy of the supervision missions, and argued that the latter should
 have done more in focusing on advising the PIU teams and beneficiary institutions on assessing the
 efficiency of innovations carried out by the project and on proactivity in preparing exit strategies for the
 shared platforms. While proactivity regarding future project efficiency and exit strategies were
 desirable, these issues were not at the core of the project components and will be addressed by a follow-
 on project as indicated under Section 7. Overall, quality of supervision was strikingly effective, because
 the project team, relying on a resident task team leader, succeeded to: (i) oversee the successful delivery
 of key project activities that generated the expected outcome, (ii) sustain a close dialogue with
 the Government, and (ii) provide timely support to the implementing agencies, all this in a context of
 fragility and weak public finance governance.

 Based on the above performance, the quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design was anchored by key performance indicators and intermediate outcome indicators, as
 included in Annex 1 of the PAD. The PIU at the RBM was the responsible implementing agency for
 conducting M&E activities which regularly collected data and provided detailed reports for the overall M&E
 system with inputs from the designated focal points in the implementing units. These units were
 responsible for data collection and reporting for their respective component. In hindsight, while the results
 framework had moderate shortcomings, it was revised and strengthened by additional indicators during
 both restructurings to better capture project's theory of change.




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)



b. M&E Implementation
  There were shortcomings in the M&E Framework which were later corrected during restructuring to better
  measure the PDO through the upgrading of some intermediate outcome indicators and new PDO-level
  indicators. Additional changes in the results framework were later introduced through project restructuring
  to make them (see Section 2-e) more realistic and able to capture achieved outcome in modernizing the
  financial sector and in promoting access to financial services.

  The Bank's task team regularly collected detailed progress data, updated progress against the baseline,
  and highlighted issues for the World Bank management and donor’s attention. Information provided
  included quarterly progress and financial management reports and annual audits of project accounts. The
  MTR took place during November/December 2014, and provided the needed guidance to (i) restructure
  the project and revise the results framework, (ii) reallocate resources towards reviewing the Malawi
  Financial Inclusion Strategy, following the impossibility of establishing the Financial Sector Deepening
  Trust, due to the cancellation of the DFID support prompted by the United Kingdom's internal policy
  changes and general public finance management concerns in Malawi (ICR, para 64).



c. M&E Utilization
  The data collected from the progress reports, including the MTR report, were evaluated and used to
  inform the World Bank management, serving as a basis to provide guidance related to prioritization of
  activities and reallocation of resources. For example, restructurings and closing date extensions were
  based on inputs from the M&E and supervision mission findings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category C, as the civil works described in Component 2 included the
   establishment of a Micro Finance processing hub and an interoperable switch. These works were minor and
   localized, and the national and local laws and regulations were sufficient to manage any social and
   environmental impacts. As a consequence, no environment safeguards were triggered. Environmental and
   social safeguards compliance was assured as the project did not involve any activities that affected
   environmental or social safeguards.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)



   Financial management. The project management team within the RBM effectively complied with the
   Financing Agreement covenants. The quarterly interim financial reports (IFRs) and the annual audited
   financial statements were submitted on time for the World Bank’s consideration and were found
   acceptable. The FM arrangements facilitated smooth implementation of the project as required, including
   funds flow and reporting. The FM arrangements were rated Satisfactory throughout the implementation
   period and all audited financial statements had unqualified audit opinions. Nevertheless, there were
   disbursement delays in resolving matters related to the IFRs.

   Procurement. The project followed the procurement procedures stipulated in the Procurement Guidelines,
   the PAD, the Financing Agreement, and the Project Implementation Manual. There were no recorded
   cases of ‘mis-procurement’ or unresolved complaints from bidders. However, there was a slow start on
   implementation due to delays in procurement staffing at the beginning of the project and significant
   turnover of fiduciary staff. All these delays led to extension of the project closing date.

   Overall, fiduciary compliance was assured as internal control arrangements were in place and adequate
   FM, procurement, and disbursement systems were maintained.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Because of the increased awareness on financial literacy created by the project, many secondary schools
   have incorporated the topic of financial literacy in their curriculum and teaching materials.



d. Other
   The ICR did not raise any other issues.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               As will be mentioned in Section
                                                                               14 of this review, the ICR
                                                                               incorrectly rated the project's
                                                                               outcome Moderately
                               Moderately                                      Satisfactory. This review rates
Outcome                                              Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory                                    the project's outcome
                                                                               Satisfactory on the basis that
                                                                               relevance of objectives was
                                                                               high, and efficacy and efficiency
                                                                               were substantial.
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)



                                                                                 Although there were moderate
                                                                                 shortcomings in the design of
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Substantial                the M&E system, they were
                                                                                 corrected at both project
                                                                                 restructurings.
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons identified in the ICR are summarized and rephrased below:

(i) Realism of activities and readiness for execution are the predictors of a successful project
outcome. The high-quality technical studies that underpinned the project activities identified at
appraisal, and the advance procurement of the technical consultants were key factors that helped
expedite progress toward pursued project outcome and objective. For instance, project design drew
heavily from the conclusions of the 2008 World Bank-IMF Financial Sector Assessment Program
report.

(ii) The PIU can be used to reinforce ownership of project achievements through end-
user involvement throughout the project lifecycle. The RBM worked together with the PIU and
facilitated stakeholder consultation and engagement on all activities related to financial market
infrastructure upgrade, and ensured that stakeholder engagement was infused into the project
throughout its lifecycle as an iterative process. The goal was to gather views of key stakeholders
and arrive at common positions of the future design of the technical solutions, through a participatory
and inclusive process. In this context, a mapping and identification of stakeholders was undertaken
in the early stages of the project to obtain a complete picture of key sector players.

(iii) Proactive actions by the implementing agency and the PIU teams can help strengthen
local technical capacity. This is especially critical when defining the technical specifications of the
technological solutions to be acquired as well as the commissioning of the solutions. Special
emphasis went to ensuring continuity in participation by key stakeholders and actors throughout the
project lifecycle and at critical project implementation periods to act on trends and other signals
before they become issues. Retention of adequate skills mixes on the PIU teams and shared
platform were key to building capacity and had implications on the implementation and monitoring of
innovative activities.

(iv) Sustainability of project results can be generated from deliberately investing in ongoing
relationship building. When a project involves multiple stakeholders, it is critical that the
implementation agency and PIU teams maintain good and productive relationship with all of
them. There is a need to have upfront conversations on the nature of the technical solutions and
business model and what is required from everyone to make it work and succeed. The development
and implementation of shared infrastructures such as a national switch was a complex process
requiring the active involvement of all stakeholders and supported by technical working groups that
bring together both bank and non-bank financial sector actors to consider all project outputs and
proposals for the target architecture of the infrastructure and operating business model. The
PIU facilitated the transfer of good practices and sharing of lessons and experiences. Formal and


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MW-Financial Sector Technical Assistance (P122616)



informal pathways were established for consistent communication to continually build the
relationship among stakeholders.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a comprehensive and candid review of the project design, implementation and discussion of
the achieved results. Data and information provided in the ICR and in the annexed Borrower's contribution were
sufficient to illustrate what was achieved by the project. However, as acknowledged to IEG by the Bank task
team, the split assessment of project's outcome resulted in an incorrect final rating (Moderately Satisfactory) of
the project's overall outcome (see Annex 7 of the ICR). There were also shortcomings in Annexes 1 and
3. Annex 1 did not provide the "comments on the achievements compared to targets" for the various indicators,
and Annex 3 included incorrect data which the Bank task team corrected for IEG. On the other hand
the lessons provided in the ICR were sound, and reflected the experience of project implementation.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 18
