     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Studies for Sustainable Flood Mgmt. (P145391)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021736

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P145391                                    Studies for Sustainable Flood Mgmt.

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Philippines                                Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-17736                                   31-Dec-2015                                             3,091,046.70

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Jan-2015                                31-Dec-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                 7,000,000.00                                  7,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                  3,200,000.00                                  3,200,000.00

 Actual                                              3,091,046.70                                  3,091,046.70




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                 J. W. van Holst                Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani                 Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   The PDO as stated in the Grant Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD,
   page 6) was:




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Studies for Sustainable Flood Mgmt. (P145391)



   "To prepare priority projects that aim to improve flood management and resilience in the greater
   Metro Manila Area".

   The original PDO referred to preparing two project proposals for structural measures that are technically,
   economically, socially and environmentally sound and ready for appraisal.

   The revised PDO as stated in the restructuring paper dated February 17, 2016 (page 3) was:

   "To prepare a priority project that aims to improve flood management and resilience in the greater
   metro Manila Area".



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  18-Feb-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   There were two components (PAD, paragraphs 28 and 31).



   1. Preparation of feasibility and design studies for priority flood management infrastructure.
   Appraisal estimate US$6.80 million. Actual cost US$3.29 million. The actual cost was lower than the
   appraisal estimate due to the reduction in project scope. (discussed below). There were two sub-
   components: preparing feasibility and design studies, including preparing environmental and social
   safeguard instruments for: (i) a high dam in the upper Marikina River catchment area; and (ii) flood plain
   developments along the shore of Laguna de Bay. The scope of this component was reduced with the
   project restructuring on February 17, 2016. The activity associated with design of flood plain developments
   along the shore of Laguna de Bay was cancelled as the government decided to pursue this activity through
   Public - Private Partnership (PPP) arrangements. Grant funds for this activity were cancelled (discussed in
   section 2e of this review).



     2. Project management and administration. Appraisal estimate US$0.20 million. Actual cost US$0.00
   million. This component aimed at capacity building of the Department of Public Works and Highways
   (DPWH) for project management. The actual cost of this component was zero as the DPWH did not use

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 13
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Studies for Sustainable Flood Mgmt. (P145391)



  funds from the grant for capacity building. The costs for for project management in DPWH were absorbed
  by the regular budget of DPWH.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


  Project cost. Appraisal estimate US$7.00 million. The Bank task team clarified that the information in the
  Data Sheet in the ICR regarding a Borrower contribution of US$1.2 million was incorrect (see footnote in
  Annex 3 of the ICR). No borrower contribution was planned at appraisal. Actual project cost was US$3.20
  million.



  Project financing. The original project cost of US7.00 million was wholly financed by the Australia - World
  Bank Philippines Development Trust Fund. Following the cancellation of US$3.80 million the actual amount
  disbursed from the trust fund was US$3.20 million.



  Borrower contribution. As noted already, none was planned at appraisal. The Data Sheet in the ICR
  indicates that the government contributed US$1.20 million at appraisal. The Bank team clarified that this
  was a system error in the portal and that there was no separate borrower contribution during
  implementation.



  Dates. The project approved on January 12, 2015, became effective on February 2, 2015 and was
  scheduled to close on December 31, 2015.



  Restructuring. Amendments were made to the project through the Level 1 restructuring on February 17,
  2015 as follows; (i) US$3.80 million of the grant was cancelled for activities that had not yet started
  and were no longer aligned with the current priorities of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade: (ii) the
  project scope was reduced given the change in the PDO and target indicators were adjusted; (iii) the
  covenant on establishing resettlement activities on the flood plain along the shore of Laguna de Bay was
  removed as this activity costing US$1.8 million was to be pursued using a Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
  arrangements and the remaining activities in the PDO were not expected to entail resettlement; (iv) the
  government would finance the remaining $2 million of the cancelled amount to conduct social and
  environmental studies for both the dam and flood protection works on the Marikina River; and (v) the closing
  date was extended by two years and ten months in order to complete all the studies.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 13
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Studies for Sustainable Flood Mgmt. (P145391)



                       Split rating. As in the ICR (paragraph 29), this assessment also does not use a split rating of objectives,
                       given that there was no disbursement before restructuring. In line with the ICR, this assessment is based on
                       the revised PDO.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


Country context. Typhoons and related flooding occur regularly in Philippines, with an average of 20
typhoons affecting the country per year. Many areas in the Greater Metro Manila Area (defined as Metro
Manila and adjacent areas of Laguna de Bay), are designated as flood prone, with insufficient protection
against frequent inundation. Given that Metro Manila contributes about 35% of Gross Domestic Product of
the Philippines economy and is one of the most populated cities in the world with a population of around 15
million, improving the capacity for managing floods was important in the country context.



Government Strategy. The PDO was highly relevant to the government strategy. The updated Philippine
Development Plan for the 2011-2016 period, prioritized disaster risk reduction and climate change as
themes that underlie various sectors. The Flood Management Master Plan for the Greater Metro Manila
Area identified a set of priorities for safety control and managing flood events in the area, through structural
and non-structural measures and institutional improvements. The government also enacted legislation, the
National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act in 2010, aimed at shifting the focus from emergency
response to disaster prevention. The project was well-aligned with the Philippine Development Plan for
2017-2022. A pillar of this plan aimed at reducing inequality through reducing the vulnerability of individuals
and families due to natural hazards.



Bank strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2015-2018
(extended to 2019). The fourth engagement area of the CPS underscored the need for building resilience to
climate change, environment and disaster risk management through (i) increasing resilience to natural
disaster and climate change impacts: and (ii) improved natural resource management and sustainable
development.



Original and Revised PDO. The original PDO was rated as High. The revised PDO was a subset of the
original PDO. It reflected the activities that were supported by the project, following the cancellation of part
of the grant. Therefore, the relevance of the revised PDO to the Bank and government strategy is also rated
as High.


Rating Relevance TBL




                                                                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Studies for Sustainable Flood Mgmt. (P145391)



               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective

                To prepare a priority project that aims to improve flood management and resilience in the greater metro
                Manila Area.

                Rationale


                Theory of change: Preparing feasibility and design studies (including the environmental and social safeguard
                instruments) for the dam in the upper Marikina River were intended for preparing priority projects that are
                technically, economically, socially and environmentally sound and ready for appraisal by the government and
                international development partners. Implementing these priority projects was expected to contribute to
                the development objective of improving flood management and resilience in the Greater Metro Manila Area.



                Outputs.

                        According to the ICR (paragraph 30), a feasibility study for interventions for the dam in the upper
                         Marikina River was completed as targeted with seven main sections: (i) description of possible
                         options and reasons for selecting the preferred option (large dam); (ii) preliminary design of the
                         selected option; (iii) study on possible use of reservoir water for secondary purposes; (iv) description
                         of safeguard issues; (v) economic and financial analysis; (vi) implementation plan for construction of
                         the structure; and (vii) possible impact of climate change. The study was reviewed by the Bank task
                         team, Project Steering Committee members, specialists from the Japan International Cooperation
                         Agency and the Bank Panel of Experts on dams, and eventually approved by the Project Steering
                         Committee. Following the completion of the study, the design study of the dam was completed
                         with aspects such as, project cost estimates, construction schedule and operation and maintenance
                         requirements. The tender documents and tender drawings were also prepared. Relevant documents
                         for appraisal were submitted to the National Economic and Development Authority's Investment
                         Coordination Committee (NEDA-ICC). The ICR also notes that ICC appraisal and clearance is a pre-
                         condition for securing loans by national government agencies. The ICR expected that the clearance
                         process would be completed by the third quarter of 2019 (paras 30 and 31). The Bank team clarified
                         that there has been good progress and that formal project preparation is expected to start soon.
                        A draft Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the dam was completed as targeted
                         by the Department of Public Works and Highways. The ESIA was submitted to the Department



                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 13
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Studies for Sustainable Flood Mgmt. (P145391)



                                   of Environment and Natural Resources as required in Philippines for obtaining an Environmental
                                   Compliance Certificate (ICR, para 32)
                                  An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) was envisioned when the dam was designed since the dam was to
                                   be located on ancestral land. The ICR notes that the IPP was being prepared when the project closed
                                   and is expected to be completed by the end of 2019 (ICR, para 33).
                                  An evaluation of the Australia-World Bank Strategic Partnership acknowledged that the grant made an
                                   important contribution to capacity building within the Department of Public Works and Highways (ICR,
                                   paragraph 39).

                            Outcomes (paragraph 34).

                                  A priority project plan was prepared as targeted to mitigate the flooding risks in the Pasig-Marikina
                                   River Basin as planned. The dam design prepared was technically, socially and environmentally
                                   sound with an estimated economic internal rate of return of 20%. The dam when constructed was
                                   expected to benefit at least three million people living downstream in Metro Manila (ICR, para 34).



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                            The studies produced from this project were endorsed by a range of expert reviews and are expected to
                            assist the government in general and the Department of Public Works and Highways and the Metro Manila
                            Development Authority in particular, in addressing flood management and resilience in Metro Manila.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency


   Economic analysis. The PAD (paragraph 47) notes that an economic and financial analysis was not
   undertaken for the studies financed under the project. There was also no economic and financial analysis of the
   project in the ICR.



                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Studies for Sustainable Flood Mgmt. (P145391)




Administrative and Operational Issues. There were considerable implementation delays because the
procurement of consultants took much longer than expected. The scope of the project was reduced by half and
yet the project closing date had to be extended by almost three years. While there were also delays in payments
to consultants, payments were made after project closure (but during the grace period permissible under Bank
procedures). This review agrees with the ICR that the efficiency with which this project was implemented is
modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
 ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



The relevance of the revised PDO to the government and Bank strategy is rated as High. Efficacy of the
single PDO - to prepare a priority project for improving flood management and resilience in the greater metro
Manila Area - is rated as Substantial, as the expected outcome was realized. Efficiency is Modest, given that
there were obvious inefficiencies in the project’s administration during implementation.



In summary there were moderate shortcomings in the project’s achievements and its overall outcome is
therefore rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Studies for Sustainable Flood Mgmt. (P145391)




Social risks. There are social risks associated with complaints by population and non-governmental
organizations about dam development, especially upstream of a city with 15 million people and near an
earthquake fault. A good communication strategy and plan and comprehensive stakeholder engagement with
downstream population, indigenous people and Non-Governmental Organizations, is hence
necessary before the construction of the dam.



Institutional risk. There are risks associated with the limited capacity of both the Department of Public
Works and Highways and the contractor to execute dam construction works. As the ICR (paragraph 66)
notes, it will be necessary to carry out pre-qualification of contractors, using stringent technical and
financial qualification criteria (ICR, paragraph 66).



Technical risk. As the ICR notes, the proposed large dam is among the most critical infrastructure
investments to achieve sustainable flood management in Greater Manila. There is, however, a risk that dam
construction will not be in line with the designs and recommendations from this project. Metro Manila will
require additional water sources for domestic consumption. As the Marikina River is close to the city and is
a possible source for domestic water supplies, there is the risk that government allows the private sector to
build and manage the dam in that basin and use it for domestic water supply, rather than use it for managing
floods (paragraph 67).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  The design of technical assistance activities, which focused only on studies, was simple and
  straightforward (ICR, paragraph 44). The project design built on the recommendations of the Master
  Plan prepared by the government, with support from the Bank. The ICR (paragraph 60) notes that
  the task team that supervised the preparation of the Master Plan also prepared this project. The
  preparation team included members with expertise in fiduciary and safeguards aspects. The
  implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the Project Management Office - the Flood Control
  Unit of the Department of Public Works and Housing, in charge of day-to-day project
  management. Several risks were identified at appraisal, including substantial risk associated with social
  and environmental issues, given that 50 - 60,000 households living in the flood plain of Laguna de Bay
  were likely to be affected by project interventions (discussed in section 10a of this review). Mitigation
  measures included engaging key civil society leaders and an information campaign for stakeholders. The
  arrangements made at appraisal for Monitoring and Evaluation (discussed in section 9) and safeguards
  and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10a and b).


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Studies for Sustainable Flood Mgmt. (P145391)



  The Bank preparation team underestimated the risks associated with the implementation capacity of the
  Department of Public Works and Highways, that contributed to delays during implementation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


 Seven Implementation Status Results Reports were filed over a four-year implementation period (implying
 twice a year supervision missions). These missions were supplemented by short term review and support
 missions. The continuity of leadership was maintained, with the same Task Team Leader (TTL) through
 the implementation period (ICR, paragraph 48). Support was provided by the team, both through training
 sessions and regular interaction with the counterpart agencies, for strengthening the capacity of
 the Department of Public Works and Highways (ICR, paragraph 39). The supervision team provided
 technical guidance on matters such as ensuring that enough attention was paid to issues such as,
 the impact of the probable maximum flood on dam stability, that inundation mapping of downstream areas
 was carried out properly and that there were sufficient criteria to select the option that would have the least
 social and environmental impacts. The task team organized workshops and training sessions and provided
 on-the-job in financial and procurement management and this aided in fiduciary compliance (discussed in
 section 10b). The timing of the restructuring of the project was appropriate, with the project
 restructured immediately after the confirmation of the extended completion date of the parent Trust Fund.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 The key outcomes of the project - proposals and detailed designs for structural measures that technically,
 economically, socially and environmentally sound and that are ready for appraisal - were appropriate. The
 indicator could easily be measured without an elaborate M&E system in place. There were no indicators for
 monitoring activities associated with "strengthening capacity of Department of Public Works and
 Highways".



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Studies for Sustainable Flood Mgmt. (P145391)




b. M&E Implementation


  Following project restructuring, the indicators were revised to reflect the reduction in project scope and
  an intermediate indicator was added for monitoring the capacity building activities of the project. The ICR
  (paragraph 50) notes that there was no need for continuous monitoring, as the PDO outcome indicator
  could only be achieved at project closure.



c. M&E Utilization


  The M&E was used to monitor the performance of consultants and assess the achievement of the
  objective.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


   The project was classified as a Category A project. Seven safeguard policies were triggered at
   appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP 4.04): Safety of Dams (OP
   4.37); Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11); Forests (OP 4.36): Indigenous People (OP 4.12); and
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12)) (PAD, paragraphs 52 and 58).



   Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats, Safety of Dams, Physical Cultural Resources and
   Forests. Although the project only financed studies, these safeguards were triggered, as the studies were
   expected to lead to investments, that could have adverse environmental impacts (PAD, paragraph 59). The
   PAD (paragraph 60) notes than an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was to be
   conducted and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) prepared during implementation.
   The ICR (paragraph 53) notes that an ESIA was conducted and ESMP prepared during implementation.
   The ICR does not report of any non-compliance with respect to environmental issues during
   implementation.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Studies for Sustainable Flood Mgmt. (P145391)



   Indigenous People and Involuntary Resettlement. These social safeguards were triggered, under the
   assumption that investments when implemented, could cause temporary and permanent physical and
   economic displacement of people occupying the plans (PAD, paragraph 53 and 54). The PAD (paragraph
   5) notes that a Resettlement Policy Framework and a Resettlement Action Plan was to be prepared during
   implementation. The main social risk related to the resettlement of people from the flood plain of Laguna de
   Bay during implementation. With the removal of this activity, the social risks were minimized. The ICR does
   not report on any unexpected potential impacts during the design of the dam.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


   Financial management. An assessment of the financial management capacity of the Department of
   Public Works and Highways (DPWH) was conducted at appraisal. DPWH had been implementing both
   Technical Assistance and lending operations of the Bank and was familiar with Bank procedures. The
   assessment concluded that the financial management arrangements were satisfactory. The ICR
   (paragraph 59) notes that there were delays in processing of payments by the Department of Public Works
   and Highways, with many payments done after project closure (but within the four month-grace period).
   The ICR does not indicate whether the audits were qualified or not.



   Procurement. An assessment of the procurement capacity of DPWH, concluded that the procurement risk
   was moderate (PAD, paragraph 51). The ICR (paragraph 58) notes that there were no procurement issues
   during implementation and that procurement issues were addressed as per Bank procedures and
   guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Studies for Sustainable Flood Mgmt. (P145391)



Quality of ICR                    ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons



The ICR (pages 19-20) draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this
project, with some adaptation of language.



(1) Capacity building activities should start as early as possible during implementation for
the Bank team to play a significant role in assisting the implementing agency. This is
particularly so when a government agency starts to implement a Bank-financed grant for the first
time. Although the Department of Public Works and Highways had implemented Bank-financed
projects, the managing unit for this study had no experience with Bank-funded projects and grants
and it took time for the managing agency to become familiar with the financial, procurement and
disbursement arrangements of the Bank.



(2) Continuity in Bank leadership can aid in long-term engagement with the clients. This
project was prepared by the same Bank team that assisted in the preparation of the government's
Master plan. This continuity allowed the team to have a precise understanding of the country and the
sector context for this project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



The ICR is well-written and relatively concise at 20 pages. It provides a candid description of the issues
encountered during implementation (such as those pertaining to the administrative details of the Trust Fund
which eventually led to the reduction in project scope). The ICR draws reasonably good lessons from the
experience of implementing this project. It also appropriately chooses not to do a split rating of PDOs, given
that there was no disbursement when the project was restructured. There was a lack of clarity regarding the
borrower contribution. This issue was, however, clarified by an explanation from the Bank team.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 13
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Studies for Sustainable Flood Mgmt. (P145391)



Substantial




                                                                             Page 13 of 13
