     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SB - Rapid Employment Project (P114987)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021772

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P114987                                    SB - Rapid Employment Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Solomon Islands                            Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D0860,IDA-D1460,IDA-H5750,TF-          30-Jun-2015                                         13,359,981.46
 95966,TF-96620

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 18-May-2010                                31-Dec-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            3,200,000.00                                     6,511,250.00

 Revised Commitment                            13,102,987.85                                     6,503,375.52

 Actual                                        13,359,981.46                                     6,503,375.52




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




 P149652_TBL
 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P149652                                    Additional Financing for SPF TF 095966 ( P149652 )

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Solomon Islands                            Social


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SB - Rapid Employment Project (P114987)



                                                                                                              0

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 28-May-2014

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                   0.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                                    0.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                                0.00                                             0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   The Project Development objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4) and
   the Emergency Project Paper (page 3) were;

   "To assist targeted vulnerable populations in the Recipient's territory to: (i) increase their incomes
   through the provision of short-term employment; and (ii) improve their knowledge, experience and
   basic employment skills that are valued in the workplace and society".



   The revised PDOs as stated in the Additional Financing (AF) Agreement of July 31, 2015 (Schedule 1, page
   5) were;

   "To assist targeted vulnerable urban populations in the Recipient's territory to: (i) increase their
   incomes through the provision of short term employment; (ii) improve their knowledge, experience
   and basic skills that are valued in the workplace and society that are valued in the workplace and
   society; and (iii) improve their access to services and markets through repaired, more climate resilient
   roads and access infrastructure".




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?

                                                                                               Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SB - Rapid Employment Project (P114987)



  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  31-Jul-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   There were three components (Emergency Project Paper pages 3-4).

   1. Rapid Employment Scheme. Appraisal estimate US$5.40 million. Actual cost US$9.76 million. This
   component aimed at providing short-term temporary employment for the vulnerable urban poor through
   labor-intensive public works. There were two sub-components.

   (i) Road rehabilitation and maintenance of tertiary (unpaved) urban and peri-urban roads in and around
   Honiara (the capital) and technical assistance and training local works contractors and the Ministry of
   Infrastructure Development staff: and.

   (ii) Urban works and services. This sub-component financed minor city works (such as street cleaning,
   brushing and clearing, developing community access infrastructure) of the Honiara City Council.

   The scope of this activity was expanded with the AF on July 31, 2015, to include additional urban
   regeneration activities (such as, landscaping and greening of public spaces or school playgrounds) and
   environmental protection for the community access infrastructure build through slope protection and tree
   planting (Project restructuring paper, April 23,2014, page 5).

   2. Pre-Employment Training (PET). Appraisal estimate US$0.80 million. Actual cost US$1.29 million. This
   component aimed at providing training in basic skills to individuals in the target group through the PET
   program. The scope of this activity was expanded following the AF, to include program extension by a year
   and piloting a referral service to complement the training of graduates with awareness of other
   opportunities in Honiara (Project restructuring paper, April 23,2014, page 5).

   3. Project Implementation Support. Appraisal estimate US$1.00 million. Actual cost US$2.06 million. This
   component aimed at providing technical support to the implementing agencies - the Ministry of
   Infrastructure Development and the Honiara City Council.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


   Project cost. Cost at appraisal US$7.20 million. The scope of the project was expanded with the
   AFs (discussed below). Actual cost US$13.01 million.

   Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA Grant equivalent of US$3.20 million. US$2.00
   million was provided from the Bank administered State and Peace Building Fund (SPF) and the US$2.00
   million Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility (PRIF). With this the total financing for the project was

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SB - Rapid Employment Project (P114987)



   US$7.20 million. Four AFs were approved for the project. (1) AF of US$1.29 million on September 11, 2013.
   (2) US$1.55 million on May 29, 2014. (3) US$2.60 million on July 31,2015. and (4) US$2.00 million on
   November 18, 2016. With these AFs, the total financing for the project was equivalent of US$13.11. The
   total amount disbursed was equivalent otoUS$13.35 million. The reason for the increase in disbursement
   figures was due to exchange rate changes during implementation.

   Borrower contribution. None was planned at appraisal. There was no contribution during implementation.

   Dates. The original project was approved on May 18, 2010 and scheduled to close on June 30, 2015. The
   original project closed 18 months behind schedule on December 31, 2016. With the third AF, the project
   closing date was extended to December 31, 2018. The AF project closed as scheduled on December
   31,2018.

   Other changes. There were five project restructurings. This included four Level 2 restructurings and one
   Level 1 restructuring following the approval of AF. The changes made to the project through the respective
   restructurings in chronological order are;

   The first, Level 2 restructuring on September 11 ,2013, following the first AF for the project, reallocated
   funding between components. Financing for urban works activities was scaled up and additional funding
   was allocated for component three activities.

   The second Level 2 restructuring, following the second AF for the project on May 29, 2014, expanded the
   scope of urban activities. Changes were made to the results framework to reflect the increase in scope of
   urban activities. The project closing date for the SPG grant was extended from May 31,2014 to June 30,
   2015.

   The third Level 2 restructuring on April 27, 2015, extended the closing date for IDA grant from June 30,
   2015 to December 31,2016, to complement the closing date for the IDA grant with the PRIF and SPF
   grants.

   These changes were made with the fourth restructuring (Level 1 restructuring), following the third AF for the
   project on July 31,2015: The PDO was revised. There was an increase in project scope and the results
   framework was amended to reflect the changes in project scope. The closing date was extended to
   December 31. 2018.

   The fifth Level 2 restructuring following the fourth AF on November 18, 2016, increased the scope
   of activities to include climate resilience in component one activities. The results framework was changed to
   reflect the increase in scope of project activities.



   Split rating. Since the PDOs were revised with the on 2015, this review is based on a split rating of
   objectives, when 69% (US$3.45 million) was disbursed and after AF, when the balance 31% (US$4.26
   million) was disbursed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SB - Rapid Employment Project (P114987)




               Rationale


               Country context and government strategy. Solomon Islands, a fragile, post-conflict country, is one of the
               least developed countries in the world and vulnerable to natural disasters. Before appraisal, Solomon
               Islands was affected by economic decline in the wake of the global economic crisis due to a combination of
               factors, including civil tension, high population growth in Honiara (the capital) exacerbated by inter-island
               migration to urban centers and the after effects of austerity measures that raised government concerns
               about the potential for renewed conflict in urban areas. The PDOs, which aimed at financing a workfare
               type program for supporting the more vulnerable urban unemployed, were relevant in the country
               context. The Government strategy articulated in the National Development Strategy 2011-
               2020, emphasized the need for equity and disaster response and resilience.



               Bank strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with the Interim Strategy Note (ISN) for 2010-2011 (There was
               no Country Assistance Strategy at that time (ICR, page 7)). The ISN recognized that as a fragile, post-
               conflict state, Solomon Islands would require medium to long-term commitment to reduce vulnerability to
               conflict and to create a more effective administration. The first pillar of the ISR highlighted the need for
               addressing surmountable barriers to growth. Although the project did not specifically refer to any of the
               pillars in the ISN, the project was developed to directly respond to a request by the government for
               assistance with post-conflict support. The Country Partnership Strategy for 2013-2017 identified sustainable
               and inclusive growth, increasing social and economic opportunities and maintaining peace and stability as
               priorities. The third focus area of the Current Country Partnership Framework for 2017-2023 highlighted the
               need for managing uneven development through improving access to service delivery in underserved
               communities.

               The PDO, besides being well aligned with both the national and Bank priorities, was pitched at a realistic
               level as it adequately provided a potential solution to an identified development problem. The Relevance
               of Objectives is therefore rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To assist targeted vulnerable populations increase their income through the provision of short-term
                             employment

                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SB - Rapid Employment Project (P114987)




Rationale


Theory of Change. Training in basic skills through the pre-employment training program together
with providing rapid employment in labor-intensive public works activities (such as road rehabilitation and
maintenance and urban works), aimed at responding to the immediate needs of providing short-term
temporary employment to the vulnerable urban poor. Expanding the scope of the program through a referral
service program aimed at complementing the training program. Activities added through the project
restructuring aimed at improving access to infrastructure. The combination of these activities was expected to
provide jobs to the vulnerable population in the short run and contribute to the long-term development
objective of contributing to more stable society.



Outputs (ICR, pages 35-36).

      13,180 people benefitted from the safety nets programs at project closure (target 12,900, target
       exceeded). 50% of the beneficiaries were from 26 of Honiara's most vulnerable communities, selected
       through a vulnerability assessment process. 7,005 of the beneficiaries were women (target 6,450,
       target exceeded).
      The average number of labor days worked per person at project closure was 60. This exceeded the
       target of 50.
      Of the total labor days generated through the Rapid Employment Scheme, 425,023 went to women
       (target 405,000, target exceeded) and 465,120 went to youth (target 405,000, target exceeded).
      801,931 of labor days in total was generated by the rapid employment scheme. This was slightly short
       of the revised target of 810,000.

Outcomes (ICR, pages 13 - pages 31-32)

      On average, 2,102 Solomon Island Dollars (SBD) was transferred to each beneficiary per year,
       exceeding the target of 1,600 SBD. The ICR (page 13) notes that payment made to beneficiaries was
       at the legal minimum wage for Solomon Islands (SBD4 per hour per day).
      58% of the participants from communities were ranked as the highest priority on the vulnerability index
       (at or below the poverty line) at closure, exceeding the target of 50%.
      58% of participants in the project were youth (defined as ages 16 to 29 years), exceeding the target of
       50%.
      53% of the project participants were women, exceeding the target of 50%.

Evidence presented in the ICR show that the project succeeded in increasing the income of the targeted
vulnerable populations (poor/youth/women) through the provision of short-term employment.



Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SB - Rapid Employment Project (P114987)




OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective

This objective was not revised.

Revised Rationale
---

Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To assist targeted vulnerable populations to improve their knowledge, experience and basic employment
skills that are valued in the workplace and society.

Rationale
Outputs (pages 39).

        11,629 pre-employment trainees were certified (target 11,000, target exceeded). Of this, 58% (6,757)
         were women. (There were no targets for this indicator)
        1,879 one-on-one coaching sessions were conducted (target 1,800, target exceeded).
        Curriculum vitae were developed by 1,137 participants (target 1,140, target exceeded).
        A community-based training pilot was conducted in two communities in Guadalcanal as targeted.

Outcomes.

        29% of the participants (3372 graduates) of the Rapid Employment Schemes (RESs)
         obtained employment after the project closed. This exceeded the target of 15%. This included 17%
         women as compared to the target of 40% (target not achieved) and 40% of youth as targeted.
        76% of REP participants reported that the scheme was useful in finding subsequent employment as
         compared to the target of 60%. This included 78% women participants (target 40%) and 76% youth
         participants (target 40%).
        16% of REP graduates reported that they invested the income earned by them in the REP scheme in
         business activities (target 11%). The percentage of women who invested the income was none as
         compared to the target of 40% (target not achieved) and 75% of the youth invested the income
         (target 40%).

While it is difficult to ascertain the extent to which the project activities contributed to this outcome, it is
reasonable to conclude that activities which included training of women and youth and other complementary
activities such as assisting in preparing curriculum vitae, significantly contributed to realizing the PDO.



Rating
                                                                                                    Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SB - Rapid Employment Project (P114987)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
This PDO was not revised.

Revised Rationale
---

Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To assist targeted vulnerable urban populations to improve their access to services and markets through
repaired, more climate resilient roads and access infrastructure.

Rationale
Outputs (ICR, paragraphs 27-28 and pages 37-38).

The outputs of the following activities exceeded the targets at project closure.

        118.72 Kilometers (Km) of non-rural roads (Given Honiara's is a hilly city with a maze of ridges and
         valley, this included a system of footsteps that linked communities of thousands of people below to the
         main roads) were rehabilitated (target 110 km).
        49 community access infrastructure sub-projects were completed (target 46).
        32 community access infrastructure units were landscaped (target 30).
        92% of the community leaders in project areas reported better access to services and markets
         because of the infrastructure (target 75%).

The outputs of the following activities were below the target at project closure.

        2.20 Km of roads were improved to all-weather, climate resilient standards (target 3.20 km).
        490 contractor representatives were trained on labor-based work methods (target 500).

Outcomes.

        61,857 people benefitted from activities associated with road works and other community access
         infrastructure, slightly short of the target 62,000. This represented 74% of the population of Honiara
         (84,000).



Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               SB - Rapid Employment Project (P114987)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                            The outcomes were realized for the most part.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency


   Economic analysis. Economic benefits from the pre-employment training were assumed to come from
   improved labor-market prospects for participants. The PAD (paragraph 27) notes that a full economic analysis
   was not prepared at appraisal due to limited availability of data and inadequate in-house capacity for data
   collection. However, a rough estimate of the benefits was made based on a survey of informal wages collected
   in two targeted project areas. Based on the assumption that at least 40% participants were likely to be from poor
   households, the project was estimated to have a Benefit-Cost ratio of between 1.2:1 and 2.2:1. A calculation of
   direct benefits conducted at closure estimated a Benefit-Cost ratio of 1.39:1.



   Cost effectiveness considerations. According to the ICR (paragraph 31), the cost of the public
   works components was comparable to an ongoing Bank-financed Solomon Islands national road improvement
   project. According to the ICR (page 49), out of the 14 cost parameters compared between this project and the
   ongoing project, eight parameters of this project were lower, two were comparable and four were higher (due to
   the difficulty associated with moving materials to inaccessible communities and increasing focus on climate
   resilience works in this project) (ICR, page 49). During implementation, the Project Management Unit took over
   the PET training in-house, rather than relying on external contractors. This change in delivery method entailed
   cost savings of US$80,000 (or 10% of the contract value), which allowed training of an additional 750
   participants.



   Administrative and operational issues. There were no major administrative issues during implementation.


   Efficiency Rating
          Substantial

                                                                                                          Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SB - Rapid Employment Project (P114987)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



Relevance of the PDOs for the government and Bank strategy is High. Efficacy of the two original and revised
PDOs - to increase the income of the targeted vulnerable population through short-term employment and
to improve their knowledge, experience and basic employment skills - is rated as Substantial, given that
outcomes were substantially realized. Efficacy of the additional revised PDO- to improve access to services and
markets through repaired, more climate resilient roads and access to infrastructure is rated as Substantial, as
the outcomes were substantially realized. Efficiency is Substantial given cost-effectiveness considerations and
few administrative or operational inefficiencies during implementation. Taking these ratings into account,
outcome is rated Substantial both before and after restructuring. Therefore, the overall rating is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



Economic risk. There is risk to benefits given the limited fiscal space in the Ministry of Infrastructure
Development and the Honiara City Council. It is still not clear if there would be adequate financial resources
for maintenance of the roads that were rehabilitated under this project.



Political risk. There is ongoing risk, given that wider causes of tensions in Solomon still Islands remain,
particularly with respect to land rights, migration and social inequity.




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SB - Rapid Employment Project (P114987)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  The ICR (paragraph 57) notes that given the emergency nature of the project, the project was prepared in
  less than four months. This project was prepared based on lessons from similar operations in post-
  conflict and fragile settings (Liberia, Afghanistan, Nepal), where "workfare" programs were prepared
  under emergency procedures and from prior Bank-financed projects in Solomon Islands. Lessons from
  fragile settings that were incorporated at design, included a simple design given the institutional
  constraints and bundling a package of services that included skills development and on-the-job learning.
  Lessons incorporated from prior Bank-financed operations, included capacity building on labor-based
  methods for road works and community infrastructure and external technical assistance (PAD,
  paragraphs 34 and 35). Several risks were identified at appraisal, including substantial risks associated
  with the possibility of conflict, elite capture of benefits and the weak institutional capacity for addressing
  fiduciary issues. Mitigation measures adopted at design included continuous monitoring of socio-political
  context to prepare for changing conditions and additional support for addressing fiduciary issues. With
  mitigation measures, overall risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD, page 17). Appropriate
  arrangements were made at appraisal for implementation, with an independent project implementation
  unit (separate from the Ministry of Infrastructure Development and the Honiara City Council) to address
  the risks of low implementation capacity. The arrangements made at appraisal for environmental and
  fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in Section 10).

  There were some shortcomings in the M&E design, such as no appropriate indicator for monitoring
  household income (discussed in section 9a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


 14 Implementation Status Results Reports were filed over an implementation period of seven years,
 implying two supervision missions per year. The ICR (paragraph 58) notes that regular supervision
 missions were supplemented with additional technical missions and the missions included people with
 relevant technical expertise. The supervision missions aided in designing annual surveys and training the
 survey firm, given the limited in-house capacity of the implementing agencies. The bank staff proactively
 worked with the government to secure the AF for the project through the State and Peace Building Fund
 (SPF) and the Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility (PRIF).There were three Task Team Leaders over the
 lifetime of the project. The team aided in adapting to the changing context over time and
 added investments in new areas, such as the community access infrastructure. The support provided by
 the team aided in fiduciary compliance (discussed in more detail in Section 10).


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SB - Rapid Employment Project (P114987)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 Of the four original PDO indicators at design, three indicators, (i.e. “the percent of participants at or below
 the poverty line when the project closed”, the “the percent of youth participating in the project” and the
 “percentage of women participating in the project”) were appropriate for monitoring project performance.
 The fourth indicator "increase in household income due to the project activities”, was not adequate as there
 were: (i) no baseline figures and, (ii) means for measuring household income could not be isolated from
 other sources.

 The management information systems of the Ministry of Infrastructure Development and the Honiara City
 Council were to be used for monitoring key indicators (such as wages paid, kilometers of roads that were
 improved, number of trainees successfully completing the Pre-Employment Training Course) (PAD,
 paragraph 55). The project also envisioned semi-annual surveys to monitor project performance (PAD,
 paragraph 56).



b. M&E Implementation


  The indicator "to increase household income" was replaced with a more appropriate indictor - "average
  wage transfer per person". The new indicator added with the AF for the project – “percentage of
  participants reporting that the project was useful in obtaining subsequent employment” - was appropriate.

  The ICR (paragraph 50) notes that as part of the overall monitoring process, a local firm completed five
  surveys in 2015, with data collected directly from participants. An additional sixth survey was completed
  in 2017, with modifications in the survey instruments to aid in the preparation of an ongoing project
  (Community Access and Urban Services Enhancement Project).



c. M&E Utilization




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SB - Rapid Employment Project (P114987)



  The reports generated by the project were used for monitoring project progress and for highlighting
  areas where management decisions were required for effective implementation. The M&E data provided
  assisted in securing the Additional Financing and the information provided by the M&E system on
  participants and feedback was used for preparing a follow-on ongoing project aimed at replicating the
  activities of this project into other provinces (ICR, paragraph 51).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


   The project was classified as a Category B project. Two safeguard policies were triggered; (i) Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); and (ii) Involuntary Resettlement (Op/BP 4.12). The negative environmental
   impacts of the project were expected to be temporary and minor. Environmental and Social Management
   Guidelines (which included a Resettlement Policy framework) was prepared and publicly-disclosed at
   appraisal (PAD, paragraph 32). The ICR (paragraph 53) notes that there was compliance with
   environmental and social safeguards. There was no resettlement during implementation and minor issues
   such as requests for "dirty allowances" for workers cleaning drains were resolved by the Grievance Redress
   System that had been set up when the project started.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


   Financial management. An assessment of the financial management capacity of the implementing
   agencies was conducted at appraisal. Financial risk was rated as substantial in view of the limited capacity
   of the implementing agencies and their lack of experience with Bank procedures. Mitigation measures
   included recruiting dedicated officers and contracting short-term financial advisory
   services (PAD, paragraph 29). A financial management action plan was prepared at appraisal (PAD, page
   43). The ICR (paragraph 55) notes that difficulties due to frequent staff changes and delays in recruiting
   new staff during implementation were eventually resolved. Audited financial statements were submitted in
   a timely fashion and all annual audits were unqualified.



   Procurement management. An assessment of the procurement management capacity of the
   implementing agencies conducted at appraisal concluded that procurement risk was high, in view of the
   general weaknesses in the overall procurement environment in the country and lack of institutional
   experience with Bank procedures. Mitigation measures incorporated at design included recruitment of
   dedicated procurement officers, initial training agencies in Bank procures and contracting short-term

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SB - Rapid Employment Project (P114987)



   procurement advisory services for works contracts (PAD, paragraph 30 and 31). A procurement plan was
   prepared at appraisal (PAD, page 47). The ICR (paragraph 56) notes that there was compliance with
   procurement management and there was no reported case of mis procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


   The ICR reports that none of the participating women invested their income in further income generating
   activities (the target was thus not achieved) - as opposed to men and male youth, and very few women
   (fewer than the target) obtained subsequent employment (7% as compared to the target of 40%). The ICR
   offers some reflections, but no real analysis of this - and thus offers no thoughts on potential interventions
   to help close these gender gaps.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons



The ICR (pages 28-30) draws the following main lessons from implementing this project, with some
adaptation of language.



(1) A workfare approach can be an effective rapid response mechanism to emergency
situations. This project demonstrated the ability to generate quick and visible results that benefitted
the most vulnerable in the short run but eventually the whole community, by shifting from an
emergency response mechanism to a more development-oriented approach aimed at improving
service delivery in urban areas.


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SB - Rapid Employment Project (P114987)




(2) Combining pre-employment training and real work experience can provide tangible
benefits in terms of income and higher propensity to enter the labor market. The feedback on
this project from annual surveys indicated that the project aided in developing beneficiaries’ skills for
entering the labor market.



(3) Although the strategies for encouraging participation of women and youth was
successful, disaggregation of data could have helped in exploring the remaining socio-
cultural barriers to gender differences. Although the project achieved its targets for participation
of women and youth, socio-cultural factors precluded equal access to benefits for women following
the project. For instance, the surveys indicated that more male participants believed that the rapid
employment scheme was useful for accessing further employment as compared to females.
Disaggregation of data could have helped to explore whether capacity building activities would by
themselves be enough for addressing severe structural obstacles for greater participation by
women in the labor market.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



The ICR is well-written and provides a candid narrative of what started as an emergency operation and evolved
into a more development-oriented approach with the AFs. The ICR is consistent with the ICR guidelines and
appropriately does a split-rating of the objectives. It also candidly acknowledges that while the project did
benefit women and youth, there were differences in the way project activities were perceived by women vis-à-
vis women and that more disaggregation of data could have helped in better understanding the gender
differences.



The description of the AFs for the project provided in the Data Sheet and ICR (paragraph 9) are unclear and
would have benefited from a more structured presentation, including a description of what the changes to the
results framework were at the different restructurings. The ICR is quite long at 30 pages (about twice the
recommended length of 15 pages) and could have been shorter.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
SB - Rapid Employment Project (P114987)



Substantial




                                                                       Page 16 of 16
