     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021743

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P150113                                      Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Tonga                                        Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54770,IDA-H9620,TF-17580             30-Jun-2018                                           12,740,914.88

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 28-May-2014                              30-Nov-2018

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             13,800,000.00                                   1,800,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              13,759,590.39                                   1,762,032.72

 Actual                                          12,743,134.13                                   1,762,032.72




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Stephen Hutton                Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 4) were;




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113)



   (i) Restore housing, community facilities and basic services to the affected population of Ha'apai: (ii)
   Strengthen the country's resilience to natural disasters.

   The revised PDOs as stated in the restructuring paper of June 28, 2017 were:

   (i) Strengthen the climate resilience of housing and selected community facilities for the affected
   population of Ha'apai; (ii) Strengthen the government's preparedness to recover from natural
   disasters.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  28-Jun-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components


   There were three components (PAD, pages 6-9).

   1. Housing and Key Community Facilities Repair, Reconstruction and Climate Resilience. Appraisal
   estimate US$11.20 million. Actual cost US$9.29 million. This component aimed at reconstructing
   the damaged houses and community facilities. There were four sub-components.

          providing contractor-built two-room climate-resistant dwelling for 200 vulnerable households
           (vulnerable households defined as households who were unlikely to recover from the effects of the
           disaster event on their housing without special assistance),
          providing subsidies for activities using the Self-Supported Recovery (SSR) approach (Under
           this approach, eligible households were responsible for reconstructing the damaged
           houses). Activities in this component: (i) rehabilitating damaged houses of 350 households; (ii)
           repairs and retrofitting houses with reparable damages for 400 households; (iii) small retrofitting for
           150 houses with undamaged buildings. The SSR approach was substantially scaled back during
           implementation, and instead the design supported contractor-build housing.
          providing logistical support through purchase of a barge for the Ministry of Infrastructure for
           transporting reconstruction materials to project areas.

   2. Technical Assistance and Training for Enhanced Disaster and Climate Resilience. Appraisal
   estimate US$1.50 million. Actual cost US$1.74 million (including a contingency subcomponent of US$0.30
   million). This component provided technical assistance for implementing component one activities and for


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113)



  improving the government's long-term recovery program for disaster management. There were five sub-
  components.

        Technical assistance for: (i) establishing an on-site one-stop recovery center; (ii) preparing pre-
           approved building plans; (iii) implementing a communications strategy: and, (iv) installing mobile
           advisory units.
          Training tradespeople, building inspectors and other stakeholders on climate-resilient building
           techniques.
          Updating the National Building Code of Tonga and implementing a public awareness campaign.
          Mapping of coastal hazards for reconstruction planning and resilience building within the Ian-
           affected areas. This activity was dropped as there were no alternate sites on the island for moving
           houses, that conformed to the existing zonal rule (building within 20 meters of the coastline).
          Technical assistance for establishing the disaster recovery framework through: (i)
           documenting lessons from past reconstruction projects: (ii) updating legislation and institutional
           arrangements: (iii) developing an operational manual for recovery implementation arrangements; (iv)
           consultation with stakeholders on the draft Housing Recovery and Reconstruction Policy prior to
           Cabinet adoption: and (v) capacity building for improving post-disasters and damage assessments.

  3. Project Support. Appraisal estimate US$1.10 million. Actual cost US$1.74 million. This component
  provided technical support for construction and support for fiduciary management, social and environmental
  oversight and monitoring and evaluation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


  Project cost. Appraisal estimate US$13.80 million. Actual cost US$12.76 million. The actual expenditure on
  component one activities was 17% lower than estimated at appraisal due to a combination of factors,
  including scaling back of activities associated with rehabilitation/reconstruction of houses (due to the shift
  from self-construction to owner-construction) and exchange rate changes during implementation. The costs
  of component two and three activities were 16% and 58% higher than appraisal estimates, respectively. The
  increase in cost of component two and three activities was met through reallocation of spending
  between components.

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA credit of US$6.00 million and IDA Grant of US$6.00
  million. There was co-financing of US$1.80 million from the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
  Recovery (GFDRR) Trust Fund. With this, the total financing for the project was US$13.80 million. Amount
  disbursed US$12.74 million. The amount disbursed in US$ terms was lower than at appraisal, due to the
  exchange rate changes between the US$ and SDR during implementation.

  Borrower contribution. Appraisal estimate US$2.09 million. Actual contribution US$0.78 million.

  Dates. The project approved on May 28,2014, became effective on July 1, 2014 and was scheduled to
  close on June 30, 2018.

  Other changes. There were three project restructurings (one Level 1 and two Level 2).


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113)



         The first Level 2 restructuring on December 14, 2016, extended the closing date of the Trust Fund
          (TF) from December 31, 2016 to June 30, 2018, to align the closing date for the TF with that of
          the IDA Credit/Grant.
         These changes were made with the Level 1 restructuring on June 28, 2017: (i) The PDO was
          modified (discussed in section 3); (ii) The number of beneficiaries was reduced following the
          beneficiary selection process: (iii) Activities pertaining to basic services were dropped and activities
          pertaining to mapping of coastal hazards were dropped for reasons described above: (iv) Activities
          associated with supported self-recovery funding were scaled back; and (v) The revised PDO was
          made more specific regarding building disaster recovery capacity.
         The Level 2 restructuring on June 17, 2018, extended the closing date by five months for
          completing activities associated with disaster recovery preparedness, that had been delayed due to
          the disruption caused by Cyclone Gita in February 2018. The project closed on November 30, 2018.

   Split rating. Since the PDOs were changed through a Level 1 project restructuring, this review is based on
   a split rating of objectives, when 80% (US$11.01 million) was disbursed before restructuring and after
   restructuring when 20% (US$2.74 million) was disbursed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


Original Objectives. The cyclone Ian (TCI), that hit the South Pacific region in January 2014, had a
devastating effect on Tonga. The cyclone passed directly through the Ha'apai Island Group (62 dispersed
islands north-east of Tongatapu) in Tonga. Of the 6,616 people in Ha'apai, about 5,500 people were
seriously affected. The combined physical loss and economic losses were estimated to be around
US$49.50 million (about 11% of Tonga's GDP). Housing, community facilities, and basic services were
heavily damaged by the cyclone, and so restoring these facilities was an important part of disaster
reconstruction. Strengthening Tonga’s resilience to natural disasters was important, given high disaster
exposure and vulnerability and weaknesses in existing disaster risk management capacity and systems.



Government strategy. The objectives were well-aligned with the government strategies. The National TCI
Response Plan, endorsed by the cabinet on January 30, 2014, outlined the immediate relief and recovery
priorities in the housing sector (the sector that bore the brunt of damages and losses from the cyclone). The
plan highlighted the need for reconstructing houses and assisting affected families move out of tents and
evacuation centers into safe housing with adequate water and sanitation facilities. Tonga's Strategic
Development Framework for 2011-2014, called for integrating disaster risk management and climate
change into program planning. The National Infrastructure Investment Plan for 2013-2023 underscored the
need for integrating Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management in infrastructure planning.




                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113)



Bank strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with the Bank's Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for 2011-
2014. The second pillar of the CAS highlighted the need for strengthening environmental and disaster risk
management and climate change adaptation through rehabilitating damaged houses and improving the
capacity for disaster management. The PDOs were aligned with the Bank's "Regional Partnership
Framework" of 2016, covering nine Pacific Island countries, including Tonga. This framework emphasized
the strategic importance of addressing climate risks under " Focus Area Three. Protecting incomes and
livelihoods”.



The original PDOs - restoring houses and community facilities that were damaged - was framed in terms of
outputs, rather than outcomes (such as restoring services provided by these assets). There was a
disconnect between project activities and intended outcomes of improving resilience to natural disasters at
the national level in Tonga, given the relatively limited project size. There were issues with the original
PDO, when the local population interpreted the PDO to mean that housing would be restored directly by
the project, while the design envisioned providing housing through a mix of directly and indirectly supported
self-reconstruction efforts.



Revised objectives. The Bank’s original intention was that households living in houses of absentee house-
owners, when the cyclone struck (including households living under informal arrangements or unregistered
houses) would be eligible for support, through subsides for self-supported reconstruction efforts. Some
households interpreted the PDO as meaning that the project was to provide them with occupancy rights in
houses of absentee house-owners for 30 years. This interpretation was neither acceptable to the
government nor to the absentee house-owners. The project design was revised during implementation to
clarify that households were ineligible for occupancy rights they did not have under the original project, but
that they would have secure occupancy rights for four years. The revised PDO was reframed to cement this
change and avoid an interpretation that the objectives guaranteed housing to all affected parties. However,
the revised PDO also introduced some vagueness, as it avoided any mention of restoration or
reconstruction even when the project activities were clearly designed as reconstruction. The problem was
not that houses in Tonga needed to have strengthened climate resilience (as if this were retrofits to existing
facilities) – it was that houses had been destroyed and needed to be rebuilt.

The revised PDO also narrowed the scope of the second part of the PDO, by moving away from the general
national goal of building resilience to natural disasters, to a more localized goal of strengthening Ha’apai’ s
preparedness to recover from future natural disasters. This better reflected the remaining activities that
could feasibly be completed at project closure, but was less ambitious, and did not reflect the need for
resilience building outside of preparedness for disaster recovery. The relevance of objectives
is rated Substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective

               Restore housing, community facilities and basic services to the affected population of Ha'apai

               Rationale
               Theory of Change.

               Original design. Self-supported reconstruction of houses and contractor-executed works for vulnerable
               groups, reconstruction of community facilities, and providing basic services were expected to contribute to the
               restoration of houses and community facilities to the affected population of Ha’apai. Supported self-
               construction was adopted as an approach shown in other countries to accelerate reconstruction, lower costs,
               and reduce risks. Technical assistance activities, such as preparing building plans at the national level,
               updating the National Building Code, mapping of coastal hazards for reconstruction planning and training
               building inspectors on climate-resilient techniques, were likely to contribute to the intended outcome of
               strengthening Tonga’s resilience to natural disasters. Government’s lack of commitment to self-supported
               reconstruction efforts led to largely dropping this approach and a shift towards contractor construction of
               houses during implementation. This change consumed project resources and contributed to: (i) dropping
               activity associated with repair of the Lifuka market and delaying water and sanitation investments: (ii)
               reducing the number of houses that could be reconstructed, and (iii) The government’s decision to
               concentrate on reconstruction activities and hold off on technical assistance activities (because of the
               problems in reconstruction following the scaling down of the supported self-recovery activities), contributed
               to slow progress on the policy front.

               Revised design. Project activities aimed at reconstruction of housing using contractors were relevant for
               the objective strengthening the climate resilience of housing and community facilities for the affected
               population of Ha’apai. Likewise, the technical assistance activities aimed at capacity building were likely to
               contribute to the narrower objective of building Ha’apai’ capacity to recover from natural disasters.



               Outputs (pages 13-19).

               1,031 houses were built, repaired or retrofitted to climate resistant standards at closure, less than the original
               target of 1,100. (The original target was revised following a detailed damage assessment of the number of
               houses eligible for assistance) and actual delivery was larger for minor repairs on houses and smaller for
               reconstructed houses. This included the following.

                     Reconstruction of 196 damaged houses by contractors of vulnerable households (target 200 houses).
                      No houses were reconstructed for households not classified as vulnerable using the Self-Supported
                      Recovery (SSR) approach (target 350). Rather, the project delivered 204 one-room houses contactor
                      build houses. The combined 400 contractor build houses were built to more resilient standards,
                      enforced by providing pre-approved contractors with housing plans prepared by the project using
                      approved designs.

                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113)




        Repair and rehabilitation of 314 houses with moderate damages (target 400 houses).
        Repair and rehabilitation of 275 houses with minor damages (target 150).
        42 households were reimbursed for repair work undertaken prior to the availability of project funds.
        Six building inspectors were trained and deployed to Ha'apai to develop repair plans, supervise
         repairs and inspect the work of inspectors.
        The ICR (paragraph 37) notes that as envisaged at design, eligible beneficiaries were to have access
         to a Recovery Center and mobile advisory units, through which they would receive technical
         assistance from an SSR firm for building to resilient standards. Following the government's decision to
         hire contractors for building houses for beneficiaries, the SSR firm procurement was cancelled and
         support to the remaining SSR households was provided in a fragmented fashion by Building
         Inspectors and by a Community Liaison officer in Ha'apai.
        Restoration work on the one large community facility assisted by the project - the Lifuka market - was
         not completed due to budget overruns on housing construction, that left a shortfall for this activity. The
         ICR notes that although the damage assessment and rehabilitation plan were prepared under the
         project, construction of the facility that was completed in July 2017, was funded by the Asian
         Development Bank.
        18 small community facilities were rehabilitated as targeted and asbestos-containing materials were
         removed from the community facilities, rehabilitated under the project. Supervision of these facilities
         by building inspectors helped to ensure that the works would meet building code standards and that
         they were more climate resilient.
        Water supply services was to be restored to 1,100 housing units. The ICR (paragraph 46) notes that
         “these services were omitted from the original housing contracts’ without a clear explanation, but were
         added for some houses through change orders. Water systems and guttering were installed in 125
         units, significantly short of the target.
        No sanitation facilities were restored for the housing units under the project, as compared to the target
         of 1,100.
        Considering electricity as a basic service, connecting houses to electricity in 178 contractor-build
         houses was added at government request, during implementation . This activity was dropped during
         implentation for budgetary reasons.

Outcomes.

      The project supported improved climate resilience in housing for 5,400 beneficiaries. This was short of
       the target of 5, 800 beneficiaries. 27% of the beneficiaries were females, short of the target of 40%.
      Restored community facilities are able to be used for religious and cultural functions.
      No evidence was provided that water supply services were restored, given that only that only water
       tanks and guttering were installed in the selected housing units.

While the project exceeded its target for minor repair work, it fell short of the target for number of
reconstructed houses, due in part to the move away from supported self-reconstruction to contractor-
delivered reconstruction. The one-room houses built under the project faced problems of social
unacceptability.



Rating

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113)



Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective

Strengthen the climate resilience of housing and selected community facilities for the affected population of
Ha'apai;

Revised Rationale
The outputs discussed above were also relevant to the revised PDO.

The National Building Code activity was updated in a consultative manner and may lead to more resilient
construction in the future, but this had not been approved by Cabinet as of project closure.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

Strengthen the country's resilience to natural disasters.

Rationale
Outputs.

      The Tonga Housing Recovery Policy was developed as targeted, and this has the potential to improve
       future post-disaster housing reconstruction, but the policy was yet to be approved by Cabinet when
       the project closed. According to the clarifications provided by the team, the policy identifies a range of
       approaches and criteria for deciding among them and promoted self- supported reconstruction, as the
       default approach for reasons of lower cost, speed and resilience building. Government is
       demonstrating a willingness to adopt this approach: after cyclone Gita in 2018, the government
       provided cash transfers for temporary shelter and provided the option for self-supported
       reconstruction. A key decision for the government is to appoint a lead agency for coordinating housing
       recovery, given that there is no housing ministry. Once this decision is made, the policy will need to be
       approved by the cabinet.
      A House Identification Guide (a compilation of designs and other technical information from past
       Tonga housing reconstruction projects) was prepared for the Ministry of Infrastructure, to serve as a
       reference for future resilient housing designs. This guide was made available to the Ministry of
       Infrastructure when the project closed.
      The activity associated with coastal hazard and risk maps for the affected islands was dropped, for
       lack of alternate sites on the island for moving houses, that confirmed to the existing zonal rule. This
       made the hazard mapping an unnecessary cost.



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113)




                                  Equipment and software for facilitating future post-disaster building assessments were acquired and
                                   equipment and protocols for building damage assessments were updated, as targeted.
                                  The building code activities discussed above were also relevant to this objective.

                                     Outcomes.

                                     The indicators were output-oriented.

                            The ICR (paragraph 51) states that the technical, policy and regulatory tools have increased resilience.
                            However, there is no clear evidence that the project activities reduced Tonga’s vulnerability to disaster risks.



                            Rating
                            Modest


                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective

                            Strengthen the government's preparedness to recover from natural disasters.

                            Revised Rationale
                            The outputs and outcomes described above were also relevant to the revised PDO.



                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                            1,031 houses in total were delivered under the project, as compared to the revised target of 1,100 houses
                            (The total included 400 reconstruction of destroyed or heavily damaged houses and repairs on 631 houses
                            with moderate or minor damages). Given project design changes and cost overruns, many activities were
                            dropped, and the revised design ended up financing a narrow set of activities and others were delayed and so
                            did not reach the point of cabinet approval.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement

                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113)




5. Efficiency


Economic analysis. There was no economic analysis at appraisal, given the emergency nature of the project.
Lack of data precluded an ex-post economic analysis of investments in housing at project closure (ICR, page
20). However, a benefit-cost analysis for the privately-owned assets created by the project, would have been
difficult, given that there was no liquid market for these assets. The ICR (paragraph 65) notes that housing
reconstruction investments from previous cyclones provided some evidence of a high rate of return from
reconstruction interventions. However lack of data precluded quantitative estimation of the avoided cost of
disaster damages, due to more climate-resilient structures.



Cost effectiveness considerations. High costs are to be expected when operating in remote parts of small
states. However, even given this, the project was not cost effective, with the actual cost of two-room and one
room contractor-build housing units 29% and 51% higher than the original estimates – which in turn were
roughly double the costs in nominal $US terms of a similar World Bank housing reconstruction project in Tonga
a decade earlier. The overruns were due to a combination of factors, including design changes and government
decision to engage contractors as opposed to self-supported reconstruction, which had been expected to be
more cost-effective. The cost overruns contributed to dropping activities relating to rehabilitating community
facilities and providing basic services in housing units. As discussed in section four, the number of
beneficiaries that received assistance for reconstruction work was lower than targeted at appraisal.



Administrative issues. There were issues associated with overpayment to contractors and ineligible expenses
(discussed in section 10b). Issues relating to occupancy rights and high turnover rate of the project management
unit contributed to implementation delays. There was not enough consultation with the local population on the
decision pertaining to the government decision to build one-room houses, that were considered to be culturally
inappropriate.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                    Not Applicable


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



Original objectives. The original PDOs are rated as Substantial, in view of the disconnect between project
activities and intended outcomes. Efficacy of the two original sub-objectives – to restore housing, community
facilities and basic services and to strengthen the country’s resilience to natural disasters is rated as modest,
given the limited achievements. Efficiency is rated as negligible, given the significant cost overruns and reduced
scope of project activities.



Revised objectives. The revised objectives were narrower in scope and represented activities which could
realistically be completed within the remaining time frame. The revised objectives are rated as Substantial. The
two revised PDOs - strengthening the climate resilience of housing and selected community facilities and
strengthening the climate resilience of selected community facilities - were still rated as modest. Efficiency is
negligible.



Considering the ratings discussed above and weighing them by the shares of Bank disbursement before and
after restructuring (0.80*2 + 0.20*2 = 2), outcome is rated as Unsatisfactory, reflecting major shortcomings
in efficacy and efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



Institutional risk. There is a risk to the ongoing benefits, given that some people living in the rehabilitated
houses only have occupancy rights for four years, after which the houses would revert to the control of the
original owner. Although agreements from nonresident house-owners had been obtained for four years,
given that construction of houses was mostly completed by January 2016, there is risk of uncertainty going
forward for the housing beneficiaries targeted under this project.

Government risk. There is also a risk to the ongoing benefits given that the updated Tonga Building Code
and the National Housing Reconstruction Policy were yet to be approved by the relevant authorities when the
project closed.




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  Given the emergency nature of the project, preparation of this project was appropriately expedited and
  the project was prepared in four months. This project was prepared based on the experience of prior
  Bank-financed reconstruction projects in Tonga (Post Tsunami Project in 2010 and the Cyclone
  Emergency Recovery Project in 2002) and drew upon the lessons from other large-scale Bank-financed
  reconstruction projects in Aceh and Haiti. Lessons incorporated at design included; (i) Unlike prior Bank-
  financed reconstruction projects in Tonga, this project envisioned supported self-recovery reconstruction
  activities for cost-effectiveness considerations, based on international practice. However, although the
  approach was technically sound, the approach did not have sustained government buy-in due to political
  factors and was discarded during implementation; and (ii) incorporating capacity-building activities of
  government agencies at the national and district levels of practices that could be used for future disaster
  recovery efforts in partnership with private sector and civil society. Several risks were identified at
  appraisal. These included High risks associated with the emergency nature of the project and the speed
  of preparation under compressed procedures, risks associated with logistics of reconstruction efforts,
  given the relative isolation of the Ha'apai Island Group. Overall project risk was rated as High at
  appraisal. The implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the Project Management Unit (PMU)
  based in a recovery center in Ha'apai and the main PMU based in Tongatapu (the capital and main
  island). Appropriate arrangements were made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance
  (discussed in section 10a).



  There were significant shortcomings at design. The project design stipulated long-term occupancy rights
  to households living in houses of absentee house owners. This generated significant resistance from the
  government and from the absentee house owners. There was not sufficient recognition of the difficulty of
  getting land consents from absentee house owners and resolving this issue contributed to the
  implementation delays. Although the financing agreement fixed August 31,2014 – three months after
  Bank approval – as the date by which the beneficiary list should have been completed, the list was not
  officially finalized until August 2017, due to a combination of factors, including uncertainty resulting from
  the land consent process, inconsistent household and housing damage assessment data despite
  multiple surveys, failure to authorize an objective third part to prepare the list of beneficiaries and
  irregularities in the qualifications process. The lack of a final list delayed the delivery of housing solutions
  and created confusion.for contractors and beneficiaries. The promised timeline of eight months for
  completing housing reconstruction was unrealistic. The short preparation time
  precluded sufficient consultation with stakeholders. There were shortcomings in M&E shortcomings
  (discussed in section 9a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory



                                                                                                        Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113)




b. Quality of supervision


 Nine Implementation Status Results Reports were filed over a five-year project implementation period
 (implying twice a year supervision missions). There were three Task Team Leaders (TTLs) over the
 implementation period. The continuity of leadership was maintained, as the TTLs in all cases had been
 involved as team members, prior to assuming the TTL role. The support provided by the supervision aided
 in addressing delays associated with activities such as identifying project beneficiaries and obtaining land
 consents from non-resident owners and addressing issues of political uncertainties, following the snap
 election in November 2017. The support provided by the supervision team helped in safeguards and
 fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10).

 There were significant shortcomings during implementation. The Bank was unable to generate sustained
 political commitment to the supported self-recovery approach. The ICR (paragraph 91) notes that it should
 have better anticipated the political risks ex ante and managed them when they arose. During
 implementation, there was inadequate consultation with the local population on the decision to build one-
 room houses, which were considered as culturally inappropriate. As the ICR (paragraph 89) notes, “a
 social assessment would have helped in identifying and ensuring sensitivity to cultural factors”. The
 shortcomings in M&E design were not rectified during implementation (discussed in section 9a).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 The key indicators for monitoring project performance – the number of houses that were reconstructed to
 climate resilient standards – were output-oriented. As there was no gender results chain in the Project, the
 PDO level indicator “direct beneficiary of which females” was not a meaningful measurement. There were
 no key outcome indicators pertaining to measuring outcomes associated with restoring community facilities
 and strengthening the country's resilience to natural disasters. The M&E design did not consider any
 beneficiaries other than households, so owners and users of community facilities were not assessed for
 their level of use and satisfaction. There were no indicators associated with the number of tradespeople,
 community members and government staff who were trained under the project.

 Given that the baseline data for monitoring project performance was not available, this data was to be
 collected as part of the impact assessment during implementation.


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113)




b. M&E Implementation


  Following the restructuring of the project which revised the PDOs, indicators were modified and scaled
  back in view of the reduction in project scope. The rapid damage assessment prepared by the
  government, with estimates of houses damaged or destroyed, were refined over the next six months
  based on additional surveys (including a household survey).

  The shortcomings pertaining to lack of outcome indicators at design were not rectified during
  implementation. Staffing transitions in both the Project Management Unit and the Bank’s task team led to
  gaps in monitoring and reporting on the status of beneficiary households. Although the design envisioned
  a management information system as the key tool to be used by the Project Management Unit for
  monitoring, excel spreadsheets were used as the principal monitoring tools. This approach did not allow
  for easy tracking, cross-referencing or validation of project data. The ICR (paragraph 99) notes that after
  the first 18 months of implementation, the Ministry of Infrastructure’s detailed physical progress reports to
  the Bank became less regular.



c. M&E Utilization


  The ICR provides no details on whether the data was used for purposes other than monitoring project
  performance.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


   The project was classified as a Category B project. Two safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal
   (PAD, page vii); (1) Environmental Assessment (OP/PB 4.01); and (2) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP
   4.12).

   Environmental Assessment. The PAD (page 14) noted that adverse environmental or social impacts were
   expected to be minor, as the project activities did not involve medium or heavy civil works for reconstruction
   activities. An Environmental Management Plan was prepared and publicly-disclosed to address




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113)



   environmental issues during implementation. The ICR (page 28) reports that there were no major
   environmental issues during implementation and there was compliance with environmental safeguards.

   Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (page 14) noted that there was the possibility of relocation of
   beneficiaries and involuntary resettlement, due to tenure security issues and establishment of a landfill site.
   A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal to address involuntary
   resettlement issues. The ICR (page 28) reports that there was no land acquisition or involuntary
   resettlement during implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


   Financial management. An assessment of the financial management arrangements of the implementing
   agency conducted at appraisal, concluded that the arrangements were satisfactory. Financial management
   risk was rated as substantial. Mitigation measures incorporated at design included, hiring an additional
   accountant dedicated to the project disbursement of supported self-recovery subsidies through vouchers in
   tranches and direct payments to approved suppliers for providing building materials and services to the
   eligible households (PAD, page 34). The ICR (page 29) notes that there were some irregularities in
   construction contracts during implementation (over payments made to four contractors based on fraudulent
   documents). The ICR notes that three of these firms made reimbursements and the
   government reimbursed for the fourth firm. This contractor was subsequently barred by the Bank following
   an investigation. Other than this, financial covenants were met. Unqualified audits were submitted in a
   timely fashion (ICR, page 29).

   Procurement. An assessment of the implementing agency's ability to address procurement issues was
   conducted at appraisal (PAD, page . The assessment concluded that the procurement risk was
   Substantial, due to the limited in-house capacity to address procurement issues. A procurement plan was
   prepared at appraisal and this plan was to be updated to reflect project requirements during
   implementation. The ICR (page 29) notes that there were no major procurement issues during
   implementation and procurement was carried in accordance with the Bank's procurement guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113)



                               Moderately                                       Significant drawbacks in efficacy
Outcome                                             Unsatisfactory
                               Unsatisfactory                                   and efficiency.
                                                                                There were shortcomings both
                               Moderately           Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                at Quality-at-entry and at
                               Satisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                                                                supervision.
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following four lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

(1) Reconstruction of housing infrastructure is necessary but not sufficient for building
resilience to natural disasters. This project contributed to constructing houses that are more
resistant to cyclones and hence less likely to be destroyed or damaged. The project however
affected only a small portion of at-risk assets and hence had limited impact on the overall
vulnerability of Tonga to natural disasters.

(2) Government provision of direct reconstruction of houses can establish expectations that
have long term consequences. The project illustrated the political and fiscal implications of the
government having previously assumed too much responsibility for risk management in the housing
sector, with public expectations that the government would directly reconstruct houses destroyed by
a natural disaster. This make it difficult to get government commitment for housing supply models
that differed than this historic expectation. This implies the need for the Bank to be prepared to
explain and persuade government of the long-term consequences of various housing recovery
project designs and to seek to rebalance risks between households and the government. It also
highlights the need for developing consensus around a housing strategy prior to an emergency, as it
is difficult to do so after a disaster.

(3) A careful consideration of country-specific conditions (including cognizance of cultural
norms and sensitivities) is required for social acceptance. This project contributed
to construction of two room houses for 200 vulnerable households and given the scarcity of
resources, one room houses for 350 households whose needs were deemed to be less
vulnerable. This decision created social and political challenges, as the one room houses were
perceived as too small and "undignified".

(4) The risks/challenges associated with reconstruction in remote locations can be
anticipated and proper mitigation measures can be applied. Project efforts to facilitate access to
trained labor and materials would be an important precondition for self-supported or owner-driven
reconstruction efforts.



13. Assessment Recommended?


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Tonga Cyclone Reconstruction (P150113)



  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and candid. It clearly discusses the move away from the self-supported recovery
approach and the time delays associated with getting consent from absentee house owners. The lessons
drawn by the ICR from the experience of implementing this project were thoughtful, candid and
constructive. The ICR is consistent with the guidelines and appropriately conducts a split rating of
objectives. The ICR also did a commendable job of addressing and explaining the reasons for project
implementation challenges and results but the layout of the report and the ICR structure made it difficult to
describe the story in an accessible manner. The team could consider publishing a separate lesson note in a
more accessible manner, given the depth of analysis presented in the analysis.

The ICR largely framed the project’s results in terms of outputs rather than outcomes, more could potentially
have been done to go beyond the evidence from the project indicators.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
