     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021516

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P103238                                  VN-Renewable Energy Development Project

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                  Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-45640,TF-98460                       30-Jun-2014                                        198,289,141.07

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 05-May-2009                              30-Jun-2018

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         202,000,000.00                                    2,272,550.00

 Revised Commitment                          203,481,808.03                                    1,524,286.63

 Actual                                      198,289,141.07                                    1,524,286.63




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Mari Noelle Lantin         Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Roquiz




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   The project development objective (PDO) of the Renewable Energy Development Project (REDP) is "to
   increase the supply to the national grid of electricity from renewable energy sources, on a commercially,
   environmentally and socially sustainable basis." (Financing Agreement dated June 16, 2009, Schedule 1, p.
   6)


                                                                                                Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)



   This ICR Review is based on the PDO stated in the Financing Agreement. The Project Appraisal Document
   (PAD) and the Implementation Completion Report (ICR) state the same objective. (PAD, p. 5; ICR, pp. 1, 10).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   The project consists of the following parts:



   Component 1. Renewable Energy Investments (at appraisal: US$313.67 million; actual: US$424.16
   million) This component includes credit support for renewable energy (RE) investments and technical
   assistance (TA) for investment implementation by the Project Management Board (PMB) for Rural Energy
   and Renewable Energy of the Ministry of Industry and Trade (MOIT).



   Sub-component 1.1. Credit to Support RE Investment This sub-component was intended to establish a
   re-financing facility for commercial loans provided by participating banks (PBs) in support of eligible RE sub-
   projects up to 30MW developed by private developers. These developers will commit at least 20 percent in
   equity funding and PBs will provide lending of up to 80 percent of each subproject’s total cost.



   Sub-component 1.2. TA for Investment Implementation This sub-component was intended to strengthen
   the capacity of: (i) MOIT to review and evaluate RE subproject proposals and re-financing applications;
   monitor the eligibility of PBs and developers; and oversee subproject implementation; (ii) PBs and private
   developers to prepare re-financing applications and implement RE-based subprojects; and (iii) MOIT to
   manage and coordinate REDP implementation, audit REDP accounts, and disseminate knowledge and
   information regarding RE development.



   Component 2. Regulatory Development (at appraisal: US$1.03 million equivalent; actual: US$1.49
   million). This component was intended to provide support to MOIT, Electricity Regulatory Authority of
   Vietnam (ERAV) and other relevant stakeholders to build the regulatory infrastructure for RE development,
   including to: (i) prepare laws and regulations on RE and carry out studies to support the application of
   power purchase agreements (PPA) and avoided cost tariff (ACT); (ii) develop mechanisms for the
   transparent allocation to developers of RE development sites; (iii) formulate technical standards for RE



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)



  technologies; and (iv) develop environmental and social safeguard guidelines for the implementation of RE
  projects.



  Component 3. Pipeline Development (at appraisal: US$3.35 million; actual: US$0.49 million) This
  component was intended to carry out a program to facilitate the large-scale development of RE through: (i)
  support for the preparation of feasibility studies on potential RE subprojects (except small hydro) through
  the provision of cost-sharing grants to potential developers; (ii) build the capacity of potential developers of
  RE subprojects and of financial institutions in regard to analysis of investment risks, implementation of
  safeguard requirements, formulation of credit policies and appraisal of subprojects, through the provision of
  small grants to develop training programs; and (iii) carry out strategic studies on systemic barriers to and
  long-term potential for RE development.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


  Project Cost:



  The total project cost was US$426.1 million (ICR, p. 2 and p. 47) about a third more than the original project
  cost estimate of US$ 318.05 million (PAD, p. 2 and p. 59) due to the increased non-IDA contribution (private
  developers and local financial institutions) to Component 1 (appraisal US$113.77 million versus US$227.85
  million actual (ICR, p.47). The greater contribution by the non-IDA sources allowed the project to have
  additional budget, which was used to finance more MW SHP thus increased the project outputs and impact.
  Also, there was lower than expected demand for the feasibility studies from private developers despite
  substantial efforts by MOIT. Under Component 3, a portion of the co-financier Swiss trust fund (US$0.92
  million) was reallocated to Component 2, thus shifting IDA and grant proportions under Components 2 (IDA
  from 92% to 45%) and 3 (grant from 59% to 43%). (First Restructuring Paper, p. 4 and p. 8)



  Project Financing:



  The project was financed with an IDA Credit for US$202 million (converted from XDR 136.9 million with the
  exchange rate of US$1.475 = SDR 1 clarified by the team in August 2019), which was 100% disbursed. The
  actual XDR disbursement from IDA at project closing was XDR 136.87 million. At appraisal, the co-financing
  was to be provided by the Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID) for US$2.28 million.
  However, the trust fund (TF) did not materialize as Australia shifted its development assistance priorities in
  the region. The Swiss Confederation through SECO (US$2.43 million), took over to support
  REDP implementation on October 26, 2010 (Grant Agreement TF071499, p.1). Consequently, a Grant
  Agreement for the amount of US$2.23 million was agreed upon between the World Bank and the



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)



Government of Vietnam (GoV) on December 20, 2010 and became effective on April 25, 2011 (Grant
Agreement TF098460, p. 1.)



Borrower Contribution:



By the time of project closing, the Borrower had contributed US$148 million which is 231% of its original
commitment of US$63.98 million at the time of project approval.



Restructuring:



The REDP project was approved on May 5, 2009, became effective on September 14, 2009, and closed on
June 30, 2018, exactly 4 years after its original closing date of June 30, 2014. The project was restructured
twice. The first was on June 5, 2014 (date on Restructuring Paper cover; p. 2 of ICR indicates June 10,
2014), by which time US$57.1 million had already been disbursed according to Operations Portal detailed
disbursement activity list (or 29% of the final disbursement of US$198.3 million). The second was on June
30, 2016, by which time US$113.6 million had been disbursed (or 57% of final disbursement amount). Both
restructurings were carried out to enable the project to fully meet its development objectives (i.e., change in
results framework and safeguard policies triggered) and adapt to changing market conditions (i.e., change
in loan closing dates, reallocation between disbursement categories and procurement). The details for each
restructuring are described below.



1) Level I Restructuring in 2014:



The first restructuring was needed to enable the project to comply with the Bank safeguard policies and
provide a more attractive on-lending mechanism to fully meet its PDO. The project was performing poorly
due to the deterioration of macroeconomic conditions and the banking sector in Vietnam in 2011-2013. The
government also decided to tighten credit policy and therefore local banks became more conservative and
were not willing to provide new loans to small RE investments that were considered risky. The restructuring
would provide sufficient time and facilitate the completion of the pipeline subprojects and improve its
performance ratings. The changes included: (i) triggering of an additional safeguard policy, OP 7.50: Project
on International Waterways; (ii) a two-year extension to the project closing date to June 30, 2016 for the IDA
credit and Swiss Grant; (iii) application of the latest World Bank’s Procurement and Consultant Guidelines,
published by the Bank in January 2011, and removal of thresholds for application of procurement and
consultant selection methods and thresholds for the Bank's prior review; (iv) a reallocation of funds between
the expenditure categories under the Swiss Grant (from US$1.90 million to US$0.98 million); and (v) other
minor changes in project implementation arrangements, including removal of the Administrative Unit (AU)
and transfer of responsibilities to the PMB. Lastly, the results framework and monitoring was revised to

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)



   include a new intermediate indicator on a national renewable energy database and reduced target for
   the capacity of RE project development from 50 MW to 25 MW due to reduced budget reallocation in
   (iv).The feasibility study support facility (FSSF) subcomponent under Component 3 was implemented slowly
   due to lack of interest of private developers in the facility despite substantial efforts by the MOIT. (First
   Restructuring Paper, p. 1,4 and 7).



   2) Level II Restructuring in 2016:



   The second restructuring was needed to provide additional time for the project to complete the ongoing
   subprojects and TA activities to meet its development objectives (ICR, p. 13). The changes included: (i) a
   two-year extension to the IDA credit to June 30, 2018; (ii) a one-year extension of the Swiss Grant to June
   30, 2017; (iii) addition of a new eligible expenditures category for training and workshops under the Swiss
   Grant; and (iv) two revisions of the results framework. The revisions included a) rewording of PDO Results
   Indicator, from "Percentage of RE projects (small hydro) meeting new environment practices or having
   benefit sharing scheme", to "Percent of RE projects (small hydro) financed under REDP meeting the new
   environmental and social practices" ; and b) changes in three Intermediate Results Indicators--two
   reworded (from "Law on Energy Conservation and Renewable Energy" to "Law on Energy Conservation",
   and from "Decree on Renewable Energy" to "Renewable Energy Development Strategy") and one dropped
   ("Proportion of small hydropower projects that adopt new environment or benefit sharing practices") due to
   redundancy in PDO Results Indicator in a). (2nd Restructuring Paper, pp. 3-4).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


REDP was a response to the rapidly increasing demand for electricity in Vietnam due to the country’s
growing gross domestic product (GDP) of over 7 percent at project approval. The government was
concerned that if the trend persisted, it would revert the country’s dependence on fossil fuel and further
digress from its development goals of addressing climate change risks. The country was also in transition to
reaching middle-income country and market economy status and therefore the need for a commercially,
environmentally and socially sustainable power sector was a government priority.



The relevance of the PDOs is high with respect to the current strategies of the Vietnamese government and
the Bank. The objectives are fully aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2018-
2022. REDP's objective of increasing the supply of electricity from RE sources directly address CPF's
Focus Area 3 on "ensuring environmental sustainability and resilience" through "promotion of low carbon
energy generation, including renewables, and energy efficiency and reduce GHG emissions" (Objective 9).
The project's PDOs also address the government's commitment "to invest in RE sources", by

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)



               providing financing to small hydropower (SHP) development and addressing readiness gaps in capacity,
               market participation, and the regulatory and institutional environment.



               The REDP was part of a wider WBG engagement supporting the RE sector in Vietnam since 1995. In 2002,
               a series of projects including the System Efficiency Improvement, Equitization, and Renewables Project
               approved in 2002 (SEIER, P066396) helped establish the policy and regulatory environment for RE. The
               Bank also provided analytical work and maintained policy dialogue to the Vietnam energy sector, all of
               which initiated the country's focus on RE. REDP's objectives continued the WBG's commitment in providing
               high quality and innovative investments in RE on a scale that is sufficient to have an impact.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             To increase the supply of electricity to the national grid from renewable energy sources.

                             Rationale


                             Theory of Change



                             The project's Theory of Change (ToC) (ICR, p. 9) indicates that the project's key inputs (IDA credit and TA
                             support) would directly lead to the achievement of the following project outputs: i) new SHPs
                             developed; ii) increased capacity of sector policy makers and practitioners; and iii) enhanced project
                             implementation and monitoring and evaluation. In turn, the outputs, together with technical assistance and
                             institutional strengthening support, would be expected to increase supply of RE to the grid which is critical to
                             Vietnam's renewable energy program. The causal pathway from project inputs to outcomes are
                             straightforward. The outcomes achieved can be attributed directly to the project's interventions.



                             Outputs:



                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)




The following major output was achieved by project closing:

269 MW of RE installed capacity were added under REDP against the target of 250 MW. The ICR (Annex 8,
p. 55) states that an additional 50.6 MW of installed capacity will be added after the completion of the
last three subprojects by March 2019, which will result in a 128 percent achievement of the target.



Outcomes:



The target of 960 GWh for electricity supplied to the national grid by RE projects financed under REDP was
surpassed by 11 percent. The actual achievement of 1,069 GWh was supplied by the 16 subprojects. All of
the commissioned SHPs are reported operating safely and complying with safeguard requirements (ICR, p.
18). The ICR states that this achievement will improve to 1,260 GWh or 31 percent above target after the last
three subprojects are completed by March 2019 with a total capacity of 319.6 MW. As of July 2019, the TTL
confirmed that two of the subprojects are commercially operating and the construction of the remaining
project (Son Tay) was completed, but its commercial operation will commence in August 2019 (delayed from
the scheduled date of December 2018).



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

To improve commercial sustainability of grid-connected renewable projects.

Rationale


Theory of Change



The REDP was the GoV's response to establish a framework for small-scale grid-connected renewable
projects to demonstrate the viability of these type of projects to the commercial banking sector, build capacity,
and provide incentives among the stakeholders of the sector. The ToC indicates that the project's inputs (IDA
credit, TA and grant support) would contribute to the achievement of all of the project outputs, based on some
critical assumptions on market conditions and favorable policies implemented by the
government. The causal pathways observed through different activities are the following: (i) increasing
government capacity and developing a regulatory structure through RE laws and enforcement of

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)



Standardized Power Purchase Agreement (SPPA) and Avoided Cost Tariff (ACT); and (ii) RE pipeline
development through feasibility studies on new RE projects and special studies for long-term development of
RE projects. These activities can be credibly expected to directly increase the commercial sustainability of RE
projects.



Outputs:



The following outputs were achieved by project closing:

      1,500 MW of installed RE capacity under ACT were financed by non-IDA sources (mobilized funds),
       which were ten times more than the target of 150 MW.
      272 SPPAs for grid-connected renewables were signed, exceeding the target of 30 SPPAs by more
       than nine times.
      80 percent of commissioned subprojects under REDP met the appraised budget, timetable and
       performance, which surpassed the target of 70 percent.
      A RE development strategy, an integrated National RE database and a New circular on ACT were
       developed and launched.



Outcomes:



1. The target for electricity supplied to the national grid by grid-connected RE projects using ACT
was overachieved by 795 percent. With an end target of 1,250 GWh/year, the project achieved 11,193
GWh/year of RE supply at project closing. The ICR attributes this achievement to the "boom of SHP
development on a commercial basis e.g., commercial lending, the ACT scheme", and the "successful launch
and annual updates of the ACT scheme to all SHPs". The ICR (p. 19) included data from ERAV on the annual
energy produced using ACT to show an increasing trend from 2010 when REDP was implemented. Under
REDP support, the ACT scheme was reviewed, updated and published annually throughout project
implementation. The scheme effectively contributed to enhance the regulatory framework and investment
readiness for promoting SHPs in Vietnam, especially from the aspects of maintaining transparency,
consistency and creditability of policies and improving bankability of SHPs. A demonstration effect of this
successful scheme was that the GoV applied a similar mechanism to other technologies such as biomass and
waste-to-energy.



2. The successful implementation of the regulatory infrastructure of SHP development resulted in
financial gains. The RE capacity financed using ACT by non-IDA sources exceeded its target 10 times due
to: (i) the government's support of SHPs; (ii) requirement to use ACT in all SHPs; and (iii) the increased
financing capacities of the SHP market. The project's credit facility provided seed fund to mobilize additional
funds from private developers and local banks. With coordination and support from the government,

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)



REDP implemented favorable policies to encourage private sector investments in the sector. The mobilization
of private capital in the amount of US$227.85 million for SHPs from private developers and local banks
leveraged IDA credits by 1.13 times, thus sending a signal to the market that banks are refinancing bankable
projects. The ICR (p. 18) provided an estimate of 1,500 MW and US$2 billion invested from private sector-
financed SHPs outside of REDP lending. To demonstrate the viability of SHPs to the banking sector, financial
benefits such as good production output and relatively generous tariffs from ACT were also achieved (ICR,
Annex 9, p. 57). All completed subprojects generated robust revenues and the carbon purchase credits
allowed private developers to repay the loans, cover operational costs and achieve profits.



Overall, the project provided proper instruments to address the absence of long financing tenors and the lack
of skills and training among sponsors and bankers in assessing small-scale RE development. IEG assigns a
high rating because the project significantly achieved this sub-objective through the mobilization of
additional financing from the private sector, thus improving the commercial sustainability of small-scale, grid-
connected RE projects.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective

To improve social and environmental sustainability of grid-connected renewable projects.

Rationale


Theory of Change:



One of the barriers to RE development is the "weakness of private sponsors to develop a site in a technically,
socially and environmentally sustainable manner..." (PAD, p. 4). This objective aimed to implement
subprojects, through REDP, that are socially and environmentally sustainable. The ToC shows that through
grant TA and IDA credit support, together with technical assistance and institutional strengthening inputs, the
project could be expected to develop environmental and social guidelines for SHPs as well as technical
standards for RE technologies (as outputs) and apply these to all subprojects financed under REDP, which
will lead causally to improvements in the sustainability of grid-connected renewable projects (as outcomes).



Outputs:



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 22
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)




                      The following outputs were achieved by project closing:

                              An environmental guideline for small hydro was approved and launched.
                              A social guideline for small hydro was approved and launched.
                              The Law on Energy Conservation was passed.
                              The Renewable Energy Development Strategy was approved.
                              Technical standards for hydro was adopted.



                      Outcome:



                      Through TA support, the environmental and social guidelines for SHPs were adopted and applied to all the
                      subprojects (ICR, p. 43). The target of 100% of "RE projects (small hydro) meeting new environment and
                      social best practices" was met fully at project closing. However, the evidence is unclear on the sustainability
                      of these RE projects. One of the results indicators was revised to exclude the "benefit sharing scheme"
                      mechanism which initially served as a proxy for supporting the sustainability objective. There was
                      no operational data disclosed in the ICR or any information on the extent to which these guidelines were
                      mainstreamed and monitored after implementation.

                      IEG assigns a Substantial rating because all the subprojects fully adopted the social and environmental
                      guidelines by project closing. However, there is a continuing need to monitor the sustainability of grid-
                      connected RE projects beyond the project's closing date. There is a strong likelihood that this monitoring will
                      be carried out given the Government's strategy and continuing donor support.



                      Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale


The project achieved its set of development objectives of increasing the supply of electricity to the national grid
from renewable energy sources on a commercially, environmentally and socially sustainable basis. At closing, the
project exceeded targets for two of three PDO indicators: (i) Electricity supplied to the grid by grid-connected
renewables projects financed under REDP and (ii) Electricity supplied to the grid by grid-connected renewables
projects using avoided cost tariff (ACT). The project also, fully met the third indicator: (iii) percentage of renewable
energy projects (small hydro) meeting new environmental and social best practices.




                                                                                                                        Page 10 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)




Overall Efficacy Rating
High


5. Efficiency


The economic and financial analyses were conducted for the project’s RE Investments (Component 1) at
appraisal and at project completion. The ICR indicates that of the 5 subprojects used to determine the aggregate
ERR at appraisal, only one of the subprojects, Sung Vui, was eventually financed by REDP (the others withdrew
from the project).



At project closing, 19 subprojects were refinanced with a total installed capacity of 319.6 MW, capital cost of
VND 9,310 billion and average annual generation of 1,268 GWh (Annex 8 of the ICR, p. 55). Out of 19
subprojects, 16 are operational and actual data was used in the analyses while the other 3 ongoing subprojects
used the latest available data at the time the ICR was written. An update from the TTL in July 2019 states
that two of the 3 subprojects are now operational while the last subproject is further delayed (e.g., Son Tay).
The estimated date of commercial operation is in August 2019.



The leverage ratio of REDP is 113% (US$227.84 million was leveraged by US$202 million IDA credits), which is
double the leverage ratio estimated at appraisal of 56% (US$113.77 million to be leveraged by US$202 million
IDA credit). The enhanced reliability of the enabling policy and tariff environment for SHPs through the ACT, and
the increased confidence and capacity of PBs in financing SHPs, both contributed to the project's efficiency.



Economic Analysis



Cost-benefit analysis was conducted at appraisal. Sensitivity analyses were also conducted based on: (i) risks to
economic returns stemming from high construction costs, low oil prices and low energy generation; and (ii)
consideration of the project's environmental benefits. Ex ante, all subprojects were found to be economically
viable. Another economic analysis through the use of Monte Carlo simulation was used to calculate the ERR
and the results showed that the risk of missing the hurdle rate when environmental benefits are included is less
than 2% for each subproject. Both approaches concluded that the economic returns for the 5 subprojects
were significantly above the hurdle rate, and robust with respect to the main uncertainties.



At the time of appraisal, the ERR for the first cohort of 5 subprojects was 17.3 percent. When GHG reduction
benefits were included, the ERR was 20.8 percent and the NPV was US$15.7 million. At project closing, the


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)



ERR for the 19 REDP subprojects was 20.7 percent and the NPV was US$315.9 million using the 10 percent
hurdle rate set by MOIT. When GHG reduction benefits were included, the ERR increased to 24.2 percent.



Since Sung Vui was the only subproject implemented from the 5 subprojects at appraisal, an economic and
financial analysis was also conducted separately on Sung Vui (ICR, p. 50). The subproject resulted in an ERR of
18.6 percent at completion, slightly higher than the 18.2 percent ERR at appraisal.



Financial Analysis



At appraisal, the financial analysis used constant 2008 prices. The assumptions included: (i) carbon revenues at
US$15 per ton CO2, (ii) 20-year life, (iii) carbon emission reduction tax at 2 percent, (iv) the GoV’s tax
concessions are taken into account as income tax liability, (v) revenues at the published ACT; and (vi) O&M
costs at 1.5 percent per year of the investment cost. It was also assumed that each of these subprojects was
likely to be representative of further projects submitted for refinancing (PAD, p. 14).



The methodology used ex-ante and ex-post are similar, with the latter using actual costs and generated energy
in the calculation. The updated ACT and carbon emission factor were also used to strengthen the ex-post
analysis. The financial analysis results shows Sung Vui and a cohort of subprojects (ICR, Annex 4, p. 49). At
project closing, Sung Vui's FIRR was 16.9 percent and its NPV was US$6.86 million compared to its appraisal
figures of 15.5 percent and US$6.36 million, respectively. The cohort of projects as a whole, including Sung Vui
had an FIRR of 20.8 percent and NPV of US$93.3 million at project closing, compared to an FIRR of 14.6
percent and NPV of US$12.13 million at project appraisal (PAD, p. 14).



Operational and Administrative Efficiency



The ICR on p. 22 lists some key features of REDP design and implementation such as: (i) active participation of
local PBs through the FI lending instrument; (ii) defined responsibilities between the project management
(pipeline identification) and the PBs (who provided loans to the SHPs thus absorbing credit risks); and (iii)
investors who were eager to learn and implement the otherwise risky technology effectively in terms of
procurement and management. However, factors such as: (i) change of co-financiers; (ii) reallocation of funds
during project implementation; (iii) project cost overruns; and (iv) implementation delays due to macroeconomic
downturns and multiple reorganizations, constrained project efficiency specifically, in subproject pipeline
development and approval of subproject loans, thus affecting the overall achievement of project objectives.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)



Efficiency is rated Substantial, on the basis of the project’s economic and financial rates of return. The project’s
implementation, however, was delayed by four years, which required two closing date extensions. This
shortcoming is taken into account in determining the project’s overall outcome rating in Section 6 below.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       16.99
 Appraisal                                                  17.30
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       94.54
 ICR Estimate                                               20.70
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the project’s objectives is rated high: increasing RE investments remains a priority in the
Bank, country and sector strategies at project closing. The project’s efficacy in achieving its objectives is also
high: the project fully achieved or exceeded its set of objectives. The project’s efficiency is substantial, when
considering its economic and financial rates of return and administrative delays and cost overruns. The
project’s implementation, however, was delayed by four years, which required two closing date extensions--one
to respond to exogenous market failures and the second was an uptake to meet the project objectives
and indicators. Based on the harmonized OPCS and IEG definitions as stated in IEG’s guidelines and the
Bank’s ICR preparation guidelines dated September 27, 2018, the overall project outcome is rated highly
satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



The project received strong support from the government including MOIT's active involvement from
preparation, throughout implementation, and beyond project closing. MOIT remains supportive of scaling up
renewables on a commercially, environmentally and socially sustainable manner and has provided additional
technical support and dissemination practices through the project. Adequate arrangements have been in

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)



place since project appraisal and were adjusted appropriately during implementation. Although external
factors such as a financial crisis and environmental safeguard issues have stalled the project’s progress, it
eventually caught up to meet or exceed its targets. As of July 2019, all but one of the 19 subprojects are fully
operational. The last subproject (Son Tay) has been completed and is scheduled to commence operations in
August 2019, i.e., an additional 73 GWh of electricity supply and 18 MW installed capacity. In sum, the
project development outcomes are likely to be maintained and continue to contribute to the project’s over-
arching objectives.



Institutional Risk



The project was contingent on the readiness of the MOIT at project initiation and the adequacy of the
enabling business and policy environment. Ensuring the subproject pipeline was important for REDP and
during preparation, TA targeted to project stakeholders mitigated this risk in the project’s design. Due to the
restructuring of the MOIT, which affected project implementation and caused inefficiencies, the main risk to
REDP’s development outcome is institutional support. The slow disbursements indicate insufficient
institutional capacity despite numerous capacity building activities.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


   With close partnership between the Bank and the GoV and the project’s strategic relevance to the
   country's development priorities, the Bank worked effectively in designing a flagship project that
   addressed significant barriers to the development of RE. The Bank performed sufficient due diligence,
   and also recognized the gaps in institutional capacity and the enabling environment, in order for the
   project to achieve its objectives. The components were adequate in achieving these objectives. The ICR
   (p. 26) included sufficient detail on soundness of project design and a candid assessment of the
   project risks, some of which were underestimated during project preparation. For example, involvement
   of the banking sector was a significant risk because local banks were mainly interested in large-scale
   energy projects. The PAD also provided sufficient background and context on both renewable energy and
   banking sectors. The choice of the FIL instrument was appropriate given the planned on-lending activities
   that were instrumental in achieving the PDOs. However, there were some minor shortcomings. Despite
   the unexpected reorganization of the MOIT which subsequently affected project implementation, the
   expertise and knowledge capacity of the implementing agency, especially on credit lines, were
   underestimated at project design. The number of TA activities were deemed necessary by the project
   team. However, the ICR (p.27) states, “there was a lack of realism in the REDP design regarding the
   capacity of MOIT to achieve a large scale-up for pipeline development”, which supports the quality-at-
   entry rating of satisfactory.



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


 The core Bank team based in Hanoi carried an additional 50 ad-hoc technical missions (ICR, p. 32) to
 support the client in addressing issues that arose during the 10-year project implementation. The
 supervision remained focused on the project’s progress toward its objectives and development impact
 throughout the life of the project through effective monitoring and evaluation. For example, the Bank team
 worked closely with the MOIT to review project design and address bottlenecks to make the credit facility
 more attractive to PBs and developers during the economic downturn. On-lending terms and conditions,
 disbursement and withdrawal application procedures and institutional agreements were addressed. The
 Bank team also recognized the subproject complexity and limited awareness of the capacity of the project
 developers and PBs. As a result, there were no large-scale resettlements; moreover, the loss of land
 for agriculture and tree crops, and the related sources of income, were compensable. The Bank team also
 addressed the poor safeguard compliance early and implemented property remedy action plans through
 the restructurings. Training on safeguards was provided to the PMB, PBs, the developers and contractors
 to enhance their capacity. Overall, the Bank team's close partnership with the GoV allowed for easy access
 to information, and led to timely decisions and cooperation among stakeholders. The quality of Bank
 supervision is rated highly satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 The M&E design included complex qualitative and quantitative indicators with three PDO indicators and 16
 intermediate results indicators without much variation from appraisal. However, given the project’s theory
 of change, many of those indicators do not appear to be causally or directly linked to the achievement of
 the PDO. Some are adequate and quantifiable indicators (i.e., energy output, installed capacity), potentially
 overlapping (generation capacity constructed or rehabilitated), and ambiguous/difficult to
 measure (institutional improvement indicators such as updating of ACT, adoption of standards). None of
 the indicators had a baseline. PMB was responsible for the performance monitoring and data reporting.


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)




b. M&E Implementation


  Data collection was reported to the PMB from each PB and subproject regularly, which were then
  submitted to the Bank semi-annually. All the indicators included in the results framework were measured
  and collected with minimal delays. However, some were unclear in terms of reliability and quality.
  Comparators were not utilized, and the development impact was unclear for most of the data collected
  despite having full-time staff and consultants monitoring on a daily basis. There were also no targeted
  beneficiaries and the sustainability of the M&E functions and processes is uncertain after project closing.



  Several indicators were adjusted during the restructurings to respond to changing environments and to
  capture results more carefully and accurately. These included E&S PDO target, RE Development
  Strategy, adoption of technical standards for SHPs, E&S guidelines, national RE database, capacity of
  pipeline of RE subprojects target, number of improved or new training courses offered on a cost-sharing
  basis target.



c. M&E Utilization


  M&E findings and project performance were communicated to the relevant stakeholders during
  supervision and were used to make timely decisions and adapt to changing market conditions. For
  example, the first restructuring included a more attractive and fully market-based on-lending mechanism
  in order to attract PBs and developers since the macroeconomic sector has improved dramatically. M&E
  data was used throughout the project implementation and some indicator targets were
  appropriately adjusted through the project restructurings (e.g., capacity of pipeline of RE subprojects
  from 50MW to 25MW). However, the M&E data could have been more actively utilized by adjusting
  target indicators that were exceeded by the mid-term review (MTR) to reflect the increasingly
  favorable market conditions.



  While there were some weaknesses in the design of the indicators, the collection and utilization of M&E
  data was satisfactory, leading to an overall rating of Substantial for M&E quality. However, concrete
  measures are needed to sustain M&E after project closing.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)




a. Safeguards


  The project triggered the following safeguard policies:

          Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)
          Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
          Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10)
          Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
          Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)



  Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01): REDP was classified as a Category FI project, which was
  appropriate for a lending operation to provide on-lending to commercial banks to finance small scale RE
  subprojects. IEG raised with the project team the following question that was unclear from the ICR: Even
  though the project was an FIL instrument, the IEG ICR Review Guidelines (page 65, Box 14.1) do stipulate
  that for Category FI projects, “the financial intermediary must screen each subproject proposed for financing
  and classify it into any one of the three categories: A, B, or C”. The ICR did not disclose this information,
  hence IEG wanted to verify if such classification was completed. The project team clarified that: “…during
  the project implementation the Developers were in charge of the screening to categorize the subprojects
  into A, B, or C category in line with the requirements and guidance provided in the project Environmental
  Safeguards Framework (ESG), and submitted to the Participating Banks (FIs) for review and verification.
  The FIs then were responsible for verifying the information to ensure that it was in compliance with ESG
  requirements using the screening checklist developed in the ESG and to assess if the Developers had met
  all REDP submission requirements. The screening was then further submitted to the PMB under MOIT and
  the WB for further review and approval. Throughout the project screening, all of subprojects were classified
  as B category subprojects.”



  Further, Environmental Management Plans (EMP), Resettlement Plans (RP) and Ethnic Minority Plans (EP)
  were prepared by the beneficiaries and were submitted to the Bank team. Overall, the project experienced
  poor compliance with the environmental safeguard policy in the first few subprojects (ICR, p. 31). A remedy
  action plan was quickly put together for the subprojects that included capacity building for the stakeholders
  and a more tightened monitoring and supervision by the PMB and the Bank team. In addition to the action
  plan, a study on cumulative impacts assessment was undertaken by the Bank to identify and develop
  mitigation measures for accumulated impacts caused by SHPs cascades. The ICR (p. 31) mentioned that
  the environmental safeguard compliance remained a challenge for the project, although at less intensity due
  to the proactivity of mitigation measures in place.



  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): Based on previous experience and assessment of private sector
  SHPs, the MOIT prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and an Ethnic Minority Policy
  Framework, which were applied to all subprojects under REDP. The RPF conforms to this safeguard policy.
  Given the nature of SHPs, the project implementation did not involve significant resettlement and no

                                                                                                 Page 17 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)



  adverse socioeconomic impacts were recorded. The project reallocated less than 50 households and
  approximately 2,500 households were affected in terms of loss of land for agriculture and tree crops, and
  related sources of income. The land acquisition, compensation, livelihood restoration and ethnic minority
  development complied with the RPs and EMDPs. A grievance redress mechanism (GRM) was designed
  and adopted for the communities as well (ICR, p. 30). No major issues arose during project implementation,
  but minor issues such as late compensations, implementation of EMDP, and reporting and documentation
  were identified on time and addressed properly by the developers.



  Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10): The EMPF also conforms to the Indigenous People policy by ensuring the
  development of subprojects that fully respect the dignity, human rights, economies and culture of affected
  ethnic minority people.



  Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37): In terms of dam safety, the Safety of Dams safeguard was applied for some
  of the subprojects. A Dam Safety Panel (DSP) was formed to review and advise the PMB on matters
  relative to the safety of new large dams or high hazard dams. Dam safety and technical aspects were
  closely supervised and verified by the dam safety panel at both appraisal and implementation stages. All
  completed subprojects were reported operating safely following sound operation procedures meeting the
  technical requirements and complying with safeguard requirements (ICR, p. 18).



  Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50): Lastly, the policy on International Waterways was
  triggered at the first restructuring because of the locations of three SHPs, Nam Hoa 1, Nam Hoa 2, and Hoa
  Phu, being on a tributary of an international waterway.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


  Financial Management



  At appraisal (PAD, p. 14), financial management (FM) assessments were completed and concluded that
  the project has adequate FM arrangements acceptable by the Bank. MOIT and BIDV have sufficient staff
  capacity and experience with other WB funded investment projects and have performed satisfactorily. All
  PBs were required to have accounts audited to IFRS. The overall FM risk rating assigned at appraisal was
  Moderate. At project closing, FM arrangements were sound and audited reports were normally submitted
  on time by the PMB except unqualified audited interim financial reports were 6-9 months late due to the
  complexity and lengthy process of consolidating data and assessment to the report (ICR, p. 31).



                                                                                               Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)




   Procurement



   The project followed clear procurement regulations and received sufficient training from the PMB and the
   Bank team. A procurement specialist provided guidance and monitoring in the bid preparations and
   evaluations. The ICR (p. 31) reported that no cases of fraud and corruption were detected. At the first
   project restructuring, an application of up-to-date World Bank Procurement and Consultant Guidelines and
   the removal of thresholds for application of procurement and consultant selection were added to reflect the
   current situation and developments during project implementation.



   Disbursement



   The PBs have adequate staff capacity but still needed training on Bank FM requirements and
   disbursement procedures. Disbursement fell behind due to lengthy review of reimbursable applications by
   the PMB and the delay in submission of reimbursable applications by PBs which impacted implementation
   of subprojects.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other


   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               Based on the harmonized OPCS
                                                                               and IEG guidelines, the overall
                                                                               project outcome is rated highly
Outcome                        Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory
                                                                               satisfactory since REDP met or
                                                                               exceeded its objectives and
                                                                               indicators. IEG recognized the

                                                                                                 Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)



                                                                                    first restructuring was a
                                                                                    response to exogenous market
                                                                                    failures and the second
                                                                                    restructuring was an uptake and
                                                                                    response to the unforeseen
                                                                                    implementation delays due to
                                                                                    reorganization of the MOIT.
                                                                                    The Quality-at-Entry is rated
                                                                                    Satisfactory and the Quality of
                                                                                    Supervision is rated Highly
Bank Performance                 Highly Satisfactory    Satisfactory                Satisfactory. According to the
                                                                                    IEG guidelines, the lower of the
                                                                                    two ratings determines the rating
                                                                                    of overall Bank Performance.
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons



The following lessons are derived from the ICR (p. 33) with some adaptation of language:



1. A country’s enabling policy and regulatory environment is a prerequisite to successful
project implementation. Due to the timely implementation of the ACT and SPPA, the
project achieved favorable results. The project subsequently provided regular updates of the ACT,
which provided transparency and confidence for the private developers to invest in RE development.



2. The project design and stakeholders’ capacity should be complementary when
determining the level of project complexity and role for TA. The project implementation period
was underestimated, thus the TA was significantly delayed in the initial years of the project and
showed first signs of activity only 6 years after project approval. PMB's capacity was
constrained and had difficulty implementing the numerous and complex TA activities. The Bank
team's close supervision as the PMB went through institutional changes made the difference
in achieving the favorable results.



3. The role of the private sector was instrumental in the project's achievement of commercial
sustainability. Initially, it was difficult for the private sector to access financial resources to develop
small-scale RE projects. Undercapitalization issues and few long-term sources of funding make it
difficult for domestic lenders in the long term. Because of the knowledge and capacity created by the

                                                                                                       Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)



REDP, PBs subsequently financed an additional 1,500 MW of private sector-financed SHPs outside
of the REDP lending envelope.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



The ICR provided valuable lessons and ample evidence to merit the sub-ratings given. The use of annexes
presented additional useful information to support the project's achievements. The key factors that affected
implementation and outcomes were thoroughly discussed. The ICR was candid and summarized key findings
well. The lessons were based directly on the project's implementation experience and were
adequately supported by the detailed assessment provided in the ICR. The ICR generally followed the
guidelines in regards to ratings and performance assessment. However, there were some minor shortcomings
in the completeness of data and information in regards to the Quality of M&E. The complex ToC was
constructed to illustrate the causal pathways from the inputs to the outcomes, but some were unclear on how
the outputs are likely to lead to the immediate outcomes.



Other minor inaccuracies of the ICR include: (i) a mismatch of original project cost of US$320.3 million (ICR, p.
2) and US$ 318.05 million in Annex 3. (ICR, p. 47); (ii) the second PDO indicator on Annex 1 showed actual of
11,139 instead of 11,193 GWh/year; and (iii) the total annual output (GWh) for the 16 completed subprojects
totaled 1,064 GWh (Annex 8. List of SHPs financed by REDP, p. 55) not 1,609 GWh as reported in the report.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 21 of 22
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
VN-Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238)




                                                                                 Page 22 of 22
