     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESRP (P131659)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021616

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P131659                                   ESRP

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Comoros                                   Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H8660                                 30-Apr-2017                                           4,495,613.08

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Sep-2013                               30-Apr-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            5,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             5,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         4,495,613.08                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Fernando Manibog           Peter Nigel Freeman          Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   The project development objective (PDO) is to contribute to improvement in the electricity sector's commercial
   and financial performance. (Financing Agreement dated September 24, 2013, Schedule 1, page 5)




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESRP (P131659)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   The project had three main components:

   Component 1: Assistance for the commercial and financial performance recovery of the state-
   owned electricity enterprises

   (appraisal estimate, US$3.5 million; revised cost, US$4.15 million; actual cost, US$3.91 million)

   This component covered mainly covered MA-MWE (Water and Electricity Utility in Comoros) and EDA
   (Anjouan Power Utility). The main activities included the hiring of external experts as senior managers to
   lead the commercial and financial restructuring of the utilities. The component also sought to enhance
   commercial and financial performance through the purchase and installation of management and
   information systems (MIS) in these utilities, 80 units of network metering equipment, 4,000 boxes to protect
   customer meters, and fuel metering equipment for fuel tanks. The component also financed: (a) A Poverty
   and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) to assess the potential impacts of electricity payment enforcement; and
   (b) communication and awareness campaign to address negative practices within MA-MWE and among its
   customers.

   Component 2: Electricity sector governance

   (appraisal estimate, US$0.90 million; revised cost, US$0.10 million; actual cost, US$0.04 million)

   This component was intended to provide technical assistance, capacity-building, and studies related to
   energy policy and planning, legal and regulatory framework, development of a new tariff and subsidy
   structure, as well as the framework for adjustments.

   Component 3: Project management

   (appraisal estimate, US$0.6 million; revised cost, US$0.75 million; actual cost, US$0.57 million)

   This component supported the overall management, coordination and monitoring of the project
   implementation activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates




                                                                                                       Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESRP (P131659)



   Project Cost. The original amount approved was US$5.00 million, of which US$4.50 was actually
   disbursed.

   Financing. An IDA credit was provided for this project through an Investment Project Financing (IPF)
   instrument.

   Borrower Contribution. The Borrower did not provide any contribution.

   Dates. The project was approved on September 6, 2013 and declared effective seven months later on
   March 13, 2014. A mid-term review was conducted on October 27, 2015. The project was restructured on
   March 2, 2017, i.e., about two months before the original closing date of April 30, 2017, when only about
   half of the approved IDA financing had been disbursed. The Level 2 restructuring involved changes in
   components and costs as well as the implementation schedule, adjustments in the results framework,
   reallocation among disbursement categories, and extension of the closing date. The original closing date of
   April 30, 2017 was extended by one year and the project closed on April 30, 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context

At project appraisal in 2013, Comoros was a fragile country with huge development challenges. This
condition remains today, although its poverty rate is low compared to its regional peers. Its gross domestic
product (GDP) per capita was US$645 in 2015, and the country ranked 159 out of 188 countries on the
2015 Human Development Index. The country’s economy is small, undiversified, and constrained by poor
public service quality, including electricity. Since its independence in 1975, Comoros has experienced 20
coups or attempted coups, frequent changes in government, and a strong separatist movement in Anjouan,
all of which have contributed to political fragility. The country’s weak institutional capacity persists as a
major bottleneck in the ability of the Government of Comoros (GOC) to implement development projects
and deliver basic services. When the project was appraised, the country had just emerged from a program
of international debt relief, hence the Government and international financial institutions were putting a high
priority on the commercial and financial performance of state-owned enterprises (SOEs). At appraisal, the
country’s moderate growth path was being constrained by a severe crisis of high costs and extreme
unreliability in the electricity sector.

Sector Context

The two state-owned electricity providers are:

(1) MA-MWE - the Water and Electricity Utility in Comoros (Gestion de l’Eau et de l’Electricité aux
Comores), which provides electricity to the islands of Grande Comore and Mohéli); and



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       ESRP (P131659)



(2) EDA - the Power Utility in Anjouan (Electricité d’Anjouan), which serves only the island of Anjouan.

At appraisal, these utilities were able to provide electricity services only a few hours per day. Most
households depended on kerosene and candles for lighting and spent a large part of their income on
batteries to power radios and small appliances. Health centers were unable to provide adequate medical
care. Power cuts made water supply unreliable even in the capital. Businesses remained uncompetitive
because of unreliable supply despite electricity tariffs of over US¢20 per kWh that were significantly above
the regional average of US¢15 per kWh.

The country’s decades of fragility, very limited institutional capacity, and lack of investments have resulted
in high electricity costs and dismal service delivery. High costs are the result of high system losses, poor
collection rates, costly generation, and poor governance. The electricity SOEs are in severe financial
distress: two thirds of electricity generated remain unpaid, leading to a steady decline in cash flow, lower
fuel purchases than needed, expensive diesel-based power generation, deteriorating operations &
maintenance, saturated and poorly maintained transmission and distribution infrastructure, and a vicious
circle of consumers unwilling to pay due to poor service.

Government Strategy

The project’s objective is highly relevant to the GOC’s strategy. Based on a World Bank-supported energy
diagnostic, GOC developed and adopted its energy sector strategy in the Sector Policy Note entitled
Document de politique de l’énergie électrique et des produits pétroliers de l’Union des Comores. The Note
highlighted the need for (a) comprehensive corporate governance reforms at MA-MWE; (b) investments in
renewable generation including micro-hydro, wind power, and geothermal energy to reduce the reliance on
thermal power generation; (c) reforms of the sector legal and regulatory framework including on tariffs and
purchasing power parity; (d) upgrading of petroleum storage facilities to improve safety and security of
supply. The PDOs remain relevant to GoC’s Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Sustainable Development
2015–2019 (Stratégie de Croissance Accélérée et de Développement Durable), which asserts that the
country’s difficulty in attracting investors is partly due to the recurrent shortages of water and electricity.

Bank Strategy

The project is the World Bank’s first financial engagement in the energy sector of Comoros. The PDO is
highly relevant to the latest Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY2014–2017, extended to FY2019,
which indicates that the acute power supply situation is due to several factors “all linked to the operational
and technical performance of MA-MWE” (page 23). The CPS aimed to tackle the commercial and financial
performance of MA-MWE under Pillar 2 (‘Shared growth and increased employment’), CPS Objective 9
(‘Improvement in the commercial and financial performance of the electricity sector’).


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 16
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  ESRP (P131659)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To contribute to the improvement in the electricity sector's commercial and financial performance.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change

               In assessing the project’s theory of change, it is important to take into account the respective roles of the
               main international donors to Comoros. The African Development Bank has taken the lead role in financing
               physical infrastructure, mostly through new generators and grid rehabilitation. The World Bank was to lead
               the support for improvements in utility performance. Finally, the European Union was to help in developing
               small-scale solar capacity. Within the World Bank’s specifically defined role, the project’s technical assistance
               activities (external experts, MIS, metering equipment, protection of meters, awareness campaigns) were
               expected to help in specifically addressing electricity theft and unpaid bills. In turn, positive results in these
               areas would be expected to lead to helping mitigate massive revenue losses at the utility level and relieve the
               fiscal strain at the sector level. Figure 1 of the ICR articulates clearly, logically and credibly the causal chain
               between the project’s inputs and its intermediate and final outcomes, although it would have been more
               complete if the constraining factors had been also indicated. For example, more effective metering and an
               operational MIS could be directly linked to improved collection rates and reduced system losses. Attribution is
               also strong, given the aforementioned roles assigned to the various aid agencies, with the World Bank
               specifically designated to help address commercial and financial performance issues.

               Outputs

               The following outputs were fully achieved as targeted:

                     A commercial and financial recovery plan was prepared. Correspondingly, commercial and financial
                      software were procured and installed, and made operational.

                      4,000 prepaid meters were installed. This target was added when the project was restructured.

                     The Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) was completed. The study resulted in a better
                      understanding of the social impacts of electricity outages. It also expanded public knowledge on
                      issues related to social imbalances that are associated with tariff increases, and the undifferentiated
                      enforcement of arrears payment. The PSIA was instrumental in enabling senior managers to advocate
                      successfully against unpopular measures, e.g., those that would result in small revenue impacts but
                      have significant negative effects on the poorest and most vulnerable households.

               The following outputs were partially achieved:

                     Only the prepaid meters were installed, out of the original target of 80 network meters and 4,000
                      protection boxes, and 1 fuel metering equipment. The rest of the equipment was dropped during the
                      project’s restructuring due to the reduction in project funding that resulted from the depreciation of the
                      SDR against the Euro (ICR, page 16).




                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ESRP (P131659)




       Only a subsidy study was completed. A tariff study, the drafting of an energy sector policy, and new
       planning processes were dropped during restructuring, in order to enable more funds to be reallocated
       to priority activities linked to improving commercial and financial performance. Several activities that
       had not yet started were also dropped, including a study on the institutional and regulatory setting, a
       study to set up a methodology for the collection of energy statistics, a study to review the fuel supply
       chain and diversification operations, as well as a communication campaign for the Ministry of Energy,
       These activities originally comprised about 20 percent (US$0.9 million) of the original total cost, which
       at restructuring was adjusted to US$0.10 million.

Outcomes

The following outcomes exceeded their targets:

      The combined cash recovery index of MA-MWE and EDA increased by more than 50 percent. Total
       cash recovery increased from 30.25 percent to 48.90 percent (49.40 percent for Grand Comore and
       43.00 percent for Mohéli), which is 5.2 percentage points higher than the expected level of 43.70
       percent based on the project’s combined targets on collection and electricity losses. (ICR,
       paragraph23, page 14)

       The collection rate of MA-MWE (based on a sliding 12-month average) improved significantly. From a
       baseline of 55.0 percent, the cash collected as a percentage of billed electricity achieved 77.4 percent
       at project closing, thus exceeding the target of 70.0 percent. For MA-MWE, the commercial results for
       the year 2017 show a collection rate at 78.3 percent on Grand Comore and 67.6 percent on Mohéli,
       hence the average of 77.4 percent for the company overall. The overall result is 7.4 percentage points
       higher than the target. (ICR, paragraph 23, page 14) These financial performance improvements
       resulted from: (i) changes in commercial procedures; (ii) the installation of 4,000 mobile payment-
       compatible, tamper-proof prepaid meters; (iii) institutionalization of GOC’s direct payment to MA-MWE
       for electricity used by the administration and public services; (iv) debt settlement and settlement of
       cross-arrears between the GOC-owned fuel supply company, MA-MWE, and the State; (v) MIS
       implementation; and (vi) a load management system, which helped to improve client relations and bill
       payment discipline.

      The electricity losses per year in the project area was also reduced above target. Compared to a
       baseline of 45.0 percent and a target of 37.5 percent, electricity losses were reduced by almost a
       quarter to 36.8 percent. For MA-MWE, the commercial results for the year 2017 show a system loss
       rate at 36.8 percent on Grand Comore and 36.4 percent in Mohéli, averaging 36.8 for the company
       overall. This result is 0.7 percentage points lower than the target. (ICR, paragraph 23, page 15) These
       improvements resulted from changes in commercial procedures—including improved monitoring of
       large medium-voltage customers—and MIS deployment at MA-MWE.

       The number of direct beneficiaries—defined as the number of MA-MWE and EDA household
       electricity consumers—was exceeded significantly. Compared to the target of 200,000 consumers (of
       which 50 percent female), 354,613 households benefited (while meeting the 50 percent female target).

The following outcome was dropped at restructuring:



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         ESRP (P131659)




                            Although the subsidy study was completed, the adoption of new utility governance arrangements and
                             tariff and subsidy framework was not implemented under the project. GOC decided to drop this
                             indicator from the project since associated measures would be pursued under another project
                             financed by the African Development Bank. The funds for these activities were reallocated to the
                             project’s component to strengthen commercial and financial performance, thus enhancing the results
                             (both outputs and outcomes) that were fully achieved or exceeded, as indicated above.

                      The ICR (paragraph 25, page 16) added two outcomes that were not part of the original Results Framework:

                            Government subsidies required to maintain adequate supply were reduced as a result of the
                             improvement of MA-MWE’s commercial performance. The State’s combined explicit and implicit
                             subsidies to the utility—that is, the sum of direct subsidies and residual losses absorbed by the utility
                             was equivalent to 0.4 percent of GDP on average during 2015–17—were much lower than the level of
                             1.7 percent of GDP on average during 2011–13 observed at appraisal.

                             The additional cash flow available for fuel purchases allowed MA-MWE to almost double power supply
                             over the period of implementation. Power supply increased from 39 GWh to 69 GWh, bringing power
                             supply much closer to the economy’s needs and reducing the share of unserved demand.



                      Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale


Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial


      5. Efficiency


Economic Analysis

At the project’s completion, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was calculated at 18 percent and the net
present value (NPV) at US$1.2 million using a 12 percent discount rate (the NPV is US$3.8 million at 6 percent
discount rate). This exceeds the appraisal estimate of 16 percent EIRR and NPV of US$0.6 million NPV using a
12 percent discount rate. The project’s main economic benefit is greater energy efficiency, with the improved
revenues collection raising the actual price paid by users per kWh, which in turn provides incentives for more
efficient use of electricity. The economic analysis at both the appraisal and completion stages assumed that the
change in the collection rate comprised (a) two-thirds resulting from a purely financial transfer from existing
consumers to MA-MWE and (b) one-third resulting from more efficient energy use, thus making incremental

                                                                                                                        Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ESRP (P131659)



supply available for users who would not have been served otherwise. The ICR (paragraph 32, page 18)
recognizes that institutional and operational factors may have contributed into the improvements in bill collection
and points out that it is not technically possible to assess the exact contribution of efficiency gains to the
increased collection rate. The main financial benefit of the project is to restore payment discipline, resulting in an
incremental revenue transfer from electricity users to MA-MWE, which has made MA-MWE less dependent on
Government subsidies. The project’s contribution to a significantly higher power supply has enabled MA-MWE to
acquire larger volumes of fuel for production. Consistent with gains in end-use efficiency, the country’s overall
growth in electricity consumption has slowed down to 4 percent per year during the 2013–2017 period,
compared to 9 percent per year during 2009–2013. In summary, with a relatively small amount of financing, the
project has achieved significant commercial and financial improvements.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency

Project implementation was significantly delayed. Procurement was slowed down by the new government’s
frequent and disruptive changes of the senior management in MA-MWE. The submission of critical financial
reports and commercial and performance data were delayed due to the absence of an administrative and
financial senior manager at MA-MWE. The disruption from the frequent changes in MA-MWE’s senior
management also resulted in major delays in implementing the Recovery and Development Plan (RDP), which
remained incomplete. These delays led to the necessity of extending the project's closing date.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        16.00
 Appraisal                                                   75.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        18.00
 ICR Estimate                                                80.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the project’s objective is high. The efficacy of achieving the PDO is substantial. Efficiency is
substantial. The overall project outcome is rated satisfactory.

This ICR Review did not apply a split rating, in line with the IEG Guidelines (page 47) indicating that “If activities
were re-aligned or resources were re-allocated to change the target or beneficiary coverage, and the ICR made
a convincing case that the level of ambition or difficulty was similar, then this can support a decision not to apply
a split rating and instead assess the project based on objectives under the revised coverage or the revised
definition of beneficiaries.” In this project’s case, the PDO was not changed, the level of ambition was the same

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ESRP (P131659)



(with governance-related goals pursued under an African Development Bank-financed project instead), and
resource realignment was the main effect of the project’s restructuring. Moreover, the main thrust of this
relatively small project’s PDO was to contribute to improvements in commercial and financial performance, not
to achieve major sector reforms per se, as was reflected in the respective shares of the various components.

That said, the ICR’s split rating is valid in its assumptions and methodology, which led to the same result that
the overall project outcome rating is satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical Risks. The project’s main achievement—the new MIS and commercial management system for
MA-MWE—is at significant risk because the one-year duration of the IT provider’s maintenance warranty is
insufficient. Even a small incident could force the utility to roll back the newly installed IT system and
infrastructure. Given the limited local capacity, the MIS maintenance warranty clearly needed to continue
beyond the project’s April 2018 closing date. However, the Bank’s operational policy does not allow for an
advance payment of the warranty extension against the provision of a bank guarantee by the software
provider to secure satisfactory performance. There was no clear resolution to this issue by the time the
project closed.

The sustainability of project results is also threatened by the departure of international experts who played
critical roles in applying best practices to operational and commercial procedures in the utilities. The experts
departed and were not replaced due to the lack of Government funds.

Commercial Risk. The utilities continue to rely on costly fossil fuels for power generation, which makes their
commercial and financial performance vulnerable to cuts in Government fuel subsidies (as in 2015).

Institutional Risk. The utilities continue to lack adequately trained staff. There is also a persistent lack of
transparency and competition in the recruitment of senior managers, which could hinder commercial and
financial performance improvements.

Governance Risk. There is slow progress in institutionalizing good sector governance, which is a major risk
since some of the project’s achievements could be reversed by incoherent investment planning and
implementation.

These risks may be partially mitigated through a planned follow-up project with an IDA allocation of US$20–
36 million. The project would finance some transition from a costly fossil fuel-based generation infrastructure
toward the greater use of renewable energy sources as well as network upgrades to further improve MA-
MWE’s financial and operational performance.




                                                                                                        Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESRP (P131659)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The World Bank assisted in preparing an energy sector diagnostic in 2011-12. The project’s design was
  focused and straightforward, focusing on key sector bottlenecks, and tailoring the activities and targeted
  results accordingly. It adequately took into account the fragile country environment, the respective areas
  of focus of the various development partners, and the client’s limited implementation capacity. The
  design was also adaptive and highly flexible, reflecting the best practices for operations in FCV contexts.
  The specific features included: (a) a realistic selection of objectives to facilitate strong and focused client
  ownership; (b) a deliberately lean program focused on billing and bill collections; and (c) close attention to
  implementation arrangements.

  However, there were two moderate shortcomings. First, governance risks were underestimated at the
  design stage. There were inadequate mitigating measures to address the failure in the sector’s
  governance framework when the Government did not meet the commitments it made during project
  preparation. As an example, the ICR (paragraph 51, pages 22-23) indicates that "after a first meeting of
  the Steering Committee in June 2015 and the signature of the amendment of the performance contract
  between MA-MWE and the GoC in March 2016, the Government did not monitor the execution of the
  contract or called for new meetings of the SC" ,which resulted in delays to several key activities under
  Component 2. Second, the project was also overambitious in its timelines for procurement and
  implementation. A less ambitious approach would have been more appropriate, given the limited project
  funding, MA-MWE’s inadequate implementation capacity, DGEME’s weaknesses in sector governance.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


 According to the ICR (paragraph 69, page 26): “The World Bank responded to emerging issues through
 just-in-time advice, technical assistance…” For example, the PSIA resulted in several benefits, as
 described in Section 4 above on Efficacy. The project’s level 2 project restructuring and one-year extension
 was timely. The World Bank alerted the client and proposed constructive solutions on the following issues:
 (a) the disruption and delays in procurement and management decisions due to the frequent changes in
 the head of the PIU and MA-MWE’s senior management team; (b) the negative impact of the cutbacks of
 state fuel subsidies on electricity supply in 2015 and 2016; (c) MA-MWE’s financial vulnerability due to the
 lack of incentives for the independent contractor of the new diesel generators to minimize fuel
 consumption; and (d) high electricity cost of production and possible additional World Bank’s engagement
 in system rehabilitation and solar photovoltaic installations. Supervision missions were held twice a year
 and included the right skills mix.

 The Bank’s field presence increased significantly during project implementation, which facilitated closer
 implementation support. Starting initially with only a local operations specialist and a consultant, the
 country office expanded to include four staff, which improved the Bank’s policy dialogue and project

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESRP (P131659)



 implementation follow-up. Issues were identified in a timely manner and time-bound action plans were
 recorded in the Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) and aide-memoires to facilitate follow-
 up. The two TTL transitions did not negatively affect the project.

 Global Practice collaboration within the Bank was also useful. Cross-sectoral expertise was brought in to
 assist in SOE debt management and public expenditure management, which helped improve financial
 management at MA-MWE.

 The ICR (paragraph 72, page 27) indicates that “the project was adequately supervised despite
 exceptionally difficult circumstances of project implementation in a volatile and disruptive governance
 context.” This included four different project coordinators, four Managing Directors (MD), four commercial
 directors, three technical directors, and three Chief Financial Officers of the utility. The MD and project
 coordinator changes were particularly disruptive because they slowed down ongoing utility reforms and led
 to month-long interruptions of procurement activities as the Government insisted that only MA-MWE’s MD
 could be accredited to sign contracts and procurement documents. In addition, donor coordination was
 also weak. Some activities originally under the project were shifted to other donors, but according to the
 ICR (paragraph 53, page 23): "The anticipated mutual reinforcement of the project’s commercial and
 financial results and AfDB’s technical improvement (rehabilitation of generation, fuel storage, and
 distribution network) never materialized."



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s indicators were adequate and selected appropriately. The M&E framework captured relevant
 results. However, its design would have benefited from the inclusion of intermediate indicators related to
 MA-MWE’s financials. (ICR, paragraph 58, page 24) Although commercial performance and governance
 were adequately captured in the results indicators, financial performance was only indirectly
 covered. Moreover, the PAD erroneously defined the results indicator for project beneficiaries as
 household connections; instead, the target figure should be individual beneficiaries, which is a much larger
 number than household connections.



b. M&E Implementation
  Despite limited data availability, the measurement of project implementation progress based on
  commercial performance indicators was timely and adequate. All other indicators were qualitative and




                                                                                                  Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESRP (P131659)



  binary (mostly ‘Yes/No’), which the PIU measured continuously and adequately. (ICR, paragraph 59,
  page 25)




c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E framework regularly collected data which was not previously available, thus significantly
  improving data availability for decision making, both for GOC and the Bank. This is especially true for the
  utility’s commercial performance indicators. (ICR, paragraph 60, page 25)



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project did not trigger any Bank safeguard policies. It was assigned a Category C for environmental
   assessment purposes.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


   At the project’s closing date, financial management arrangements were compliant, all audit reports have
   been received, and the latest independent audit of the project’s financial statements, expenses and
   balance sheet received and unqualified opinion. Earlier, the project had faced delays in the submission of
   project audits. The last ISR, for example, rated financial management risk as Unsatisfactory because of
   delays in the submission of project audits and concerns regarding the risk of failing to implement the
   project’s budget plan in the absence of back-up project management and financial management persons
   with the authority to sign off and provide continuity in PIU’s daily operations. According to the ICR
   (paragraph 63, page 25), these issues were resolved by the time the project closed.



   Procurement. Project procurement complied with the Bank’s guidelines. However, procurement was slow
   and caused significant delays in implementation. Although the PIU’s procurement staff were training in the
   Bank’s guidelines for contract preparation and bidding, delays nonetheless resulted from the frequent

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESRP (P131659)



   changes in the head of the PIU, the lack of staff, and GOC’s multiple levels of approvals required for most
   contracts. According to the ICR (paragraph 64, page 25), despite the delays, there were no issues of
   procurement non-compliance during project implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


   A positive, unintended impact was that--aided by lower global fuel prices--the project helped to create
   a significant fiscal space by reducing the need for budgetary transfers to state-owned enterprises while
   maintaining the ability of the utilities to operate. According to the ICR (paragraph 42, pages 20-21): "The
   sum of the GoC’s subsidies to the utility and MA-MWE’s losses equivalent to 0.4 percent during 2015–17
   were much lower than the level of 1.7 percent during 2011–13. This freed up fiscal resources to spend on
   human development and other GoC priorities."



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons



The following lessons were derived from the project’s implementation experience (with some
paraphrasing by IEG):



The World Bank’s analytical engagement and strong client buy-in are particularly important
in fragile and low-capacity countries. MA-MWE’s Recovery and Development Plan (RDP),
prepared during appraisal and adopted by the GOC soon after the beginning of the project, ensured
that both scope and design of the project were targeting the most critical levers for project success.
Moreover, the key parameters of the RDP subsequently served as the basis for the performance

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESRP (P131659)



contract between MA-MWE and the GOC adopted a year later. Without the analytical foundation and
official adoption of the RDP, the project would neither have the needed relevance nor the client buy-
in to successfully pursue the most critical utility reforms.



Simple, well-targeted interventions based on proven solutions to critical operational
challenges can have significant positive impacts within a short time frame, even in the most
difficult country context. The simple project design and avoidance of activities that are not critical
to achieving the PDO were instrumental in achieving results within a difficult governance context. An
even more focused approach exclusively aimed at utility governance may have allowed a faster and
more effective achievement of the PDO.



If adequately communicated and targeted, measures to reduce electricity theft and
nonpayment can yield large financial benefits without triggering significant opposition from
vested interests. The project’s support of targeted communication campaigns was key in MA-
MWE’s successful reduction of nontechnical losses.



Women’s groups can be effective in fostering positive change by appealing to social norms
and individual responsibilities, especially in an FCV context with weak enforcement of
property rights and chronically poor payment behavior for public services. The engagement
and empowerment of women’s groups to lead campaigns against electricity theft and meter fraud
was particularly powerful within the context of the matrilineal Comorian society.



If it is not explicitly addressed, the lack of provisions for IDA-funded warrantee contracts and
maintenance services that extend adequately beyond a project’s closing date can become a
major threat to project sustainability. The World Bank’s inability to finance long-term warrantee
contracts or maintenance services beyond a project’s closing date is a major limitation that needs to
be addressed appropriately during project preparation. Warrantees of MIS and related hardware
typically last 5–10 years, hence projects must either be extended accordingly or governments have
to credibly ringfence the necessary funds in their budgets. However, for typical FCV environments
such as the Comoros, the latter is not an option due to the perceived risk of Government default on
contract payments.



In an FCV context, the intervention of resident experts can make the difference between
project success and failure. The intervention of experts must be well prepared and carefully
managed to ensure: (a) the definition of a robust executive mandate including decision-making
authority and detailed key performance indicators; (b) the recruitment and embedding of the right
experts within the client organization; and (c) robust provisions for retaining experts and transferring
knowledge. Teams tend to underestimate the complexity of these challenges while overestimating
the capacity of PIUs to meet these requirements. In this project, the experts’ value added was

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ESRP (P131659)



reduced by GOC’s categorical refusal to grant experts more than just an advisory mandate. The lack
of a managerial role made the experts vulnerable to the frequent change of MA-MWE’s senior
management. Given the PIU’s lengthy recruitment and unsuccessful attempts to hire financial and
technical resident experts, the services of a specialized recruitment agency were utilized. Although
costly, suitable experts were identified sooner, contracts were negotiated faster, and the experts
were retained or quickly exchanged as needed.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



The ICR was well prepared and thorough. The country, sector and FCV context was well articulated and
provided solid justification for the project. The ICR was evaluative and candid in its analytical approach. A large
emphasis was placed on providing concrete evidence behind the intermediate and final outcomes; in this
regard, it identified two additional outcomes that went beyond those in the original results framework. The figure
and tables provided were useful in helping understand this relatively small but complex institutional
strengthening and capacity-building project. Albeit long, the ICR put a lot of effort in delineating the project’s
implementation record and how specific issues evolved and were resolved. The ICR’s format and internal
substance within each section complied generally with the Bank’s guidelines on ICR preparation. The lessons,
particularly those related to the Bank’s convening role and the importance of cross-sectoral collaboration (i.e.,
between the Bank’s energy and social protection sectoral staff) were valuable and had broad replicability in
FCV setting.

Annex 3, page 38 of the ICR did not provide the original amounts per component at the time of approval,
although the figures were on Table 1, page 9 of the main text.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
ESRP (P131659)




                                                                  Page 16 of 16
