     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kiribati Adaptation Program - Phase III (P112615)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021745

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P112615                                      Kiribati Adaptation Program - Phase III

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Kiribati                                     Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-10875,TF-11351,TF-11448,TF-               31-Dec-2018                                          11,561,597.92
 11818,TF-A5560

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Sep-2011                                  31-Dec-2018

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              11,567,162.00                                   11,567,162.00

 Revised Commitment                               11,561,597.92                                   11,561,597.92

 Actual                                           11,561,597.92                                   11,561,597.92




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl               Fernando Manibog              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (p. iv) and the Global Environment Trust Fund Grant Agreement
   of October 14, 2011 (p. 6) the objective of the project was “to improve the resilience of Kiribati to the impacts
   of climate change on freshwater supply and coastal infrastructure.”




                                                                                                     Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kiribati Adaptation Program - Phase III (P112615)



   The project was the third phase of a multi-year program supported by the World Bank. The first phase of the
   Kiribati Adaptation Program (KAP) was implemented from 2002 to 2005 and the second phase was
   implemented from 2006 to 2011.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component C1: Improve water resource use and management (appraisal estimate US$4.4 million,
   actual US$5.4 million): This component was to finance the following activities: i) expand the installation of
   groundwater abstraction systems in North Tarawa based on investigations and community consultation
   work completed under KAP II; ii) detect leakage and repair real losses; iii) expand the program of installing
   rainwater harvesting systems on public buildings for community use that was started under KAP II; and iv)
   improve the legislative and regulatory framework and governance model for water resources management
   with a focus on improved management and protection of the water reserves in Bonriki and Buota.

   Component C2: Increase coastal resilience (appraisal estimate US$2.7 million, actual US$2.6
   million): This component was to finance the following activities: i) implement further works at priority sites
   identified and started under KAP II; ii) continue to further build the capability of the Ministry of Public Works
   and Utilities (MPWU) capability in coastal assessment, options analysis, design and construction through
   the appointment of a Senior Civil Engineer seconded to MPWU; iii) develop skills in coastal infrastructure
   asset management; and iv) continue/expand the mangrove planting program commenced under KAP III.

   Component C3: Strengthen the Capacity to Manage the Effects of Climate Change and Natural
   Hazards (appraisal estimate US$2.1 million, actual US$2.1 million): This component was to finance the
   following activities: i) providing additional support to the Strategic Risk Management Unit (SRMU) to better
   undertake its role with respect to Climate Change Adaptation (CCA) and Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR)
   coordination, integration and policy harmonization functions; ii) preparing coastal management policy and
   locally managed adaptation planning; iii) implementing communications and media activities relating to CCA
   and DRR over the duration of the project; iv) maintaining and continuation of populating the GoK’s website
   with KAP III outputs, stories and general information; and v) operating a small grants scheme for CCA and
   DRR activities at community level with an agreed proportion of activities increasingly identified through the
   locally managed adaptation plans.

   Component C4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (appraisal estimate US$1.5 million,
   actual US$1.4 million): This component was to finance the establishment and operation of an
   appropriately staffed Project Management Unit (PMU), audit of the project’s financial systems and results,
   independent review of the project progress and achievements at the time the project has achieved roughly
   50% disbursement of funds, and monitoring of project implementation progress and other key performance




                                                                                                        Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kiribati Adaptation Program - Phase III (P112615)



   indicators, end of project review of the project achievements and final verification of the indicators from the
   Results Framework.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$10.8 million. Actual cost was US$11.62 million.

   Financing: The project was to be financed by a Global Environment Facility Least Developed Country
   Fund (GEF LDCF) in the amount of US$3 million (actual disbursement was US$2.9 million), Japan Policy
   and Human Resources Development Fund in the amount of US$1.8 million (which was fully disbursed),
   Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) in the amount of US$900,000 (which was
   fully disbursed), and the Australian government in the amount of US$4.85 million (which was increased by
   US$0.85 million during the 2017 restructuring and actually disbursed US$5.4 million).

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$250,000. Actual contribution was US$53,000.
   According to the Bank team (June 25, 2019) significant savings were realized in project administrative
   costs, and the full planned amount of Borrower’s in-kind contribution was not needed.

   Dates: The project was restructured twice:

         On January 11, 2016 the project was restructured to: i) adapt the Results Framework through
          revising or introducing new indicators to better measure desired outcomes, deletion of some
          indicators, and modification of yearly targets to better reflect realistic implementation conditions and
          progress; ii) addition of an extension to the President’s office building as part of Component 3; iii)
          extension of the project’s closing date by 18 months from August 31, 2016 to February 28, 2018 to
          utilize project savings resulting from favorable exchange rate movements.
         On August 3, 2017 the project was restructured to: i) scale up existing activities on water network
          improvement, resilience fund grants, and capacity building for the lead implementing agency; (ii)
          revise the Results Framework to effectively capture the outcomes associated with the scale-up; (iii)
          allow inclusion of a new activity, the development of a Long-Term Coastal Security Strategy; and (iv)
          extend the closing date from February 28, 2018 to December 31,2018 to align the closing date of all
          funding sources.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Kiribati is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to the effects of climate change. The country’s
capacity to respond to climate change related risks is impacted by low atolls, isolated location, small land
area separated by vast oceans, high population concentration, and the costs of providing basic services.
The rise of the sea-level and natural disasters such as drought and weather fluctuations pose significant
and direct additional threats to sectors and resources central to human and national development. Kiribati’s
remote location and many small islands impose a significant economic challenge. At the time of project
appraisal in 2010, Kiribati had the lowest gross national per capita income in the region of US$2,090 and


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Kiribati Adaptation Program - Phase III (P112615)



               one of the highest rates of poverty with 22 percent of the population in extreme poverty and 66 percent at
               risk of falling into extreme poverty. Exports of marine products and income from fishing license account for
               approximately 10 to 20 percent and 20 to 25 percent, respectively, of the Gross National Product (GNP).
               The Kiribati Sustainable Development Plan (2008-2011) estimated that without adaptation to climate
               change, Kiribati could face approximately US$8 to US$16 million a year (approximately six percent of
               annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP) at appraisal) in climate change related damages by 2050.

               The objective of the project is in line with the National Adaptation Program of Action which was adopted by
               the government in 2007 and identified water resources, coastal zone management, and community
               resilience as key priorities. The project’s objective also supported the Kiribati Development Plan (2016-
               2019), which identified climate change as the long-term issue threatening the sustainability of the country’s
               economic development. The project contributed to the Plan’s key performance areas on environment
               (coastal resilience) and infrastructure (protection of water resources and improvement of fresh water
               supply). The project’s objective also supported Kiribati’s Climate Change Policy (2018), which identified
               coastal protection and infrastructure, water security, environmental sustainability and resilience, and
               disaster risk management as priorities. Furthermore, the project’s objective is also in line with the Bank’s
               Pacific Islands Regional Partnership Framework (FY2017-FY2021), which emphasized the importance of
               protecting incomes and livelihoods, through strengthened resilience to natural disasters and climate
               change.

               The project’s objective was overly ambitious in terms of scope and geographic coverage. According to the
               ICR (p. 23) the project benefited from the Bank’s decade long involvement with the government to address
               climate change impacts.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the resilience of Kiribati to the impacts of climate change on freshwater supply:

                             Rationale
                             The project’s theory of change established a valid causal chain between the project’s provision of additional
                             groundwater abstraction and water harvesting systems and the project outcome of improving fresh water
                             supply because those project activities would increase the number of people who would gain access to more
                             sources of water supply. The project outcome on improved water supply resilience can be partly attributed to
                             this Phase III project, since earlier interventions under KAP I and KAP II already provided inputs and outputs
                             related to groundwater abstraction and water harvesting systems, which were expanded under Phase III.



                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kiribati Adaptation Program - Phase III (P112615)



The project output of water transmission rehabilitation was causally and directly linked to the project outcome
of improved resilience in fresh water supply because the rehabilitation activity would decrease leakage and
thus increase the number of people with permanent access to pressurized water. The project’s outputs on
construction of seawalls completed on South Tarawa and coastline protected by mangroves was causally and
directly linked to the project outcome of increased amount of people and assets protected from coastal
erosion, flooding, and storm damage.

This Theory of Change applies to the two PDOs. The PAD did not include a Theory of Change.



Outputs (the ICRR only mentions targets when they were included in the ICR):

      Three groundwater abstraction galleries at the Immaculate Heart College, the Notoue village, and the
         Tabonibara village, were completed as planned.
      Health and hygiene training programs for beneficiaries were implemented by the Ministry of Health
         and Medical Services (MoHMS) and Operation & Maintenance trainings of village-based committees
         were implemented by the Ministry of Infrastructure and Sustainable Energy (MISE).
        Six rainwater harvesting systems were built at faith-based and public buildings and community halls in
         North Tarawa.
        A large-scale rainwater harvesting system, with a storage capacity of 300,000 liters, was constructed
         in Buota, North Tarawa.
        Collection roofs over the tanks, in-line ultraviolet treatment and on-demand, solar-powered pumping
         system and associated reticulation and tap-stands to serve the adjacent five villages were
         constructed.
        The Resilience Fund for community-led small adaptation grants financed the construction of (a) 328
         rainwater harvesting tanks (ranging from 5,000 to 10,500 liter volume), and (b) 36 solar and Tamana
         pump systems (simple hand-powered system made using plastic tubes that can greatly reduce water
         contamination by allowing pumping from closed wells), thus providing 14.2 m³ / day to approximately
         13,400 people in 70 community groups.
        The secondary distribution networks were replaced: laying of 4,602 meters of new pipes, surpassing
         the target of 3,000 meters; installing 438 tap-stands and water meters, surpassing the target of 180
         meters, and replacing a 20 m³ storage tank, fittings, and valves.



Outcomes:

      The number of people with access to improved water sources rose from 5,000 people in 2017 to
       12,780 people in 2018, surpassing the target of 11,000 people.
      The number of women provided with access to improved water resources increased from 2,500
       women in 2017 to 6,495 women in 2018, surpassing the target of 6,000 women.
      The number of people provided with access to improved water resources in rural areas increased from
       3,600 people in 2017 to 8,435 people in 2018.
      The number of people provided with access to improved water sources in urban areas increased from
       1,400 people in 2017 to 4,345 people in 2018, surpassing the target of 2,600 people.


                                                                                                  Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kiribati Adaptation Program - Phase III (P112615)




      The volume of potable water provided from new groundwater sources increased from six kiloliters per
         day in 2016 to 22 kiloliters per day in 2018, surpassing the target of 21 kiloliters per day.
        The volume of potable water saved through reduced leakage increased from >5 kiloliters per day in
         2011 to 645 kiloliters per day in 2016, surpassing the target of 190 kiloliters per day.
        The volume of potable water provided from new rainwater harvesting system increased from one
         kiloliter per day in 2016 to 6.5 kiloliters per day in 2018, surpassing the target of 6.1 kiloliters per day.
        645 m³ of water were saved from rehabilitation of the transmission main and storage reservoirs.
        438 households had 24/7 pressurized water supply in the pilot zones providing an additional of 140 m³
         of water, surpassing the target of 180 of households and the service level of providing four hours per
         day.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the resilience of Kiribati to the impacts of climate change on coastal infrastructure:

Rationale
Outputs:

      Detailed coastal risk assessments and engineering studies for nine vulnerable coastal erosion sites on
         South Tarawa were conducted.
        A coastline asset condition assessment was completed and documented for all major non-government
         assets along the South Tarawa coastline, achieving the target.
        Three seawalls measuring 370 linear meters were completed in South Tarawa.
        Community-based mangrove managements plans were prepared and adopted under the village
         development committees.
        Over 35,000 seedlings for mangrove plantings along 46 segments of coastline measuring 1.005 linear
         kilometers were completed by communities in nine outer islands, under the training and monitoring of
         the Ministry of Environment, Lands, and Agricultural Development (MELAD).
        The number of groundwater abstraction systems installed and operating in North Tarawa increased
         from one system in 2011 to three systems in 2018, achieving the target of three systems.
        A Long-Term Coastal Security Strategy (LTCSS) was developed. The strategy established a coherent
         framework for managing the use of the coast by responsible agencies and communities. An updated
         coastal risk assessment for highly vulnerable areas in South Tarawa and outer islands was
         conducted. Also, a consistent set of practical tools aiming at breaking the reactionary cycle of the
         government communities funding low-cost, poorly constructed, under-designed seawalls requiring
         frequent maintenance.
        The government adopted a structured approach of identifying hazards, development risks, and
         potential interventions called the Whole of Island Approach (WoIA). In line with the WoIA the project
         supported the development of nine island vulnerability assessments and four island strategic plans
         covering a population of 33,761 and 13,745 people, respectively. The strategic plans identified the

                                                                                                        Page 6 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Kiribati Adaptation Program - Phase III (P112615)



                                   risks, issues, and development priorities for each island for expenditure planning and directing donor
                                   investment.
                                  The number of community-led resilience sub-projects completed increased from 35 sub-projects in
                                   2017 to 100 sub-projects in 2018, surpassing the target of 80 sub-projects.

                            Outcomes:

                                  The amount of coastline protected increased from 0.50 kilometers in 2011 to 1.87 kilometers in 2017,
                                    surpassing the original target of 1.60 kilometers and the revised target of 1.20 kilometers.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of both objectives is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency:

   The PAD did not conduct an Economic analysis stating (p. 12) that it is challenging to quantify the damage
   associated with future climate events and the project benefits associated with climate risk reduction.

   Also, all project activities had not been fully defined during appraisal, therefore, costs and benefits could not be
   estimated.

   The ICR (p. 20) conducted a cost-benefit analysis for key investments under Components 1 and 2, which
   comprised 84 percent of the of the two components and 51 percent of the entire project cost. The analysis did
   not include any costs related to capacity building and policy advisory support since the benefits of these
   activities were difficult to quantify and fully attribute to the project. The analysis applied a discount rate of six
   percent.



                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kiribati Adaptation Program - Phase III (P112615)



The Net Present Value (NPV) for water resilience investments ranged from US$1.32 million to US$3.53 million.
The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) for these activities ranged from 10 percent to 38 percent. The
NPV for the coastal resilience investment was US$1.06 million and the EIRR was 10 percent. The ICR (p. 21)
stated that several benefits were not quantified, such as: reduction in the incidence of water-borne diseases,
opportunity costs of school absenteeism among school age population, loss-of-life avoided, savings resulting
from switching from alternative water supply to piped water supply, avoided damage costs on power and water
mains, avoided business disruptions due to power and water outages and traffic delays, and avoided disruptions
in lifeline and other public services.

Operational Efficiency:

During appraisal, the project’s administrative costs were estimated to be 13.6 percent of the revised budget,
which ended up being lower at 12 percent. The 28-month extension of the project’s closing date did not have a
negative impact on the administrative costs, indicating that the project’s operation was efficient. Also, the ICR (p.
21) stated that the share of management costs in the total budget decreased from 21 percent under KAPII to 12
percent under KAPIII, indicating that the project benefited from efficiency gains from systems, structures and
capacity building activities implemented during the previous phases. However, the project design included a
large amount of Implementing Agencies (IAs). The ICR (p. 24) stated that this resulted in a lack of clarity in
terms of responsibility among IAs and competing demands on the technical advisors who supported the IAs.
Third, the Bank team did not take into account the amount of infrastructure projects the IAs were responsible for.
The ICR (p. 24) stated that in October 2014, three IAs were responsible for 24 different infrastructure projects,
resulting in KAP III being given less priority due to their smaller size. And finally, the ICR (p. 28) stated that the
project design assumed that the water supply network and coastal infrastructure could be constructed by local
contractors, which turned out to be inaccurate and resulted in implementation delays.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

During the 2016 project restructuring and the Additional Financing in 2017, the Results Framework was revised
to modify or introduce new indicators to better measure desired outcomes, delete some indicators, and modify


                                                                                                        Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kiribati Adaptation Program - Phase III (P112615)



yearly targets to better reflect realistic implementation conditions and progress. Since the end targets were not
revised, a split rating was not conducted in this Review.

The relevance of the objective was High given its alignment with Kiribati’s Climate Change Policy and the
Bank’s Pacific Islands Regional Partnership Framework (FY2017-FY2021). Efficacy and Efficiency were
Substantial. On the basis of these sub-ratings, the project’s overall outcome rating is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (p. 17) stated that in order to ensure the sustainability of O&M of the groundwater abstraction
galleries, the Ministry of Women, Youth, and Social Affairs registered village committees that were
empowered with constitutions and authority to collect small fees from residents. The registration was
authorized under the Incorporated Societies Act. In addition, to support sustainability and appreciate the
voluntary land agreements by future generations, a traditional community agreement "Te Berita", which binds
all members to abide by the pledge, entailing a cultural sanction for enforcement, was implemented.
According to the ICR (p. 17) MISE is currently taking steps to draft legislation for similar voluntary water
protection zones for future use. The ICR (p. 29) stated that greater social fragmentation in Buota poses a
moderate risk on the sustainability of village water supply systems which is being mitigated by the
management of the Public Utilities Board (PUB). PUB has adequate capacity for long-term O&M but requires
government funding since it only generates limited income. In order to ensure the sustainability of PUB's
operations it will be critical to establish a more efficient and accessible customer billing and collection
system. The sustainability of coastal protection works is threatened by the limited public financing and
capacity of the MISE. Also, the Office of the President, which has a clear work program and well identified
priorities on climate change policies, is heavily dependent on donor funds.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (p. 24) the design of the project was built on lessons learned from KAP I and II.
  Lessons learned included the importance of day-to-day community engagement across all components
  and the need to address complex and sensitive policy issues such as land and asset ownership, to
  ensure the sustainability of the infrastructure investments. In order to apply these lessons, long-term
  resources were budgeted. The ICR (p. 28) stated that the Bank team included the relevant expertise
  including a mix of coastal and water resource engineering and urban and community infrastructure
  development specialists.

  The PAD (p. 11) stated that the Bank identified relevant risks such as weak implementation capacity,
  competing demands from other infrastructure projects, and project rejections by communities. Mitigation
  measures included on-the-job training and capacity building, partnering with donors and programs to

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kiribati Adaptation Program - Phase III (P112615)



  increase complementarity and effectiveness of interventions, and consultations with and engagement of
  communities. According to the ICR (p. 24) mitigation measures were adequately identified.

  However, there were also some shortcomings. First, the project scope and geographic coverage was
  ambitious. Second, the project design included a large amount of Implementing Agencies (IAs). The ICR
  (p. 24) stated that this resulted in a lack of clarity in terms of responsibility among IAs and competing
  demands on the technical advisors who supported the IAs. Third, the Bank team did not take into account
  the large number of infrastructure projects the IAs were responsible for. The ICR (p. 24) stated that in
  October 2014, three IAs were responsible for 24 different infrastructure projects, resulting in KAP III being
  given less priority due to their smaller size. And finally, the ICR (p. 28) stated that the project design
  assumed that the water supply network and coastal infrastructure could be constructed by local
  contractors, which turned out to be inaccurate and resulted in implementation delays.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 28) the Bank team conducted regular supervision missions on a semi-annual
 basis. In addition, the Bank team conducted technical missions, procurement support missions, and
 financial management implementation review missions. The ICR stated that the Bank team’s reporting was
 of high quality and appropriately candid.

  Furthermore, the ICR (p. 29) stated that the Bank team provided support to strengthen the fiduciary and
 technical capacity within the IAs and the PMU, reviewed tender documents, and ensured the project’s
 compliance with the Bank’s safeguards. Even though there were changes in Task Team Leaders, who
 were all based in DC, specialists based in the Sydney office were closely involved throughout
 implementation which allowed for continuity and long-term relationships with the counterpart. When it
 became clear that international contractors were not interested in providing services due to insufficient
 profit gains due to the remote location of Kiribati and domestic contractors did not have sufficient capacity,
 the Bank team used Force Account and specialist technical consulting services. The ICR (p. 29) stated that
 this resulted capacity building within the IAs and job creation for local communities.

 The Bank team restructured the project twice to modify the Results Framework to allow for better
 measurement of outcomes and to obtain Additional Financing for strengthening the resilience at the
 community level and build on well-functioning implementation mechanisms. However, according to the ICR
 (p. 29) an earlier restructuring might have had a positive impact on the project’s performance.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kiribati Adaptation Program - Phase III (P112615)



  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change and how key activities and outputs would lead to the intended outcomes
 was sound and reflected in the Results Framework. The objectives were clearly specified. The indicators
 included a mix of qualitative and quantitative targets and were specific, measurable, relevant and the
 majority had a baseline. Data sampling methods included beneficiary surveys and impact assessment for
 selected components. However, a shortcoming of the original M&E design was that it mainly focused on
 outputs. The ICR (p. 26) stated that the M&E design would have benefitted from additional indicators
 focusing on outcomes such as the behavior change of water users, governance outcomes for sustainability,
 and adoption of relevant policies.

 It seems that some indicator’s targets could have been more ambitious given that for example the indicator
 for measuring the volume of potable water saved through reduced leakage already surpassed the target in
 2016, almost two years before project closure.



b. M&E Implementation
  During the 2016 project restructuring and the Additional Financing in 2017, the Results Framework was
  revised to modify or introduce new indicators to better measure desired outcomes, delete some
  indicators, and modify yearly targets to better reflect realistic implementation conditions and progress.
  However, end targets were not revised. According to the ICR (p. 26) baseline data for the project were
  collected and analyzed during the completion of KAP II. The project conducted random-sample
  household surveys, expenditure diaries and an impact assessment for the sub-projects of the Resilience
  Fund. The ICR (p. 26) stated that the Implementation Status Reports consistently reported on all
  indicators. According to the Bank team (June 25, 2019) the data were found to be reliable and of good
  quality and the M&E functions and processes are likely to be sustained after project closure. For
  example, ongoing mangrove awareness-raising, initiated by MELAD under the project, is being
  conducted during Island Council meetings, at village meetings in maneabas, and during school
  visits. Students and teachers tend to the plantings and revegetation as part of their environmental
  studies. MELAD officers continuously monitor the seedlings, as two years (on average) are needed to
  reach full viability.

  According to the Bank team (June 25, 2019) the Office of the President (OB), with the support of the
  PMU, worked with Island Councils and the Ministry of Internal Affairs to monitor the completion of the
  Resilience Fund sub-projects, and MELAD actively monitored and regularly reported on implementation
  progress of the outer island mangrove planting activities.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 26) M&E results were used to inform decision making and supported resource
  allocation and modification of project implementation. Also, donors, especially the Australian High


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kiribati Adaptation Program - Phase III (P112615)



  Commission was briefed on a regular basis on progress towards the achievement of the outcomes
  resulting in Additional Financing.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) and was classified as category B. The ICR (p. 27) stated that an
   Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was developed and disclosed and all civil work contractors and
   implementing agencies carrying out Force Account works followed the EMP. Also, all major works included
   an environmental impact assessment. The PMU collaborated with MELAD to monitor safeguard compliance
   on a regular basis and addressed environmental issues that were identified. According to the ICR (p. 27)
   the project complied with the environmental safeguard policy.

   According to the ICR (p. 27) the project used an existing Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy
   Framework since the impacts of the project were not known before implementation. The framework was
   modified during implementation before being disclosed. The project did not require any physical
   displacement or relocation. The ICR stated that for the construction of rainwater harvesting systems in
   North Tarawa included full consultation and community agreements. Also, for the groundwater abstraction
   systems implemented in North Tarawa, landowners provided land voluntarily for use as a water reserve and
   were fully compensated for any livelihood loss. According to the ICR, the safeguard policy was adequately
   complied with.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (p. 28) the project complied with legal covenants throughout implementation. Interim
   financial reports were submitted in a timely manner, transactions were accounted for and documented
   adequately, accounting information was up-to-date and reliable and the external auditor’s opinions were
   unqualified. Also, financial management for Force Account works was maintained and effective. However,
   the Commitments Register was not updated on a regular basis and budget management was weak and
   required substantial support by the Bank.

   Procurement:

   According to the ICR (p. 27) the project complied with the procurement procedures as outlined in the Grant
   Agreements and Procurement Plan. The project experienced implementation delays due to poor bidder
   and consultant response given the country’s remote location, limited understanding of the supply market,
   and lack of capacity among local suppliers and contractors. These challenges resulted in unsuccessful

                                                                                                Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kiribati Adaptation Program - Phase III (P112615)



   bidding processes and the need to use the Force Account mechanism for the replacement of the
   secondary water distribution network and the Buota rainwater harvesting system. The ICR (p. 28) stated
   that after the 2016 project restructuring, procurement improved due to extensive implementation support
   and capacity building by the Bank team, the synchronization of procurement plans with design/consultant
   engineers’ targets for civil works procurement, and the establishment of a longer-term contractual
   agreement for centralized procurement of Resilience Fund materials through an Indefinite Delivery
   Contract. Also, the PMU hired a Procurement Specialist for the large number of goods, works and services
   contracts (in contrast to large infrastructure projects with a limited number of sites and contracts).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory            Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                         Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 30 -31) provided lessons learned that were adapted by IEG:

    1. Engaging local communities in project activities throughout the project cycle is
         essential for ensuring the sustainability of project outcomes. In this project, community
         engagement was critical for a successful implementation and subsequent use and
         maintenance of public infrastructure such as coastal protection measures and water
         supplies. Community engagement evolved from information seeking, to semi-commercial
         behavior change campaigns, to empowering residents and allowing for public voice in
         decision-making and proactively recognizing the needs and priorities of different groups.




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Kiribati Adaptation Program - Phase III (P112615)



     2. Understanding local administrative systems, local contracting and suppliers’ markets
         and taking advantage of local expertise are critical for successful implementation. In
         this project, an appropriate contract size and pre-bid training for local contractors allowed for
         the eventual completion of 13 of the 16 works contracts by local contractors using Force
         Account in two cases.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a good overview of project preparation and implementation. The ICR was internally
consistent and mainly outcome driven. The ICR included an adequate Economic analysis and useful lessons
learned. However, the ICR did not mention the risks and mitigation measures that were identified during
appraisal. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 14 of 14
