     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DTF:EG-Energy/Social Sectors Reform TF (P144305)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0021695

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P144305                                     DTF:EG-Energy/Social Sectors Reform TF

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Egypt, Arab Republic of                     Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16152                                    30-Dec-2016                                           6,483,425.96

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Nov-2013                                 31-Jul-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             6,500,000.00                                     6,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              6,483,425.96                                     6,483,425.96

 Actual                                          6,483,425.96                                     6,483,425.96




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Fernando Manibog            Kavita Mathur                 Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The three project development objectives (PDOs) are to strengthen the Government of Egypt's capacity to:

   (1) design a comprehensive fuel subsidy reform strategy;

   (2) establish concrete measures for improved financial viability of key energy sector actors; and



                                                                                                       Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DTF:EG-Energy/Social Sectors Reform TF (P144305)



   (3) identify households that would be most vulnerable to the impacts of the fuel subsidy reform.

   (Schedule 1, page 5 of the Grant Agreement, Middle East and North Africa Transition Fund, dated December
   4, 2013)



   These objectives are assessed respectively as PDO1, PDO2 and PDO3 in the efficacy section below.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three main components:

   Component 1: Power Sector Institutional Development and Financial Viability (appraisal estimate,
   US$2.7 million; actual cost, US$3.4 million).

   This component included technical assistance in the following areas: (i) financial management and
   governance for power utilities; (ii) EETC strengthening to operate in a new market structure, which replaced
   the Fuel for Power Study when the project was restructured; and (iii) the establishment of an Energy
   Efficiency Unit.

   Component 2: Energy Pricing and Fuel Switching Reform (appraisal estimate, US$1.8 million; actual
   cost, US$1.3 million).

   This component was intended to produce an energy pricing and fuel switching reform strategy, and to
   develop a communication strategy for fuel reform.

   Component 3: Strengthening Social Safety Nets Technical Assistance (appraisal estimate, US$2.0
   million; actual cost, US$1.8 million).

   This component included the following activities: (i) support for the establishment of the data base for the
   poor and vulnerable; (ii) a baseline survey for beneficiary families; and (iii) the establishment of a Technical
   Working Unit to support Social Safety Net reform.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The total cost estimate at appraisal was US$6.5 million. The actual disbursement at the
   project’s closing date was US$6.483 million, or 0.3 percent less than the appraised cost. The disbursement




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DTF:EG-Energy/Social Sectors Reform TF (P144305)



   on Component 1 was 127 percent of the appraisal estimate, while the disbursements on Components 2 and
   3 were 89 percent and 99.7 percent, respectively, of their appraisal estimates.

   Financing. The project costs were financed entirely on a grant basis from the Middle East and North Africa
   Transition Fund (TF-16152).

   Borrower Contribution. There was no Borrower contribution.

   Dates. The project was approved on November 13, 2013 and declared effective on January 8, 2014. It was
   restructured once on October 27, 2016 to adjust the components and their respective costs, modify the
   results framework accordingly, reallocate among disbursement categories as needed, adjust the
   implementation schedule, and extend the closing date. The project was extended by about 19 months from
   the original closing date of December 30, 2016 to the final closing date of July 31, 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context

The security situation deteriorated in Egypt after the January 2011 revolution, leading to social instability
and a slowdown of the economy. Unemployment had risen to 13 percent by December 2011 and poverty
rates increased from 21 percent before the revolution to 25 percent by December 2012. More than US$30
billion of foreign reserves was lost post-revolution, thus worsening the already poor balance of payments
position. International reserves declined to US$14 billion in June 2013. The overall budget deficit in FY2012
reached 10.8 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in FY2012 and was projected at 12 percent in
FY2013. Weak growth and inadequate tax revenues resulted in higher deficits. At the same time, spending
increased on salaries, pensions, and the persistent legacy of huge energy and fuel subsidies. At project
appraisal, the country was confronting an increase in chronic poverty as well as transitory poverty from the
economic shocks.

Sector Context

Egypt was burdened with serious power shortages at the time of project appraisal. The country suffered
from rolling blackouts since the peak power demand could not be met. The Government was providing very
large budget subsidies for energy supplies, given the power sector’s poor financial condition. The prices for
electricity and petroleum products were below their costs. Energy subsidies were not targeted to the poor or
vulnerable. Yet the high subsidies claimed about 7 percent of GDP and were larger than the Government’s
expenditures on both the health and education sectors. The Egyptian Electric Holding Company (EEFC)
was heavily indebted and in need of substantial Government support to finance its capital investment
program. The Government-owned integrated power company was an inefficient quasi-monopoly that
needed to be restructured.

Government Strategy



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      DTF:EG-Energy/Social Sectors Reform TF (P144305)



               The project’s objectives are highly relevant to the Government’s strategy at appraisal. In 2012, the
               Government aimed to reform electricity tariffs and fuel subsidies, and took actions to increase heavy fuel oil
               prices, natural gas prices for households, and electricity tariffs. The subsidy for 95 octane gasoline was
               also eliminated while more than doubling its price. LPG prices for domestic use were also increased.

               The project’s objectives remain highly relevant to the current Government strategy. Egypt’s 2030 vision
               document aims to maximize the energy sector’s ability to sustainably develop national traditional energy
               resources and exploit renewable energy resources, with the goals of enhancing energy security and
               maintaining growth rates. Egypt’s Energy Sector’s Strategy for 2035, which was aligned with the Egypt
               2030 vision document, seeks to maximize renewable energy in the energy mix to reach about 40% share
               by 2035, restructure and reform the gas sector, promote energy efficiency, and combat global warming by
               decreasing greenhouse gas emissions. To this end, the Government has implemented energy subsidy
               reform to enhance its efficiency and ensure sustainability and is implementing programs aimed at improving
               the performance efficiency of the petroleum sector (Source: Ministry of Petroleum).

               Bank Strategy

               The project’s objectives are highly relevant to the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
               Egypt 2015–2019, which organizes the World Bank Group’s support under these three focal areas: (i)
               improving governance; (ii) private sector job creation; and (iii) social inclusion.” To improve governance, the
               CPF cites specifically the need for “strengthening governance in the energy sector through energy policy
               and subsidy reforms.” To promote private sector job creation, the CPF indicates that: “The World Bank
               Group may support investments in institutions and capacities that contribute to competitiveness …ensuring
               Egypt’s energy security and diversification through enhanced energy efficiency and supporting financial
               sustainability of the energy sector.” To enhance social inclusion, the CPF states that “improving social
               inclusion will be addressed by strengthening the targeting of the social safety net system (SSN),” which the
               project supports by identifying poor and vulnerable households that are likely to be most impacted by the
               reform of fuel subsidies.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To design a comprehensive fuel subsidy reform strategy.


                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The project's activities--including technical assistance, studies, consulting services,
                             communication campaigns, and other institutional strengthening efforts--have direct and causal links to the

                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DTF:EG-Energy/Social Sectors Reform TF (P144305)



three PDOs, such that achievement of the PDOs could be credibly attributed to the project's
interventions. The project's analytic activities are comprehensive in covering both energy pricing and fuel
switching reforms. In turn, the analyses serve as the basis for preparing a road map toward the reduction
and/or elimination of energy subsidies. In order to implement that road map, promote adoption of
reforms, and achieve behavioral changes, the project went further along the causal chain toward achieving
the three PDOs by developing a communication strategy for implementing the reforms, including actions to:
(i) establish a Core Communication Unit and (ii) launch of the communication framework for the
Modernization Strategy of the Ministry of Petroleum (MOP). The concrete results and outcomes are
delineated below.

Outputs

      The Ordena Model for energy pricing was developed, judged as valid and robust, and accepted by the
       implementing agency and key project stakeholders, although it was also found that its requirement for
       large amounts of data proved to be a disadvantage.

      A road map for subsidy reduction and/or elimination was prepared, using the Ordena Model. The road
       map included the socioeconomic impact of subsidy reform.

      Training in using the Model was provided over 5 days to the Ministry of Electricity and Renewable
       Energy (MOERE), the Ministry of Petroleum (MOP), the Egyptian Electric Holding Company (EEHC),
       the Egyptian Electric Utility and Consumer Protection Regulatory Agency, the Egyptian Natural Gas
       Holding Company (EGAS), and the Egyptian General Petroleum Company (EGPC).

      Two study tours in Spain were conducted for 15 participants to observe a liberalized market in
       operation.

      Further training was provided on communications, and also for two other models, the Computed
       General Equilibrium (CGE) model for energy pricing, and the Subsidy Simulation (SUBSIM) package,
       which focused primarily on issues related to poverty and inequality.

Outcomes

The two main PDO 1 indicators were achieved:

(1) A comprehensive energy pricing and fuel switching strategy, including detailed action plans for
compensatory measures to mitigate the impact of subsidy removal, was developed.

(2) A communication strategy for fuel subsidy reform including public consultation was prepared.

The achievement of these PDO indicators, which were output-oriented in their formulation, is evident from the
following:

      Financial and economic costs of natural gas, petroleum products, and electricity were estimated to
       2030 using the Ordena Model. An energy pricing strategy was prepared together with mitigation
       measures for subsidy reform, as well as a monitoring and evaluation framework for energy pricing.



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DTF:EG-Energy/Social Sectors Reform TF (P144305)




      The Ordena Model was in use at project closure, and is still currently in use, by MOERE and
       MOP. However, like almost all forecasting models, a major effort is required soon to update the
       Ordena Model, since it would soon be outdated and would no longer be useful.

      As targeted, the Communication Unit was set up and the communication framework for MOP’s
       Modernization Strategy was launched.

      The purpose of the reduction in energy subsidies and the intention to replace them over time by Cash
       Transfers—to provide more assistance to the poor and vulnerable—was explained to the broad public
       by the Communications Unit.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To establish concrete measures for improved financial viability of key energy sector actors.

Rationale
The achievement of this PDO depended on the effective delivery of four areas of technical assistance:

(1) strengthening of financial management and governance in electric utilities;

(2) restructuring of the Egyptian Electricity Transmission Company (EETC) to reflect the changed priorities in
the reform program and the opening of the electricity market;

(3) establishment of an Energy Efficiency Unit (EEU) in MOERE; and

(4) setting-up of a Project Management Team (PMT) in MOERE to implement the entire project.

Outputs

      A major accounting firm, as project consultant, prepared for Egyptian Electric Holding Company
       (EEHC) a corporate governance code, a Chief Executive Officer contract, and audit committee charter
       for the EEHC Board, and other draft documents intended to improve EEHC’s governance. However,
       despite several tries, a financial forecasting model that was satisfactory to EEHC was not
       achieved. Training was provided over 9 sessions to 452 individuals.

      EETC received extensive technical assistance for its restructuring, including an internal gap analysis,
       provision of market rules and a power supply code, design of its market operating system, functional
       specification of its require IT and billing systems, assistance in the unbundling of its accounts,
       recommendations on its financial restructuring, building of a financial model for EETC operations and
       planning, support for EETC’s financial reporting systems, and capacity building involving training
       sessions internally and overseas. Training was provided over 21 sessions to 425 individuals.


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DTF:EG-Energy/Social Sectors Reform TF (P144305)




      The Energy Efficiency Unit (EEU) was established with the mandate of helping reduce energy
       usage. Training was provided over 4 workshops to 94 individuals.

Outcomes

Although with some delay, the two main PDO 2 indicators were achieved:

(1) Reform options to improve the financial viability and governance of EEHC were prepared; and

(2) An action plan was prepared for (a) the establishment of EEU in the MOERE and (b) at least two of the
energy efficiency projects in the NEEAP.

The achievement of these PDO indicators is evident from the following:

      Internal audit departments were established within EEHC and each of its subsidiaries.

      EEHC has prepared bidding documents for an Enterprise Resource Planning program and will issue
       the request for bids once the valuation and separation of its assets is completed.

      EETC is now quasi-independent from EEHC. EETC now has its own General Assembly and is owned
       by the Government, not EEHC. EETC has been enabled to sign contracts to offtake power from
       private companies. EETC can also buy and sell electricity at prices set by the regulatory authority and
       approved by the government. However, although the consultant had prepared much of the basis for
       the separation of EETC and EEHC, EETC’s assets (especially distribution) remain embedded within
       EEHC. The separation process is delayed pending completion of the Asset Evaluation Study
       mentioned above.

      The EEU now has a business plan and is working on various programs, one of which is the
       distribution of LED bulbs for public lighting and public housing, respectively 2.6 million and 11 million
       bulbs.

      The EEU was the main author of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP), which has been
       approved by Cabinet. An Energy Efficiency Fund is expected to help implement the Plan.

      The PMT satisfactorily fulfilled its expected functions, which involved significant procurement and
       financial management activities, difficult negotiations with four other ministries, supervision and
       monitoring of 47 consultants and consulting firms, and delivery of a large number of training sessions.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To identify households that would be most vulnerable to the impacts of the fuel subsidy reform.

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DTF:EG-Energy/Social Sectors Reform TF (P144305)




Rationale
The specific activities intended to achieve PDO3 include the development of a database on the poor and
vulnerable, the preparation of a baseline survey of beneficiary families, and the establishment of a Technical
Working Unit to support Social Safety Net (SSN) reforms. Upon completion, the technical assistance activities
were expected to help strengthen Egypt’s SSN delivery by improving the targeting of its currently fragmented
SSN programs. Moreover, the baseline survey would help to gauge the efficiency of social service delivery
and evaluate the medium- to long-term impacts of the reforms.

Outputs

      The targeted number of databases to be linked was exceeded. Although 9 databases were to be
       linked initially, the Administrative Control Authority (ACA) has been able to link 39 databases to date,
       including the Family Smart Card system, which contains information on 80 percent of Egyptian
       citizens.

      The Takaful and Karama Program (TKP) has been established as Egypt’s largest cash transfer
       program for the poor and vulnerable, with 41 consultants and staff from the Ministry of Social
       Solidarity (MOSS). The TKP cash transfer program is managing review of household applications,
       enrollment and rejections. It is also responsible for grievance resolutions, communications and
       community outreach, management information systems, use of the UNR, monitoring and evaluation.

Outcomes

      The PDO indicator has been exceeded. The original indicator was to develop a database of the poor
       and vulnerable with 10 million households registered in the new poverty database. The actual result
       was that 13 million households were registered in the food subsidy program that was connected to the
       Unified National Registry (UNR).

      The UNR is refined regularly to weed out ineligible households and improve the targeting of social
       assistance programs.

      The ACA has taken over the development of the national database for all government program
       beneficiaries and the UNR.

      As of April 2018, the TKP was operating in all 27 Governorates of Egypt, covering 345 districts and
       5,630 villages. Over 2.27 million beneficiary households have been enrolled, exceeding the initial
       target of 1.5 million households. Cumulative cash payments totaling EGP 18.38 billion have been
       made, of which around 9.5 million family members have benefitted.



Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 8 of 15
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      DTF:EG-Energy/Social Sectors Reform TF (P144305)



OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale
The three PDOs were substantially achieved. The achievement of PDO 1 was substantial: an energy pricing
strategy and a corresponding monitoring and evaluation framework was prepared, the energy pricing and subsidy
model is still in current use, and a communication strategy was implemented that explained the reduction of
energy subsidies and its Cash Transfers replacement to the broad public as well as the poor and vulnerable. The
achievement of PDO 2 was substantial: an Energy Efficiency Unit was established and at least two projects were
included in the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan. The achievement of PDO 3 was also substantial, with the
PDO indicator having been exceeded: 13 million households were registered in the food subsidy program
(compared to the target of 10 million). The program is connected to the Unified National Registry, which is refined
regularly to improve the targeting of social assistance programs.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial


 5. Efficiency
As a technical assistance project, conventional measures of project worth (net present value, economic rates of
return) were not calculated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) or the Implementation Completion and
Results Report (ICR). No comparator technical assistance projects were discussed, hence there was also no
cost-effectiveness analysis that would benchmark this project against similar interventions.

Benefits

At a sectoral level, the ICR emphasizes the point that “the gradual shift from energy subsidies to targeted Cash
Transfers undoubtedly increased efficiency in terms of benefits delivered to the poor” (ICR, paragraph 61, page
26). However, the ICR did not provide any quantitative figures to support this assertion, albeit intuitively credible,
given the ICR’s explanation that energy subsidies can end up helping the rich, while cash transfers could be
much better targeted to the poor population who need help as energy subsidies are being reduced. At a more
general macroeconomic level, the ICR cites unquantified benefits from the PAD (page 19) including greater
fiscal stability, improved transparency and management of the electricity sector, reduced fiscal burden from
subsidies, and mitigation of the adverse impacts of subsidy reform by strengthening the social safety network.
Of these claims, the reduced fiscal burden through subsidy reform would have been possible to quantify but was
not.

Costs

The overall project costs remained almost unchanged from the PAD stage, through restructuring, and up to final
disbursements and the project’s closing date. The delay in the closing date by 19 months may have increased
costs since the PMT staff stayed longer, but this may have been counterbalanced by the longer-term reduction
in institutional learning time and costs, as well as the efficiency gains from the location and quicker response of
the Bank’s Task Team Leader in Cairo.




                                                                                                        Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DTF:EG-Energy/Social Sectors Reform TF (P144305)



Overall, given the many possible and largely credible benefits from the highly targeted technical assistance that
was provided without cost increases for this relatively small project, the project’s efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?               Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of project objectives is high. The extent to which each of the three PDOs was achieved is
substantial, leading to an overall efficacy rating of substantial. Efficiency is substantial. The project’s overall
outcome is rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Regarding outputs, there are no risks since the policy documents, analytical reports, operational and
procedural manuals, training sessions, workshops, and databases have been delivered. The Ordena Model,
however, would need serious updating to maintain its utility for forecasting, which may present a significant
risk since the model is highly data-intensive and data collection is very time-consuming.

Regarding outcomes, the risks are mainly political. The sustainability of outcomes depends ultimately on the
Government’s determination and consistency in implementing its plan to reduce energy subsidies partly
through the Cash Transfers program, the restructuring of the energy sector to encourage private investment,
and improvements in the governance and efficiency of the state-owned companies. Reform performance is
unpredictable. If the reform process stalls or reverses, the project’s outcomes are at significant risk.
However, the ICR (paragraph 92, page 35), indicates that “so far, the Government is continuing the reform
program and all indications are that it will continue with the reform program.”


                                                                                                        Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DTF:EG-Energy/Social Sectors Reform TF (P144305)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was well designed to provide a plan and a road map for helping to resolve—through
  specifically tailored technical assistance and capacity-building—a series of major problems in the energy
  sector of Egypt, including high energy subsidies, poor targeting of the poor or vulnerable, energy prices
  that were below economic costs, and an inefficient Government-owned integrated power company that
  was a quasi-monopoly and needed restructuring. The subsidy reform plan was designed to first identify
  the poor and vulnerable, target them more effectively, and minimize the impacts of subsidy reforms on
  them. The project’s social safety net aspects benefited from the Bank’s long-term policy dialogue in Egypt
  on safety nets, as well as its experience and lessons learned from several smaller Government projects
  that were poorly targeted. The lessons learned from the shortcomings of ongoing programs helped the
  Government design, target and implement the national Cash Transfers program. Risks were also
  identified appropriately. For example, a high risk at entry was the need for close coordination among the
  participating ministries, as well as the Government’s sustained ownership and commitment to support
  reform policies and programs. Risks were mitigated by the fact that the participating ministries
  themselves proposed and fully owned the project's technical assistance package; moreover, the
  establishment of a multi-ministerial Project Steering Committee helped maintain stakeholder ownership
  and commitment, which involved the provision of adequate resources and coordination mechanisms for
  implementation (PAD, para 56). In sum, the design of the project, and the monitoring and evaluation
  (M&E) system, were straightforward and robust.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 During implementation, there was strong collaboration between the teams from the World Bank's energy
 and social protection sectors. Two Task Team Leaders supervised the project regularly, one for the two
 energy reform components, and the other for the social safety net component. One was country-based,
 which facilitated supervision. The team produced regular Implementation Status and Results Reports
 (ISRs) and resolved issues efficiently when they emerged. (ICR, Paragraph 88, page 35) For example, the
 team was responsive when the Government passed an Electricity Law in July 2015 that established the
 Egyptian Electricity Transmission Company (EETC) as an independent transmission system operator and
 a market operator. The team responded to these changed priorities by arranging for the project’s
 restructuring, which occurred in October 2016. Given its enhanced new role and the Government's
 expressed prioritization of strengthening EETC, the study on fuel for power generation was replaced with
 technical assistance tailored to EETC’s strengthening needs. For the social safety net component, the ICR
 (paragraph 90, page 35) indicates that “the World Bank provided more assistance than was initially
 planned including (a) the development of the Unified National Registry that links 39 databases, including
 the Takaful and Karama Programs (TKP) and the Family Smart Card (FSC) database, with information on
 80 percent of Egyptian citizens, including the poor and non-poor; (b) development of the World Bank’s

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DTF:EG-Energy/Social Sectors Reform TF (P144305)



 Strengthening Social Safety Net Project (P145699) for Egypt in 2015 for US$400 million; and (c) capacity
 development of the Project Management Unit at the Ministry of Social Solidarity, which is implementing the
 TKP.”




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO indicators were selected appropriately and adequate in number. They were concrete and readily
 monitorable. The diagram on the project’s theory of change (ICR, Figure 1, page 12) was also clearly
 presented and easily understood. However, the project’s contributing (and not decisive) role could have
 been more clearly represented; moreover, the constraining factors could have also been indicated (ICR,
 paragraph 78, page 33).



b. M&E Implementation
  The project’s implementation status was reviewed regularly by the Bank team based on information
  provided by the Project Management Team (PMT) from the monitoring indicators. ISRs were produced
  regularly. In lieu of a mid-term Review, a large mission was held in May 2017 to conduct a detailed
  review of the project (ICR, paragraph 79, page 33).



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E information was reported regularly to Bank management through ISRs, Aide Memoires, and
  emails. M&E data formed the basis for discussing the project’s implementation progress with the key
  project agencies, including EEHC, EETC, MOP, MOSS, the Ministry of Planning, Monitoring, and
  Administrative Reform, and other stakeholders. For example, when M&E information showed continuing
  project delays, project ratings were adjusted downward and discussions were held between the Bank
  team and the Government to identify measures that could be taken to accelerate project implementation
  (ICR, paragraph 80, page 33).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

                                                                                                Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DTF:EG-Energy/Social Sectors Reform TF (P144305)




10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   In line with the World Bank’s Safeguard Policy OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, the project was
   classified as Environmental Category C, indicating that the project would not have any adverse
   environmental impacts. No social safeguard policies were triggered as the project did not involve any
   significant social issues. On the contrary, the project provided technical assistance to strengthen Egypt’s
   social safety net, and also to develop a communications strategy for consultation, participation, and
   dissemination of information on the energy sector and subsidy reforms. According to the ICR (paragraph 82,
   page 33), the project’s environmental and social risk was first rated as Moderate in June 2015, but it was
   changed to a Low risk rating in June 2017 and has remained the same.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. There were no significant fiduciary issues. The ICR (paragraph 83, page 33) cites
   this finding from the final project supervision mission Aide Memoire: “For accounting, recording and
   reporting purposes, the project management utilized a manual accounting system in collaboration with
   Excel spreadsheets for reporting. The system is capable of generating the quarterly Interim Financial
   Reports and annual Financial Statements required under the Grant Agreement. As per the project Grant
   Agreement, the project management contracted with an Independent External Auditor who is responsible
   for reviewing the project Interim Financial Reports and auditing annual financial statements. All previous
   reports were received, reviewed, and found acceptable. The project management maintains acceptable
   records and adheres to the arrangements stated in the project’s Grant Agreement hence, the project’s FM
   arrangements are found to be Satisfactory.” The ICR also indicates that in the ISRs, the fiduciary risk was
   first rated as Moderate in June 2015 and remained as Moderate throughout the project implementation
   period.

   Procurement. The Project Management Team (PMT) had no prior experience with the World Bank’s
   procurement procedures. Training was provided at the start of project implementation. However, the
   various ministries involved in the project used different procurement rules and procedures. Given the large
   number of consulting contracts that needed to be processed, and PMT’s lack of hands-on experience,
   procurement proceeded slower than planned. As more experience was gained and more senior staff were
   brought in, procurement accelerated. The ICR (paragraph 84, page 34) indicates that: “Given their lack of
   experience, the PMT staff did an acceptable job. Although some minor mistakes were made, there were no
   serious issues.”




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DTF:EG-Energy/Social Sectors Reform TF (P144305)




11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were derived from the project’s implementation experience (with some
paraphrasing by IEG):

Ways need to be identified—partly through the Bank’s convening power—to simplify the
coordination of complex projects. The project’s complex set of activities and its institutional
management were daunting but might have been simplified. Five ministries, several state-owned
companies, six consulting firms, and 41 separate consultancies were involved. Coordinating and
ensuring the cooperation of each of these entities was a major task. The World Bank’s convening
power was helpful. Complexity was hard to avoid since the various ministries and state-owned
companies needed to be kept aware of what was going on and what they needed to do. However, it
might have been possible to hire an Egyptian consulting firm to handle the 41 individual
consultancies. The Project Management Team (PMT) could have selected them and then turned
them over to the apex consulting firm to arrange the terms of service and manage the separate
consulting contracts. This approach might have been easier compared to the PMT having handled
all the consultants itself.

Flexibility to accommodate a dynamic environment is essential. Although the PAD identified
some of the implementing agencies at the outset, all the responsible agencies changed several
times. The World Bank worked flexibly and engaged proactively with the required agencies in a
dynamic environment without requiring project restructuring to take place. This prevented further
delays and built effective partnerships with the relevant ministries, which enabled the achievement of
better results that initially expected.

The coordination required by a project could help break silos both in the Government and in
the World Bank, while facilitating reforms. To reform energy sector subsidies and to free up
funds that could be used for more targeted social protection cash transfers, teams from the World
Bank’s energy and social protection sectors collaborated on the project, as did energy and social
protection agencies in the Government and the Administrative Control Authority. Breaking of silos
and cross-collaboration enabled the success of the project. Partnerships with a similar approach are
being replicated in other World Bank-financed projects in Tunisia, Jordan, and Algeria.




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DTF:EG-Energy/Social Sectors Reform TF (P144305)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well prepared and thorough. It was evaluative and candid in its analytical approach. A large
emphasis was placed on providing concrete evidence behind the intermediate and final outcomes. The figure
and tables provided were useful in helping understand this complex technical assistance project. Albeit long,
the ICR put a lot of effort in delineating the project’s implementation record and how specific issues evolved and
were resolved. The ICR’s format and internal substance within each section complied generally with the Bank’s
guidelines on ICR preparation. The lessons, particularly those related to the Bank’s convening role and the
importance of cross-sectoral collaboration (i.e., between the Bank’s energy and social protection sectoral staff)
were useful and had broad replicability.

The ICR had some minor shortcomings, however. For example, it discussed the relevance of objectives only at
the appraisal stage, and not their current relevance, as required. Although understandably hard to avoid, the
ICR also made use of too many confusing acronyms in the text. It was also very long at 36 pages, or around
double the length of ICRs indicated by the guidelines. This is partly due to a large amount of repetition of text
and over-explaining, which in some sections gave the impression of “straining to say something because there
was little to say.” This could have been resolved with some editorial work.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 15
