     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021655

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P095673                                    JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Jamaica                                    Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-75540,IBRD-83340                      30-Sep-2013                                           26,470,581.08

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 13-May-2008                                28-Sep-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            15,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             26,470,581.08                                                0.00

 Actual                                         26,470,581.08                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Dale M. Hill                Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Behrens                     IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Original Project Development Objective (PDO): ”The Project endorses the objectives of the National Strategic
   Plan (NSP). Its Development Objective is to: (i) improve the monitoring of children’s development, the
   screening of household-level risks affecting such development, and early intervention systems of the
   Borrower to promote such development; (ii) enhance the quality of early childhood institutions (ECIs); and (iii)
   strengthen Early Childhood organizations and institutions” (Loan Agreement (LA), Schedule 1).



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



   Revised PDO: “The Project endorses the objectives of the NSP. Its development objectives are to: (i)
   improve parenting education and support programs; (ii) improve the monitoring of children’s development, the
   screening of household-level risks affecting such development, and early intervention systems of the
   Borrower to promote such development; (iii) enhance the quality of ECIs; and (iv) strengthen Early Childhood
   organizations and institutions” (LA, Schedule 1 and Fourth Restructuring Paper, January 10, 2014, page v).

   This Review will assess achievement of three objectives that were in effect across the project's entire lifetime:
   (i) improve the monitoring of children’s development, the screening of household-level risks affecting such
   development, and early intervention systems; (ii) enhance the quality of ECIs; and (iii) strengthen Early
   Childhood organizations and institutions. It will also assess achievement of one objective that was added
   at the January 2014 restructuring and Additional Financing (AF): improve parenting education and support
   programs. Because the objective on parenting support--added in 2014--was already implicitly a part of the
   NSP supported by the project (and the original 4 PDO indicators included one on parenting education), it is
   considered to have been in effect across the project's entire lifetime, and therefore a split rating is not
   performed.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  10-Jan-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The original project contained two components.


   Part 1: Supporting the implementation of the early childhood development (ECD) NSP (2008-
   2013) (appraisal: USD 14.1 million; AF: USD 11 million; actual: USD 24.65 million).

   Part 1 was designed as a Sector Wide Approach (SWAp) that would reimburse Government budget lines
   when disbursement linked targets (DLTs) were met. The budget lines were: grants to community schools
   and to the Early Childhood Commission (ECC, under the Ministry of Education, Youth and Information
   (MoEYI)). Various agencies were responsible for meeting the DLTs, but the largest number were under the
   responsibility of the ECC. The areas the NSP supported included:

         Parenting Education and Support (targeted ECC institutional development; sub-strategy
          development and implementation; ECD strategy; public awareness campaigns; accreditation
          system; and grants to help service providers meet accreditation standards).



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 23
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



      Preventive Health Care for Children (reorganization and strengthening of well-child clinics, including
         an accreditation system; transformation and scaling up of nutritional programs; and introduction of
         child health passports to clinics).
        Screening, Diagnosis and Early Intervention (national policy for screening, referral, and early
         intervention; application of screening to households enrolled in the Borrower’s income support
         program (Program of Advancement through Health and Education, PATH); and training of child
         development therapists who would work with children with disabilities.
        Safe, Learner-Centered Early Childhood Facilities (strengthening inspection system for ECIs at
         ECC; recruitment of development officers to technically support ECIs; and training of ECI
         caregivers).
        Trained Early Childhood Practitioners (human resources (HR) strategy; improved ECD curriculum;
         increased number of trained practitioners and improvement of their skills; and development of
         continuing education and licensing systems).
        ECD Sector Governance (reorganization and staffing of the ECC; national ECD policy including local
         governance; ECI management models; and identification of specific budget lines of the Borrower’s
         national budget for monitoring ECD expenditures).
        Evidence-Based Decision Making (strengthening ECD management and information system (MIS)
         and ECD statistics, including coverage of the HR situation and an instrument to monitor early child
         status at age four).

Restructurings: Support for these NSP strategy areas did not substantially change with the AF. The
revised PDO added explicitly a new objective of parenting support (which had been part of the NSP all
along). The AF allowed for implementation of parts of the original ECD NSP (2008–2013) that had been
delayed, and commencement of support for the 2013-2018 ECD NSP (developed with technical assistance
(TA) from the first phase of the project, hereafter called “parent project”).

Part 2. Technical Assistance, much of which was to directly support the strategy areas above, through the
following activities (appraisal: USD 0.86 million; AF: USD 0.97 million; actual: USD 1.67 million).

      Development and support of implementation of a national policy on screening, referral, and early
         intervention, including: design of risk screening systems; public education strategy; service delivery
         models for nutrition; strategy for well-child clinics; mapping of existing parenting programs; and
         development of accreditation systems for parenting support institutions.
        Redesign of the Borrower’s grant facility supporting ECIs, after an analysis of needs and gaps in
         service provision by ECIs.
        Development of a comprehensive ECD HR strategy, including compensation and training.
        Studies to: strengthen the legal framework governing ECD; develop national ECD policy; and
         elaborate proposals for local governance and ECI management models.
        Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) support: evaluation of the NSP at mid-term and near project-end;
         development of a national ECD M&E system; and development of an instrument to measure child
         development status at age 4.
        Development of the Borrower’s ECD NSP for the period 2013-2018.

Restructurings: TA support was restructured periodically as new needs were identified. In the first
restructuring dated June 15, 2011 (not level 1), the changes consisted of more training, support for
ECI inspections, and the purchase of laptops and software for education officers. The fourth restructuring,
which brought the AF, reallocated funds in favor of the TA component, since some contracts had been

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



  financed in-house or by donors, allowing new activities such as: development of an ECI management guide;
  training of stakeholders on parenting education and support strategy; development of nutrition guidance and
  training of ECI cooks and principals on the new Nutrition Strategy; temporary hiring of fire, health, and/or
  police inspectors to carry out ECI inspections; and purchase of computers and software to support
  Development Officers in their field work, which fed into ECI inspections. In other restructurings, minor
  changes in the TA were agreed and approved through the Bank’s periodic review of the procurement plan.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: For the parent project, total project cost was estimated at USD 495.75 million. Actual total
  costs were not reported in the ICR. The project team later provided the estimated total costs at the
  AF as USD 522.87 million; and actual total costs as USD 509.42 million.

  Financing: The project was financed as a Specific Investment Loan that used a SWAp disbursing against
  DLTs for Part 1 and standard financing modalities for Part 2 (PAD, para. 12). Of the original total costs
  given above, the IBRD loan was to finance USD 15 million for the parent project, and USD 12 million
  through the AF. At project end, of the total planned IBRD financing of USD 27 million, the loan had
  disbursed USD 24.65 million for Part 1 and USD 1.67 million for Part 2, for total actual IBRD financing of
  USD 26.32 million.

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower contribution was originally planned at USD 493.87 million (97% of
  total project costs), and USD 495.87 million (94% of total costs) after the AF. The actual contribution was
  USD 484.28 million (information provided later by the Project Team). The 2008 global financial crisis
  reportedly led to some shortages of counterpart funds that restricted some needed staff increases. Other
  fiscal constraints also arose from time to time during the project.

  Dates: The original/parent project was approved May 13, 2008 and became effective February 9, 2009. The
  mid-term review was conducted as planned in May 2010. There were five restructurings.

        The first restructuring (June 15, 2011) changed disbursement arrangements against DLTs for Part 1
           to alleviate bottlenecks, amended the Part II TA as noted above, and changed the Results
           Framework (RF) indicators and targets to better align with the pace of implementation.
          The second restructuring (February 27, 2013) further changed the RF, reducing the number of
           indicators from 71 to 67, prioritizing those most closely supporting the PDO.
          The third restructuring (September 10, 2013) extended the closing date to September 30, 2013, to
           allow for preparation of the AF.
          The fourth restructuring (Level 1, January 10, 2014) added the AF of USD 12 million and revised the
           PDO to explicitly add the improvement of parenting education and support as an objective. The
           approved AF project closing date was September 28, 2018. Both PDO and intermediate results
           indicators (IRIs) were revised to accord with the new ECD NSP for 2013-2018.
          The fifth restructuring (June, 2018) followed Government reprioritization of activities that
           considered some sub-components as redundant and changed the RF indicators further (ICR, paras.
           11–16). The project closed on time, on September 28, 2018.




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 23
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               The project objectives were substantially relevant to both Government and IBRD strategy at appraisal and
               remained so at closing. The Government showed its support for ECD by establishing the ECC by an act of
               Parliament in 2003 to oversee and coordinate different agencies and sectors involved in ECD (e.g.
               education, health, labor, national training institute). The project aligned well with the Government’s
               development strategy for 2004-2007, in that it directly supported the results-based NSPs developed by the
               ECC to improve the system performance of the ECIs. (The parent project supported the plan for 2008-2012;
               the AF support the updated plan for 2013-2018.)

               More recently, the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2014-2017 included references to “building
               human capital, starting from early childhood, [to provide] the foundations for a more resilient, stronger, and
               more prosperous society“ (page 20). Likewise, the project supported the CPS's outcome 6, “strengthened
               social protection programs and improved institutional capacity for their management” and outcome 7,
               “increased opportunities for the poor and vulnerable.” The 2017 CPS Performance and Learning Review
               extended the Framework's validity for two more years (ICR para. 20).

               An area of misalignment, however, was that the objective was pitched at a level that did not fully match the
               development status and capacity in the country, as described in the CPS (regardless of the
               Government's commitment to the goals), especially given: a) ECC’s status as a relatively new agency; b)
               plans for the ECC to take on more functions during the life of the project; c) ECC's sometimes limited
               authority to obtain commitment from other agencies to fulfill their DLTs; and d) the overall complexity of the
               project. A less complex alternative to supporting the whole NSP (with its seven areas of emphasis, and the
               project's multiple objectives and 71 indicators) was presented in the PAD, but was not chosen due to "need"
               and a reference to compensating capacity in other agencies. (See Section 8a on Quality at Entry).

               The ICR review manual calls for two criteria other than alignment to be considered in relevance: country
               context, including capacity, alluded to above, and previous sector experience. For a first project in the ECD
               sector, the objectives set were overambitious given this context and experience.

               Relevance of objectives is therefore rated substantial rather than high because the objectives of the project
               were pitched at a level that would have required a higher level of capacity among government institutions
               than existed.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
Improve the monitoring of children’s development, the screening of household-level risks affecting such
development, and early intervention systems of the Borrower to promote such development

Rationale
This ICR Review relies on the theory of change implicit in the NSP rather than the theory of change
presented in the ICR, as the NSP's theory of change is more comprehensive and causal relationships are
clearer. For this objective, desired outcomes were plausibly to be achieved through (a) development of a
policy and strategy covering child screening, monitoring, and early intervention; (b) development and
implementation of specific screening tools; (c) adjustments to interventions with at-risk children based on data
collected through those screenings; and (d) public information campaigns. Four types of activities/institutions
were to be involved in the screening: ECIs (private sector, aided by grants to undertake “improvement plans”),
health centers with well-child clinics (not known if eligible for grants); the Ministry of Labor and Social Security
(MLSS)’s at-risk child intervention systems, and the PATH income support program. The envisioned
outcome was more children at the household level screened for risks to health and delayed development.

Note: all baselines were zero unless otherwise stated.

Outputs

Foundational elements achieved: a) development of an ECD policy that includes screening, referral, and
early intervention approaches; b) a public education strategy on risks for children; and c) an Infant and Young
Child Feeding Policy approved by the Cabinet (covering both under and over-nutrition).

Screening models developed and implemented: development and approval by the Ministry of Health
(MoH), MLSS, and ECC of screening and documentation models for high-risk households:

      A child health development passport (CHDP) was developed under the project, approved in 2009 and
       rolled out nationally in September 2010 to replace immunization records. The CHDP added
       information on the child’s education and family health, plus information to make the parent aware of
       common risks. Since 2013, CHDPs have been issued to 98% of babies born, exceeding the original
       target of 50%. All health centers now use the CHDP as a risk screening device. Its use facilitated
       achievement of 92% national coverage for the third dose of diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis vaccine vs. a
       baseline of 85% in 2008. In comments on the draft of this ICR Review, the GP noted that "the CHDP
       captures information that enables parents, health care workers and teachers to better monitor
       children's growth and development and to take early corrective action as needed. Interviews with
       health care workers and early childhood education teachers and principals at the various sites visited
       confirmed that the CHDPs were being used appropriately at clinics and schools, and that although
       completing them increased staff reporting duties, parents appreciated the CHDPs." (Evidence to
       support this note was not provided in the ICR or in the GP comments.)
      A simple first-line screening tool (“Eleven Question Screen”) for developmental delays was developed
       by the MLSS in 2012 and improved in 2013. Using this tool (part of the CHDP), the number of children
       aged 3-6 annually accessing MLSS programs reached 763 against a revised target of 550. The
       cumulative number of children accessing the programs over the life of the project was 5,068. As
       context for interpreting this result, it is important to note that the total number of children attending
       ECIs with permits was almost 92,250 and that the ICR does not indicate what percentage of children


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



         with a need for intervention were identified or reached by this at-risk screening process; thus, an
         important caveat is that this indicator may not provide an accurate basis on which to judge
         achievement of the objective.
        The "Eleven Question Screen" was used to identify high-risk children among households with children
         age 0 – 6 that accessed the PATH cash transfer program. The number identified with high risk was
         764, vs. a 2013 target of 300 and a revised 2014 target of 470. The same caveat on judging this
         achievement relative to need applies as that cited in the point above.

Monitoring data used and reported: The ICR indicates there was complete transfer of information from the
CHDPs to the MOH’s MIS. In addition, the ECC Annual Review Publication reported comprehensively on
performance of the early childhood sector and ECD outcomes, including school readiness, nutrition status,
and growth ratios.

Planned outputs (noted in the PAD) on which information was lacking in the ICR: a) DLTs related to “a
national service delivery model for screening diagnosis and early intervention for child development risk” as
applied to health centers were deleted; the GPs comments on the draft of this ICR review clarified that this
was due to a change in Government priorities given other project activities; and b) information was lacking on
the number/percentage of PATH workers trained to use the screening tool.



Outcomes

Because of the development and use of improved screening tools, behavioral and institutional change took
place, resulting in improved ECD systems for screening, identifying at-risk children, and referring those
children for intervention. Targets for children reached were met or exceeded, as noted above.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhance the quality of early childhood institutions

Rationale
For this objective, desired outcomes were plausibly to be achieved through: (a) enhancing the inspection
system; and (b) recruiting development officers and child development therapists to provide technical support
for ECIs. These activities were to lead to improved quality of facilities.



Outputs

Foundational elements for improving ECI facilities and staffing: a) standards and inspection system
developed, with increased TA support for the latter in the first restructuring; b) a comprehensive HR strategy

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



developed, including compensation and training (extent of training increased in second restructuring); c) ECI
management guide developed; d) parish-level community development model for delivery of ECD services
developed; and e) nutrition policy approved by the Cabinet, and a service delivery model for nutrition support
for children aged 4-6 approved by MoH.

Accreditation system for ECIs approved by the relevant authorities (MoH, ECC): In application, the
standards initially set for accreditation were found to be too high, and in subsequent restructurings, lowered
thresholds for quality were used: for ECIs, the indicator was changed to “issuing permits“; and for health
centers and parent support organizations (covered under the third objective), “certification." For ECIs, permits
to operate were issued when no significant health and safety breaches were identified; areas for improvement
were listed as part of the permit process. The decisions to lower standards were justified after piloting
revealed the difficulty in meeting the standards, and there were concerns about cost-effectiveness and ability
to reach as broad a group of children and parents as possible. The discovery of inability to meet
standards came quite late for the MoH clinics, causing them to miss targets while piloting revised
standards. Later, the ECC established criteria for ECI “certification” (a standard above issuing
permits) that required ECIs to meet all 12 of the ECC's operating standards.

After inspections, the average quality of ECIs improved:

      At least 75% of ECIs received one initial inspection, and 40% a complete inspection, by an ECC-
       trained inspector.
      These inspections resulted in closure of about 500 undocumented ECIs deemed to be unsafe for
       children. 1977 out of 2626, or 75%, passed inspection and were issued permits, exceeding targets.
      129 ECIs met the higher standards for “certification." A DLT calling for information on these certified
       ECIs to be accessible to the public was achieved.
      1,461 out of 2,626, or 52%, implemented their improvement plans, exceeding the original target of
       45%. Presumably these plans were financed by the revamped grant system; no information was given
       in the ICR on the criteria for making grants, or the content, quality, or distribution of grants
       awarded. Examples of improvement plans were not provided in the ICR.



Planned outputs that were only partially achieved, or for which targets were revised downward or
information was not provided in the ICR:

      Health centers offering well child clinics: A strategy for well-child clinics was to have been
       developed; the ICR does not state whether this was achieved. The percent of health centers
       “assessed” using the well-child assessment system was 12%, against an original target of 5%. The
       assessment, however, did not result in many certifications. Only 6 out of 317 centers offering well-
       child clinics were certified (an original target of 30%, later revised to 10%). The program was started
       late, and there were delays deciding institutional arrangements (information from Project Team). The
       MoH stated that more time was needed to train the child health teams and provide printed protocols
       and guidelines for the centers (ICR, Annex 5). There is no information in the ICR on whether the
       health centers were eligible for grants for improvement plans (as the ECIs were) and if any took
       advantage of such programs. Nonetheless, the foundations have been set and next steps laid out,
       and MoH can benefit from the experience with certification of ECIs and parenting support programs
       (the latter covered under Objective 3).

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)




      Piloting of nutrition support: A nutrition support strategy and service delivery model for children
       aged 0–3 was developed, and the fourth restructuring document (para 8) stated that the next step was
       piloting. The pilot of the service delivery model however, was dropped, however, due to
       multiple/duplicative nutrition initiatives taking place in Jamaica at the same time. One example was the
       Jamaica Brain Builders Program, an initiative launched by the ECC in July 2018 as a framework for
       action in the first 1,000 days of a child's life, including nutrition interventions.

Outcomes

 The number of ECIs delivering the standard curriculum effectively (based on COT scores) was 1,000 out of
2,626 (36.5%, exceeding the original target of 25%). Based on the shortcomings related to well child clinics,
achievement of this objective is rated modest, in agreement with the ICR.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthen early childhood organizations and institutions

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective plausibly held that strategy, governance, and data improvement
outputs, as well as training and incentivizing ECI caregivers through improved continuing education and a
licensing system, would strengthen early childhood organizations and institutions at the macro level.



Outputs

Foundational elements on overall policy, ECC strengthening, strategy development, and monitoring:
a) an ECD Policy including local governance approved by 2018, a 2014 target; b) a resource
mobilization strategy approved (including from the private sector); c) reorganization of ECC with increased
staffing, and successful transfer of functions from MoEYI to help assure sustainability; d) a spatial analysis of
ECIs conducted by ECC; e) ECD MIS and statistics strengthened, through data collection included in the
Survey of Living Conditions, and two rounds of the age 4 School Readiness Assessment; f) 2013-2018 NSP
prepared, and preparation of 2019-2023 financed (the ICR did not note if the 2019--2023 strategy was
completed); g) performance of the ECD sector and the NSP for 2013-2018 reported in the
Government's annual review publications, and ECD expenditures reported by the Ministry of Finance and
Public Service; and h) improved financial and accountability arrangements for grant support to ECIs
approved, and subsidy manual produced.

Curriculum improvement, continuing education programs, and licensing developed: The National
Training Agency helped the project develop advanced ECD vocational qualification standards (Level III and
IV) and a licensing system for ECD practitioners. The ECC Board approved a curriculum for child
development therapists, a new cadre of workers whose role was to address vision, hearing, speech

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



impairments, and behavioral development challenges. An online course was developed for ECD
teachers and students in the pipeline (a 2014 target).



Outcomes

        The percentage of ECD practitioners at Level 1 proficiency was lowered from 60% in 2007 to 6% by
         project end. The number qualified at Level III and above was 5,158 out of 11,381 (78%, against a 53%
         original target and a baseline of 7%).
        A classroom observation tool (COT) was developed for use by ECD development officers to assess
         quality of ECI teaching. While the ICR referred to only 16 development officers having been trained,
         100% of them are using the COT tool.
        The number of parishes that have at least one full-time child development therapist on staff in the
         public sector was 7, achieving the target of 7. All used the COT tool.
        90% of ECIs have at least one early childhood practitioner trained in seven areas of ECI safety.

Community-based integrated ECD service delivery model implemented at parish level: Six parishes
(target met) implemented the model. Implementation of the model also involved piloting an ECD Community
Council to coordinate service delivery for children aged 0 to 8.



Based on overachievement of targets for proficiency of practitioners and meeting of all other targets,
achievement of this objective is rated High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Improve parenting education and support programs (added at 2014 Additional Financing; was implicit in
National Strategic Plan)

Rationale
Parenting education and support programs are called “parent places” in Jamaica. Project documents did not
make clear whether they are a subset of ECIs or fall in a separate category. The ICR’s examples of services
provided by parent places included helping parents teach nutrition to young children and discussing parents’
challenges with discipline. The NSP theory of change called for this objective to be achieved by:
development and implementation of a sub-strategy for these programs; an accreditation system; grants to
help providers meet accreditation standards; and a public awareness campaign. (Note: all baselines are zero
unless otherwise given.)




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 23
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



                      Outputs

                      Foundations: A national parenting strategy, parenting standards, and an “accreditation system” for early
                      childhood parenting education and support programs were approved in 2010. The National Parenting Support
                      Commission was established in 2013 to support implementation. As in the case of ECIs and health centers, a
                      pilot showed that a lowered accreditation standard of “certification” was more practical and cost-effective than
                      full accreditation, and could reach more children. Certification covered the physical environment, program
                      design, program administration, human resources, program materials, and program M&E. (Not all of the
                      ECC's 12 operating standards for ECIs were on this list, e.g. child rights.)

                      Parent places identified: The Borrower’s Annual Review publication included identification and mapping by
                      location of early childhood parenting programs. The resulting total count was not provided in the ICR.

                      Assessment and certification of parent places:

                            The percentage assessed was 66% against a revised (lowered) target of 60%. It is not known if any
                             facilities were closed due to unsafe conditions (as with the ECIs). The percentage certified was 48 of
                             92 (52%, against an original target of 30%, revised downward to 20% in 2011, raised again to 60%
                             at the 2014 restructuring, which added the parenting support objective explicitly, and revised again
                             downward to 45% in 2018).
                            A Communication Strategy (2014 target) was developed and implemented. It covered early childhood
                             stimulation, parenting, and nutrition practices, and used media campaigns, public service
                             announcements, and newspaper articles.
                            The ICR provided no information on grants to help parent places achieve accreditation or certification.



                      Outcomes

                      The ICR reports that project-financed improvements resulted in circulation of parenting
                      information. The percentage of parents/guardians of children ages 0-6 who have ever received any
                      information on parenting (excluding that received from family members and friends) reached 45% by 2011;
                      after 2011, this indicator was dropped. No information on survey methods was provided, and therefore the
                      quality of this evidence cannot be assessed.



                      Rating
                      Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale
Objectives 1 and 3 were achieved at a High level. Objective 4 was Substantially achieved. Objective 2 was
Modestly achieved. Overall Efficacy is therefore rated Substantial.




                                                                                                                       Page 11 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)




Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial


5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis at Appraisal

The objectives of the analysis were to estimate internal rate of return (IRR) of the investments under NSP;
assess the distribution of access to ECIs according to socio-economic characteristics; and assess the impact of
NSP investments on recurrent costs after project closing (PAD, para 56). The private IRR to the NSP investment
plan was calculated by estimating the effect of NSP interventions on educational outcome variables using
research evidence. Benefits assumed some decreased rates of dropout and repetition, as well as the effect of
changes in educational outcome variables on wages using current income data. It was assumed that benefits
would extend beyond the project period (at that time 2013), but with some depreciation over time – assumed to
be 20% after two years, and for each of the four following years an additional 20% depreciation from the original
investments. A sensitivity analysis of scenarios decreasing the depreciation assumptions to 15% changed the
IRR estimate only by 0.1%. The projected private IRR varied between 9.0%, 8.5% and 7.5% under high,
middle, and low scenarios for changes in assumed educational attainment of beneficiaries. The societal IRR
would likely be higher (PAD, para 187). Access to ECIs for 4-6 year olds was found to be equitable; enrollment
rates had increased for the lowest income quintiles from 1996 to 2004, resulting in rates above 93% in all by
2006 (PAD, para 59). This analysis justified the NSP's focus on improving quality.

The implementation of the NSP was estimated to cost USD 495.74 million, out of which USD 83.76 were
incremental; parent fees were not included. Most (90%) incremental costs were recurrent costs, which were
projected to increase by 27.9% during project implementation. The IRR estimate included all costs, both non-
incremental and incremental, and the Bank loan financed a portion of both (PAD, para 17).

Ex-Post Economic Analysis

The ICR's approach in calculating the IRR was “as close as possible” to that used for appraisal (ICR, para.
6). The ICR stated that the “resulting IRR is higher than at project appraisal, possibly due to scale up of
activities,” but such an argument would need to show that scale/benefits/beneficiary numbers increased at a
higher rate than cost, especially since the ex-post IRR only used data from 2013–2018 (see below).

The ICR's method of IRR analysis differed from the ex-ante analysis in several key ways:

      Possible improvements in education efficiency, e.g. a reduction in dropout and repetition rates, were
       not included (information provided by Project Team).
      The IRR was calculated using data from 2013–2018, which corresponds to the second half of the
       project. The reason given was that the MoEYI provided detailed information on participants of each
       intervention during those years (ICR, para 34), allowing a comprehensive calculation of benefits (Project
       Team). IEG considers it likely that this methodology would introduce a positive bias to the
       IRR. Considering implementation delays at the beginning of the project (see below), it is likely that
       the benefit/cost ratio during the first phase was lower than the second. (The Project Team confirmed that
       it would require additional data and time to test that hypothesis.)


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



      The ICR did not provide information on cost analysis, but the Project Team confirmed that total costs
       were used. The ICR did not, however, repeat the PAD’s analysis of the impact of the project on the
       Government's recurrent costs, a factor important for sustainability.

The IRR was estimated at 10.86% with a benefit-cost ratio of 2.32. The calculations assumed a work life of 38
years starting at age 22 and a discount rate of 8% and used 2017 gross domestic product per capita as a proxy
for average wage. The employment rate assumed was 54.3%. At end-project, the impact was assumed to last
for five more years, reported to be a conservative assumption according to the literature. As in the ex-ante
analysis, benefits having to do with improved parenting, screening and early intervention, health, and
strengthened institutions were not captured by the calculations. “Different tiers of impact” were assumed
according to how many components children participated in and the duration they were exposed to the program.
No account was taken of health interventions, since data was from MoEYI. The benefit-cost ratio stayed positive
even when the discount ratio was varied from a low of 5% to a high of 10%. The sensitivity analysis also found
that even after lowering the assumed impact to a level below that recorded in impact evaluation studies and the
literature, the IRR range and benefit/cost ratio remained positive (ICR, Annex 4).

Implementation Efficiency

The initial project was planned for five years. At restructuring, additional financing was added, along with an
additional five years. The ICR does not present detailed information to underlie an assessment of whether the
scaleup in results/benefits made possible by the additional financing was proportional to the amount of
additional financing.

The ICR and project documents describe early delays due to: a) inexperience of the ECC, staffing constraints,
and inexperience with international procurement procedures (ICR, paras. 35, 45); b) flaws in the
reimbursement/DLT synchronization (later fixed at the first restructuring) (First Restructuring Paper, para. 24),
and c) limited authority of ECC to mobilize all partner agencies to action (ICR, para. 47). The 2008 financial
crisis apparently also limited counterpart funds, causing staffing constraints. Detailed analysis of delays was
difficult due to the complexity inherent in the presence of 71 DLTs and indicators, many of which changed with
each restructuring. Also, the ICR contained scant information on the timing of DLT achievements.

Later delays resulted from a transfer of responsibilities from MoEYI to ECC, and the difficulty of finding the right
consultants in certain technical areas (ICR, para 47). Exogenous factors (epidemics, regional aid
responsibilities) were also cited as contributing to delays. Because the project had many interdependent parts,
delays in some aspects caused ripple effects on progress in others, resulting in inefficiency; this point was made
both in the ICR and in the Government’s end-project review (ICR, Annex 5, pp. 57-58), although the project
documents provide no critical path framework to demonstrate this definitively. The ICR lacks full information on
which DLTs and indicators were dropped because they were achieved, and which were dropped for other
reasons--for example, because there were better indicators, or because they were not realistic.

The ICR gave little perspective on how NSP fared in implementation progress compared to other education
sector quality assurance efforts. An example of a Mauritius project was shared in response to the circulation of
the draft ICRR. No unit costs were reported.

Project efficiency is rated modest, based on: (a) multiple delays (without full quantitative evidence on them, e.g.
DLTs achieved on time or not); (b) limitation in the ICR's IRR analysis which arose from unavailability of relevant




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



data for the first half of the project; and (c) lack of full data on scaleup. Taken together, the assessment of
efficiency suggested that the implementation of the project was likely not least cost.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       63.00
 Appraisal                                                   7.50
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       54.00
 ICR Estimate                                                10.90
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated Substantial, as the project's objective was pitched at a level that was not well aligned with
development status and capacity in the country. Achievement of objectives is rated Substantial, based on High
achievement of two objectives, Substantial achievement of one objective, and Modest achievement of one
objective. Efficiency is rated modest due to evidence of delays, lack of full data on scaleup, and shortcomings in
the IRR calculation (resulting from unavailability of relevant data for the first half of the project). Overall, these
factors are indicative of moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation, consistent with
an Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Most of the risks rightly identified at appraisal, with regard to fiduciary aspects and administration of grant
funds, show signs of having been resolved, although the ICR did not treat the latter in much detail. The
ECC’s capacity and authority has been strengthened and a Steering Committee formed to further improve
coordination between sectors. The Government’s commitment remains high, as evidenced by the third
installment of the NSP covering 2018-2023. The foundations for both standards setting and the inspections
systems underpinning its application are largely in place. The one subsector that lagged behind targets –
well-child clinics -- is now benefitting from a piloting of revised standards that have proven attainable in some



                                                                                                       Page 14 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



clinics, boding well for a continuation of momentum. While only 2% of the clinics have been certified, 12%
had been assessed by project end.

The main risk for sustainability is financial constraint. The Government funded the bulk of the expenditures of
this project, but the project did increase recurrent costs, and, at various times during implementation, fiscal
strains constrained staffing and other key implementation steps. To mitigate this risk, the project financed a
resource mobilization strategy that included the possibility of raising funds from the private sector. The NSP
successfully raised some funds from foundations, and official donors other than the Bank continue to show
interest in supporting the sector as well.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Overall project design (parent project stage) drew on key elements of the Bank’s Country Assistance
  Strategy of 2005, particularly pillar 11: improving human development and opportunity, and also
  supported other complementary projects (ICR, paras. 9, 85). While Jamaica had achieved both high
  enrollment rates for ECD programs and high vaccination rates (PAD, paras. 43, 66), the quality and
  standards applied in the mostly private-sector ECD centers had been uneven, and there was a need to
  add parenting education. Thus, the project’s focus on quality assurance (QA) was well-founded.

  Detailed project design was based on sound sector analysis and a literature review including more than
  fifty studies on the impact of early childhood development on later productivity and earnings (and possible
  other societal benefits such as reducing crime) (PAD, para. 62). Preparation was led by a multi-sector
  team of high-level Jamaican ECD experts with deep knowledge and experience in the sector (ICR, para.
  42). The relevance to the Government's development objectives was clearly established. The design of
  the ECD NSP had been collaborative and was comprehensive, including all aspects potentially affecting
  ECD, reflecting international best practice. Regionally, Jamaica's approach to the sector has been
  appreciated as innovative, as other countries seek to emulate the approach in the NSP. The project's
  anchoring in the NSP, bolstered by previous supportive legal actions, meant that its strategic directions
  were endorsed at the highest levels, ensuring strong client ownership.

  There were prior assessments of financial and procurement capacity, as well as the operation of the
  grants system (for ECIs), and the PAD drew on these effectively to design conditions of negotiations,
  effectiveness, and disbursement. The risk assessment and design of mitigation measures were
  sound. The economic and financial analysis at appraisal was well done, as it went beyond the usual IRR
  and benefit-cost analysis (as covered in Section 5). The project's design, a SWAp with DLTs to be
  fulfilled, was meant to “mimic an incentive framework similar to performance-based budgeting," which
  the Government sought to pilot (PAD, para 117). The inclusion of design of a resource mobilization
  strategy as a component was an added plus. The social safeguard study was particularly participatory
  and thorough (see Section 10a), confirming the focus on quality assurance. The emphasis on multiple
  indicators of quality of the ECI services in the results framework and provision for support of a survey to
  measure ECD outcomes was laudable (see Section 9).

  However, there were some significant shortcomings.


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



        The project was overly complex given the ECC's status as a relatively new agency. As designed,
         the project supported seven areas of emphasis of the NSP, with multiple compound
         objectives, 71 indicators, and DLTs that were under the responsibility of seven different
         agencies. While the PAD addressed alternatives considered (para. 36), one of which was “a
         phased approach … whereby phase I focused on providing technical assistance to the ECC, and
         phase II focused on the implementation of the NSP,” alternatives were rejected based on “urgent
         need” and an assessment of other Government capacity that proved to be an overestimate. The
         ICR did not indicate whether the project team considered a SWAp design that was less
         comprehensive, supporting only a part of the Government's ECD NSP in a first phase.

        The thresholds for standards were overly optimistic. In all three types of institutions targeted for
         improved quality (parenting centers, ECIs, and health clinics), the initial standards laid out for
         “accreditation” were later lowered, due to both prohibitive costs and the desire to reach more
         beneficiaries.

        Although grants constituted the largest proportion of project costs, provisions for assessing the
         effectiveness of the selection and distribution process were scant. The PAD did not mention the
         criteria used in the past for the targeting of grants to ECIs, and whether or how the targeting
         would change under the project. This aspect was also not captured in the project's indicators,
         which were all focused on aggregate performance (See Section 9a). As a result, the project did
         not achieve its aim to create incentive structures similar to performance based budgeting.

        In comments on the draft ICR Review, the GP stated that the lack of design focus on grants was
         intentional, and consistent with the SWAp approach adopted. IEG acknowledges this point, while
         considering the lack of attention to the effectiveness and distribution of grants as, at most, a
         design flaw, and at least, a missed opportunity to achieve the government’s stated goal of piloting
         incentive structures similar to performance-based budgeting.
        The design of monitoring and evaluation also did not include sufficient provision for measuring
         benefits, a significant gap in a project focused on quality assurance. This gap also ultimately
         compromised the precision of the economic analysis.

  The shortcomings noted are considered significant, consistent with a rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 In general, the Bank team proactively identified issues with achievement of development outcomes and
 assisted the client in addressing them (ICR, para 60). Examples of this proactivity include the revamping of
 disbursement processes and reporting at the first restructuring (Restructuring Paper 1, para 24);
 procurement of an HR expert to assist in resolving recruiting and staff retention problems (ICR, para.
 46); and eventual streamlining of the burdensome number of indicators (see Section 9b). The Borrower’s
 comments (Annex 5) described Bank supervision as prompt and “highly satisfactory." The ICR stated that
 reporting in the Implementation Status Reports was transparent, with risks flagged appropriately. Fiduciary

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



 and procurement aspects were intensively supervised, assessed and reported on (para 61). Project M&E
 data were used regularly for decision-making by the ECC and the Bank, particularly for adjusting objectives
 and targets for key indicators. The mid-term review was used to justify and begin design of the AF. The
 restructuring papers were well prepared, covering completely implementation status at the time and the
 state of risks.

 There were minor shortcomings. There was not regular monitoring of recurrent costs, or of the fiscal impact
 of the increased expenditures incurred by the Government for the project (information later added by the
 Project Team). The supervision team did not recognize--and therefore could not address--a lack of focus
 on the “micro-effectiveness of grant distribution” (Project Team). At one point, however, due to safeguards
 supervision, a pattern was noted of neglecting some poor districts, and this was pointed out to the
 Government. Although laudable surveys of beneficiaries were carried out in the design stage, these were
 not repeated in the mid-term review or later in the project implementation period, to inform the AF design.
 Similarly, there was no mid-term review planned for the second-phase AF. These were considered missed
 opportunities (confirmed by the Project Team).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 It is noteworthy that the NSP included evidence-based decision-making as an area of emphasis.
 Measurement and monitoring were therefore built into the foundations of the project. The NSP had a
 component to improve the national system for monitoring early childhood outcomes, including the
 introduction of impact indicators: a) a questionnaire module to measure child development in the Survey of
 Living Conditions; and b) a regular assessment of child development at age 4, to track effectiveness and
 provide feedback to ECD practitioners. The project also financed tools for monitoring HR capacity, a mid-
 term review (of the NSP) to feed into design of the NSP for 2013–2018, and a near-end project review.

 The project monitoring system design laid out in the appraisal documents consisted of: a) DLTs, which
 were mostly discrete qualitative steps to monitor progress on the NSP; and b) PDO and intermediate
 results indicators that were mostly quantitative (PAD, para 45). There were 71 of these indicators in
 total, with overlap between them. This complex design posed challenges for both Government and the
 supervision team. Although broader data collected by the borrower filled some gaps, shortcomings of the
 project indicators included: a) an over-reliance on indicators stated in terms of percentages without
 including absolute numbers, which hindered measurement of reach or coverage (the total number of
 beneficiaries in terms of children, households, and ECIs were notable by their absence among key
 indicators); and b) lack of disaggregation by gender. There was no theory of change or critical path




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



 description in the appraisal document, making it difficult to judge the consequences of delays or the
 importance of dropped indicators that were not achieved.

 Overall, the project’s targets and monitoring had an aggregate focus. Less attention was paid to the
 content, distribution, and results of grants to ECIs, despite the fact that the grants comprised the highest
 proportion of project expenditures. There is no evidence that the question “Are the right ECIs receiving the
 grants, and by what criteria?” was addressed in the M&E design.

 A full-time MIS officer was recruited for ECC. Monitoring DLTs was the responsibility of the ECC, but
 delivering on some of the DLTs involved six other agencies, requiring memos of understanding and
 collaboration, and carrying the potential to create bottlenecks in data collection and monitoring.



b. M&E Implementation
  Data collection measures were appropriate, and the data were, in general, found to be reliable and of
  good quality. The web-based MIS was effective in capturing progress on indicators monitoring the
  NSP. ECC hired the planned dedicated Research/MIS Officer responsible for maintaining the data and
  troubleshooting any quality issues. The updated results framework was discussed during each
  supervision mission, leading to corrective actions.

  The targets for indicator achievement (in terms of both time frame and level) changed many times. At
  each restructuring, some indicators were dropped, for varied reasons: a) they were achieved (usually
  DLTs); b) they were judged redundant; or c) they were no longer realistic. At the fourth restructuring, new
  indicators and targets were also introduced. The cumulative effect of these changes during restructurings
  was a reduction, by end-project, to five PDO indicators and 21 intermediate results indicators.

  The ICR reported some absolute figures on children reached by project interventions, disaggregated by
  gender, showing that the ECC MIS collected some data beyond that required for Bank reporting on the
  project. The MoEYI and MoH also had MIS systems that contributed to some results reporting; the ICR
  does not discuss whether the project strengthened those systems.

  The midterm review was completed and served its purpose of assisting in design of the AF. Information
  presented in the ICR on the end-project review conducted by the Borrower (ICR, Annex 5) listed useful
  basic data on documentation of achievement of DLTs, but it also contained inconsistencies and was
  limited in coverage.



c. M&E Utilization
  Project M&E data were used regularly for decision-making by the ECC and the Bank, providing the basis
  for adjusting targets that could realistically be met to support reimbursement of key expenditures. For
  example, M&E data detected a slippage in the percentage of children enrolled in ECIs with permits to
  operate. The teams determined that one contributing factor was increasing demands on ECC inspection
  staff, and corrective actions were agreed (ICR, para 54). As noted, the mid-term review led to
  agreement between the Borrower and the Bank on the need to restructure the project and add AF.




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project did not trigger environmental safeguards and was rated Environmental Assessment category C.
   No buildings were planned, although allowance was made for possible minor works financed with
   counterpart funding, for which construction standards were to be in the Operational Manual and all
   Requests for Proposals. In addition, the Borrower agreed not to provide health services that produced
   medical waste.

   A comprehensive social assessment identified risks of exclusion of children with disabilities and from
   minority communities (Maroon and Rastafarian) (ICR, para 56). The assessment included not only desk
   review, but also a survey of communities and interviews with key stakeholders, including those working with
   disabled children (PAD, para 192). The design mitigated this risk by: a) ensuring that the curriculum
   included age-appropriate and culturally-sensitive references to diverse groups; and b) financing specialized
   training of ECI staff on identification and support for children with disabilities. Also, the PAD recommended
   that the ECC expand its presence in minority communities and provide parent education programs that
   were sensitive to diverse social groups (PAD, paras 56, 64). The development of parish-based ECD
   delivery models, and the formation of a Community Council and communication activities, supported these
   efforts. Safeguards (social factors) were monitored periodically by specialists, and at one point a potential
   inequity was identified and reported to Government. In general, however, the distribution of grants from an
   equity perspective was not monitored (information later provided by the Project Team).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM): The PAD used FM and procurement assessments (2006, 2007) at appraisal,
   identifying weaknesses and factoring these into the risk assessment, but set out to use country systems
   while addressing weaknesses through loan conditions. Challenges were discussed at the highest political
   level, and it was agreed that action plans would be carried out to strengthen FM and internal auditing
   (PAD, para 63). The project supported establishment of an FM system at ECC, following a transfer of
   authority from the MoEYI, and extra staffing and the establishment of an internal audit unit at ECC (ICR,
   para 57). FM status at the time of the AF was reported to be “good," as the accounting and audit systems
   (the latter “highly effective”) had been strengthened under the parent project. Still, close supervision was
   planned to continue (Restructuring Paper, Annex 2). The ICR reported that FM arrangements were
   satisfactory and in compliance with guidelines throughout most of the implementation period (ICR, para
   57).

   Procurement: Similar to the case of FM, prior assessments in 2006 showed weaknesses in the
   procurement systems that affected transparency (PAD, para 158). The procurement system was
   multilayered, involving a National Contracts Commission, various committees, and a contact point at the
   Ministry of Finance and Public Service (PAD, para 160). Corrective measures built into design included: a)
   recruitment of a full-time procurement specialist for ECC with experience in international aid procurement

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 23
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



   procedures, whose terms of reference the Bank would approve; b) submission to the Bank of a preliminary
   procurement plan for the first 18 months of the project (condition of negotiations) (PAD, para 165); and c)
   supervision missions every six months and post review of procurement once a year (PAD, para 167). The
   ICR reported frequent procurement delays (paras 35, 45, 47). However, in the fiduciary section, the
   ICR stated that most of the time procurement arrangements were satisfactory, with problems mainly
   surfacing toward the end of the project, specifically persistent delays on a few key contracts (ICR, para
   58). Ex-post reviews confirmed compliance of procurement procedures by the ECC. The ICR and the
   Borrower’s end-project review report cited other factors beyond the control of the ECC causing
   procurement delays (difficulty in finding technical experts; one case of a conflict of interest discovered late)
   (ICR, Annex 5, p. 57, and additional information provided later by the Project Team).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR reported that the project leveraged financing from the United Kingdom aid agency (through the
   Early Learning Partnership Trust Fund) and United Nations Children's Fund for research. Already, ECC
   representatives have spoken at international conferences, participated in a South-South knowledge
   exchange, and are planning to open a regional ECD professional development institute scheduled for May
   2019 (ICR, para 41). The added support for research should allow this regional leadership to continue.



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                   IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   Efficiency is rated modest due to
                                                                                   shortcomings in implementation
                                                                                   efficiency and an IRR calculation
Outcome                           Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   affected by unavailable data.
                                                                                   Achievement of one objective is
                                                                                   rated Modest.
                                  Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Substantial
                                                                                   There were minor to moderate
                                                                                   shortcomings in following ICR
Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial                guidelines, reporting on DLTs,
                                                                                   and presenting information on
                                                                                   efficacy and efficiency.



                                                                                                      Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



12. Lessons

A Sector Wide Approach (SWAp) using disbursement-linked targets (DLTs) can align incentives
within Government to achieve a project’s targets and aid intersectoral coordination. In this case,
central government authorities were incentivized to engage relevant line ministries, and the
implementing entities outside the main implementing agency (the Early Childhood Commission,
ECC) were encouraged to collaborate to meet project targets. A conventional input-focused project
may not have mobilized all agencies in a unified action plan in the same way. Nonetheless, a more
streamlined model with fewer DLTs and a simpler results framework may well have reaped the same
relative benefits, with less need for changed schedules and restructurings.

Whether a project uses a SWAp or traditional investment project design, it is necessary to ensure
that adequate incentives, authority, and communication mechanisms are in place to sustain
commitment and accountability from all partners, and that cross-sectoral coordination bodies have
leverage to drive results. In this case, the ECC initially lacked full authority to hold other executing
agencies accountable and to sanction non-compliant early childhood institutions.

Project targets should be set realistically, accounting for the implementing organization’s experience.
In this case, ECC faced a steep learning curve as it began project implementation. A phased
approach to build capacity initially, or setting more explicit objectives of strengthening overall project
management, might have increased effectiveness and reduced the need to adjust targets.

Building and sustaining effective quality assurance (QA) systems starts with careful setting of initial
standards. In this case, for the certification of well-child clinics, the Ministry of Health created
standards that almost no facilities were prepared to meet, contributing to the project’s missing the
certification target, and leaving a temporary void in standards.

Where project disbursements are against grants to a large number of decentralized institutions with
improvement action plans, effects on equity need to be monitored. In this project, disbursements
were linked to aggregate targets, for example, the percentage of ECIs and health centers with well-
child clinics certified. Although grants to these institutions formed the largest share of
disbursements, there was little evidence in the project documents that the criteria against which
grants were made were examined, revised, and/or monitored throughout the project with an eye
toward effects on results and equity. The desire to meet targets related to standards could result in
disproportionate resources allocated to facilities that are close to higher standards at the outset, thus
serving more advantaged areas.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The ICR stated that this is one of the first SWAp projects in the Bank. Given that this was the case, the
  project's complexity was a design shortcoming, and an assessment may shed light on alternative designs,

                                                                                                       Page 21 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



  although a later SWAp project may be a better-practice case for assessment. In addition, the ICR did not treat
  comprehensively: (i) the consequences of all delays and changes in indicators for efficacy or implementation
  efficiency; (ii) the consequences of using only latter-year data for calculations of IRR and benefit-cost ratio
  (2013–2018, when the project started in 2008); and (iii) the criteria for allocation of grants to ECIs, their
  rationale, the possible need for change, and monitoring for equity concerns. Thus, an assessment could shed
  further light on these issues not well covered in the ICR, if judged consequential for either ratings or lessons.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presented many valuable facts about project implementation, usually well organized to support
conclusions. The discussions on context, relevance, and project restructurings were well written. The inclusion
of an Annex 7 attempting to describe all changes in indicators for each restructuring was laudable, although the
ICR author stated it did not cover all DLTs. The analysis of factors affecting implementation was thorough,
although it was sometimes difficult to place them in time, e.g. link them to supervision report ratings. Writing
was clear and concise. In many cases, useful examples were provided as evidence, e.g. for utilization of M&E
and quality of supervision. Presentation of a Theory of Change diagram was a welcome addition, since the PAD
did not present one; however, it had shortcomings (see below.) The ICR went out of its way to cite some
absolute numbers in its efficacy discussion and annexes on achievements, as opposed to just the percentages
in the formal project results framework, including gender disaggregation. The ICR was candid in presenting a
key case where project outputs were not achieved. Lessons were well identified and described. The ICR
effectively covered the way in which the project addressed gender issues.

However, there were minor to moderate shortcomings. Most notably, Annex 3 contained inaccuracies in several
respects. First, it did not list total costs, by component, with all sources of financing identified, including
Borrower contributions. Second, the stated amount of the IBRD loan “at approval” was inconsistent with the
amount noted in the PAD (para 92) and the LA (p. 11). Likewise, the efficiency section and Annex 3
lacked information on total costs. Annex 5, “Government, Cofinancier, and Other Partner/Stakeholder
Comments,” was not presented in full (or at least in summary form that contained key information such as title
and location of the original document or information on the ministry or agency that prepared it; instead, a note
at the front said only that the introduction had been omitted deliberately “for brevity"). In commenting on
the draft ICR Review, the GP provided information on the parts omitted.

The theory of change presented in the ICR did not clearly link NSP areas of emphasis/outcomes to the
project's activities (and outputs and outcomes). Only some of the last two areas of NSP – improving
governance and evidence based decision-making – were covered. The efficacy section did not refer to the
theory of change, focused only on selected indicators, and did not mention some key indicators that
were dropped or some cases where standards were lowered. Better presentation of a “critical path” to
outcomes, specifying which steps were achieved, which dropped, and which not achieved, and the
consequences, was needed. The information was not well organized in a way that would enable the reader to
place the succinct efficacy narrative in the context of a more comprehensive examination of outputs and
outcomes achieved or not achieved (using Annex 1, Parts A and B and Annex 7, each of which contained
different degrees of detail and some inconsistent terms).

Information on the original and revised DLTs--including whether and when they were achieved, whether and
when they were dropped, and why they were dropped--was insufficient. DLTs were the basis for disbursement
releases under the SWAp (by far the largest part of the project compared to TA), and some were a critical-path

                                                                                                    Page 22 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      JM Early Childhood Develop Proj -- SWAP (P095673)



step to achievement of PDO indicators. Lack of full information on them had consequences for assessment
of efficacy and efficiency.

The analysis of efficiency was not concise and was incomplete. The narrative sometimes mixed concepts of
efficacy and efficiency. The reasons given for limiting use of data to the second half of the project (2013–2018)
were not sufficient, and consequences were not covered. The summary statement “Overall, efficiency was
satisfactory and in line with expectations in the sector” (ICR, para 35) was not supported by evidence. The ICR
did not report unit costs or comparisons.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 23 of 23
