      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)



                                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0021774


1. Project Data



 Project ID                                      Project Name
 P123729                                         CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project

 Country                                         Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                           Transport



  L/C/TF Number(s)                               Closing Date (Original)                            Total Project Cost (USD)
  IBRD-82560                                     31-Dec-2018                                                     49,393,873.41

  Bank Approval Date                             Closing Date (Actual)
  13-May-2013                                    31-Dec-2018

                                                  IBRD/IDA (USD)                                                Grants (USD)

  Original Commitment                                     50,000,000.00                                                      0.00

  Revised Commitment                                      49,393,873.41                                                      0.00

  Actual                                                  49,393,873.41                                                      0.00




 Prepared by                    Reviewed by                      ICR Review Coordinator                Group
 Kavita Mathur                  Peter Nigel Freeman              Victoria Alexeeva                     IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives



                                                                                                                    Page 1 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)



   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was to improve airline connectivity in northeastern Jiangxi Province and to
   demonstrate the environmental sustainability of the development and operation of the Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport (Loan
   Agreement page 5, and PAD para 12).

   The PDO was not revised during the life of the project.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had two components:

   Component 1. Airport Infrastructure Development (estimated cost at appraisal (includes contingencies): US$100.7 million;
   actual cost at project closing: US$121.5 million). This component included the construction and installation of the following:
   (i) airfield – construction of runway, taxiway, etc; (ii) terminal building; (iii) air traffic control; (iv) freight facility; (v)
   supporting infrastructure facility (fuel storage farm, water supply, power supply, fire stations, heating, storm/water
   management, parking, fence, etc); (vi) implementation of the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and the Resettlement
   Action Plan (financed fully by government own funds); (vii) auxiliary facility (office building, staff quarters, etc); and (viii)
   storm water reuse system and ground aircraft auxiliary power unit.

   Component 2. Institutional Development and Capacity Building (estimated cost at appraisal: US$2.0 million; actual cost at
   project closing: US$1.5 million). This component included provision of consultancy and technical advisory services, studies
   and training:

         • Project Management Consultant to provide advisory services to support the Project Management Office (PMO) and
           Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Company Limited (SSAC) on project coordination and monitoring;

         • Management Consultant services to (i) develop Airport Operation Model for SSAC, (ii) prepare and implement
           Human Resource Development plan, operational and financial manual (in accordance with China’s company’s law),
           (iii) assist SSAC to comply with Civil Aviation Administration of China (CAAC) regulations and international
           practices, and (iv) assist SSAC to develop a marketing plan to attract airlines and assist in service agreement
           negotiations with airlines;

         • Technical assistance to support the PMO to (i) document the lessons learned in developing Green Airport concept,
           (ii) share their experience widely with other potential cities considering building green airport in China through



                                                                                                                        Page 2 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)



            wider dissemination and holding workshops and road shows in selected cities, and (iii) other civil aviation related
            studies; and

         • Training and study tours covering several aspects of airport construction and operations.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The actual project cost at project closing was US$125.5 million, higher than the appraisal estimate of US$105.1
   million. The project team explained that the cost overrun was due to the change in terminal building and site preparation (see
   Efficiency section 5 for details). The actual and appraisal cost includes (i) interest during construction US$2.28 million, and
   (ii) front-end-fees US$0.125 million.

   Financing. The Bank financed a total of US$49.4 million through an IBRD loan, which is 98.8% of the original loan amount
   of US$50.0 million. The loan was fully disbursed.

   Co-financing. There was no co-financing.

   Borrower Contribution. At appraisal, the Borrower was expected to contribute US$55.1 million. The actual Borrower
   contribution was US$76.1 million to finance the cost overrun.

   Dates. The project was approved on May 13, 2013, became effective on July 16, 2013 and closed on December 31, 2018 as
   scheduled.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale

Country Context: Air transport plays an important role in China in promoting economic and social development and
reducing regional disparities. Despite the large airport infrastructure development, the provision of efficient airport service
has lagged behind, in part because (i) air transport resources and function between airports in some regions were not
optimized, and (ii) air transport was not integrated with local urban planning and surface transport planning. Issues such as
poor connectivity with regional airports, poor operational efficiency, and low utilization of feeder airports were restraining
China from building a mature and efficient air transportation network (PAD para 6). The 2008 China’s National Civil
Airport Development Plan envisioned 244 civil airports by the end of 2020 to enable all provincial capitals, major cities,
and major tourism destinations to be connected by a functional hub, trunk, and feeder airport network.

Alignment with Strategy: The project’s objectives are strongly aligned with both Strategic Theme 1: Supporting greener
growth, and Strategic Theme 2: Promoting more inclusive development, of the World Bank’s Country Partnership

                                                                                                                        Page 3 of 18
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)



          Strategy (CPS) for China 2013–2016 (this is the latest CPS). The PDO "improve airline connectivity in northeastern
          Jiangxi Province" was highly relevant to Outcome 2.4: Improving transport connectivity for more balanced regional
          development as improving airline connectivity would shorten economic distances between cities and reduce rural-urban
          and regional disparities (CPS para 63). The PDO "to demonstrate the environmental sustainability of the development and
          operation of the airport" was aligned with CPS Strategic Theme 1, Supporting Greener Growth, under which the Bank
          aimed at expanding its focus on environmental sustainability across China's portfolio (CPS para 48).

          The PDOs are highly relevant to the Government of China's 13th Five Year Plan (2016-2020) which aims to further
          improve the capacity of air transport and expand the network for more inclusive development. To promote environmental
          sustainability and investments in ‘greening’ growth, the State Council issued a "Three-year Action Plan to Win Blue Sky
          Protection War" in June 2018. The action plan identified the civil aviation industry as a key area to reduce the country’s
          carbon footprint (ICR para 17). The Jiangxi General Airport Layout Plan, issued in July 2017, aims to build more than 50
          airports by 2030, covering all cities, major industry zones, and main tourism areas, to further improve air connectivity in the
          region and stimulate economic development (ICR para 18).

          Sector Context: China is expected to have a total of 260 airports by 2020 and 320 by 2025. Taking this into account,
          China committed to carbon reduction in the Paris Climate Agreement of 2015. This is the only Bank-financed airport in
          China and was a high profile project, as it was conceived as a demonstration project to show how a green airport should be
          designed. This experience would then be rolled out nation-wide for the development of future feeder airport projects in
          China. This project did not suffer from lack of resources because of the importance attached to it. The Borrower added
          capital funds in the form of a grant to expand the size of the terminal after it was realized that there would be a greater than
          expected shift from rail to air. The Borrower also provided a substantial operating cost subsidy during the initial year of
          operation to cover non-operating income.
          Rating Relevance TBL




          Rating
          High


  4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


EFFICACY_TBL




                           OBJECTIVE 1
                           Objective
                           To improve airline connectivity in northeastern Jiangxi Province.

                           Rationale
                           Theory of Change.



                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)




The theory of change of this objective was that the construction of Sanqingshan airport infrastructure including (i) construction
of runway, taxiway, etc, (ii) terminal building, (iii) air traffic control building and tower, (iv) freight facility, and (v) supporting
infrastructure (fuel storage farm, water supply, power supply, fire stations, heating, storm/water management, parking, fence,
etc), was expected to improve the operation of Sanqingshan Airport and attract commercial airlines and reduce travel time
between Shangrao and other major cities, thereby improving airline connectivity in northeastern Jiangxi Province.

Outputs

The construction of the airport was completed on December 29, 2016, one year earlier than planned (ICR para 38). This
included:

      • Construction of 4c level airfield, runway, taxiway, etc;

      • Terminal building and apron;

      • Air traffic control building & tower;

      • Freight Facility;

      • Supporting Infrastructure facility;

      • Auxiliary Facility (office building, staff quarters, etc); and

      • Storm water reuse system and ground aircraft auxiliary power unit.

Intermediate outcomes

The airport became operational on May 28, 2017.

      • At project close (December 2018), five commercial airlines were connecting Shangrao to eight destinations:
          Beijing, Shenzhen, Qingdao, Huizhou, Chengdu, Zhoushan, Kunming and Harbin.

      • The number of airplanes taking-off/landing increased from 1634 (May 28 to December 31, 2017) to 4512 in 2018.
          During the same period, number of passengers (in/out) increased from 146,700 to 375,000, and cargo shipped
          increased from 5.4 tons to 121 tons.

      • Average passenger occupancy (% to the total number of seats) was 78% in 2018.

      • In April 2019, four additional routes were opened from Shangrao to: (i) Sanya, a tourism city in Hainan Province, travel
          time was reduced from 12 hours to 2.5 hours; (ii) Jinan, capital city of Shandong Province, travel time was reduced from




                                                                                                                          Page 5 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)




          6 hours to 1.75 hours; (iii) Guiyang, the capital city of Guizhou province, travel time was reduced from 7 hours to 2.25
          hours; and (iv) Ningbo, a major city in Zhejiang province, travel time was reduced from 3.5 hours to 1.3 hours.

Outcomes

This objective was fully achieved, and its efficacy is rated high. There was substantial reduction in travel time
between Shangrao and major destinations. The target for travel time reduction was exceeded, actual reduction was 45%
compared to the target of 27%, by end 2018 (the comparator mode of transport was the shortest travel time before the airport’s
opening, which was: (i) a combination of a flight to the nearby airport from the major cities and ground transport; and (ii) rail
transport). There were daily flights from Shangrao to Beijing, Huizhou, Shenzhen, Qingdao, Chengdu, while flights
to Kunming and Harbin were thrice a week.




Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To demonstrate the environmental sustainability of the development and operation of the Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport.

Rationale
Theory of Change.

The theory of change for this objective was that the projects technical assistance in developing Green Airport concept and
implementation of the Bank's Environmental Management Plan would support environmentally friendly airport design,
construction, and operation. This would result in developing a Green Airport. Upon completion, Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport
would be recognized as “Green Airport” through an established recognition process.

Outputs

The PMO prepared the “Shangrao Sanqingshan Green Airport Design Guidelines” and the "Green Airport" concept was
incorporated in the design of the airport.

       • The Sanqingshan Airport was designed with energy efficient architecture. This included natural ventilation, double
          glass facades, and large roof overhangs to protect it from the sun.

       • The airport layout was also energy efficient. The terminal and runways were designed so as to provide the most direct
          route to reduce taxiing time, thereby saving fuel.



                                                                                                                     Page 6 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)




      • A ground aircraft auxiliary power unit was established to reduce fuel use. This system operates as an external power
        source for the aircraft.

      • A storm water reuse system was setup, whereby storm water is treated and collected in a water tank under the airport
        parking lot. This water is used for washing the airport structure, pavement, watering plants, and for flushing in
        restrooms.

      • The airport is now using energy efficient equipment such as LED lights, Pre-Conditioned Air (PCA) unit to provide
        heating or cooling to the aircraft, and intermittent functioning modes for elevators, escalators and pedestrian conveyors.

      • Ground Source Heat Pump (GSHP) system was installed to convert the energy source for heating and cooling the
        Airport Terminal from oil-fired boilers with large air handling units to a new geothermal system.

Outcomes

This objective was fully achieved, and its efficacy is rated high. The PDO indicator "Shangrao Airport recognized as “Green
Airport” through established recognition process" was achieved. The airport was awarded Excellence in Design for Greater
Efficiencies (EDGE) certificate on January 21, 2019. EDGE, an innovation of IFC, is a green building standard and a
certification system for designing green within a local climate context (www.edgebuildings.com). According to the ‘EDGE’
evaluation, the Shangrao Sanqingshan airport achieved 24% energy saving, 42% water saving, 38% building materials embodied
energy saving, and 24% operational CO2 saving.

The project supported substantial reduction in energy consumption of the terminal building. The Technical Assistance
Report on the Green Operation of Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport (prepared under the project and the Project Team informed
IEG that the report was completed in December 2018) found that the energy consumption per unit area of the terminal
building was 40% lower than the maximum national value (ICR para 29). Also, energy consumption at Shangrao airport was
20% lower than two other airports in Jiangxi province namely Yichun Airport and Jingdezhen Airport.

This was a demonstration project, to showcase "Green Airport Design" in China and the project supported local authorities to
become familiar with the concept and technologies of “Green Airport”. Two workshops were organized on Green Airport
design, planning, construction and operation. In total, 150 representatives attended these workshops from CAAC, other
airports, and various airport constructions, consulting and engineering companies. Green Airport design guidelines were
prepared as well as a technical study reporting the project experience and lessons learnt. Green Airport design guidelines were
prepared as well as a technical study reporting the project experience and lessons learnt (ICR para 43 & 73). The Bank team
also invited several international aviation experts to join Bank missions or the workshops to introduce global best practices. The
concept of green airport was well disseminated, and local institutional capacity was improved with a better understanding of
“Green Airport” techniques and its sustainable benefits (ICR para 43).




                                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)




                            The management consultancy to develop the airport operational model and support to SSAC was dropped since it was agreed
                            instead to adopt a PPP approach. An operational concession agreement was signed between SMG and the Jiangxi
                            Airport Group (JAG, which currently operates all seven airports in Jiangxi), to operate the Shangrao airport (ICR para 55).




                            Rating
                            High



OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project fully achieved its objective to improve airline connectivity in northeastern Jiangxi Province and to demonstrate the
                            environmental sustainability of the development and operation of the Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



        5. Efficiency
  Economic Efficiency

  At appraisal, the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was calculated for the airport infrastructure component. The main
  benefits were to the air passengers since the connectivity to Shangrao would be enhanced. The benefit that were quantified was the
  value of travel time saving of (a) existing air passengers, (b) existing train passengers who would shift to use Shangrao Sanqingshan
  Airport, and (c) induced demand, over the assumed project life of 20 years. The costs of the project were the capital investments
  and operation cost.

  The ex-ante EIRR was 17.1% and the Net Present Value (NPV) at 12 percent discount rate was 172.5 million RMB. Sensitivity
  analysis (assuming 20% benefit decrease, 20% cost increase, and both happening) showed that EIRR was higher than the discount
  rate of 12% for all scenarios.

  The ex-post EIRR used the appraisal methodology and the EIRR was 17.8%, which is very close to the ex-ante EIRR of 17.1%
  (ICR para 33). The ex-post NPV was 448.9 million RMB, higher than the appraisal NPV of 172.5 million RMB. It should be
  noted that the assumptions made in the ex ante analysis were less complex than used in the more sophisticated analysis at


                                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 18
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)



completion. Compared to the parameters used in the PAD, the benefit per air passenger is higher than was originally expected,
while the modal shift from rail to air was also greater than expected.

The Financial Internal Rate of Return was estimated at 8.54% (ICR page 37). Operating subsidies are small in comparison to the
forecast budgetary revenue of the local government.

Administrative Efficiency

The ICR reports (para 38) that after loan effectiveness, the PMO was quick in contracting out works, and throughout
implementation the disbursement rate was higher than forecast in the PAD. The construction of the airport was completed about
one year earlier than anticipated at appraisal. There were no financial or procurement issues.

There was a cost overrun for the airport infrastructure component - actual cost was US$121.5 million compared to the appraisal
estimate of US$100.7 million. The project team explained that the cost overrun was mainly caused by the change in terminal
building design and site preparation. At appraisal, the terminal was designed as a one-story building. However,
before implementation, the local authorities decided to build a two-story building to accommodate more passenger volume.
Therefore, the cost increased from US$10.71 million at appraisal to US$25.60 million at completion. Site preparation fee also
increased from US$13.54 million to US$23.03 million due to more challenging than expected geographic conditions and to land
expansion. The reason for such expansion may have been additional parking but is not elaborated upon in the ICR.

The loan closed without requiring an extension and was fully disbursed.

The overall efficiency is rated substantial.



Efficiency Rating
Substantial



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal and the re-
   estimated value at evaluation:
                                      Rate Available?              Point value (%)              *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                                93.00
  Appraisal                            　                            17.10
                                                                                                　 Not Applicable
                                                                                                95.00
  ICR Estimate                         　                            17.80
                                                                                                　 Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.



                                                                                                                     Page 9 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)



6. Outcome

The project objectives were highly relevant to the Bank strategy and government priorities. The relevance of objectives is rated
high by IEG, whereas the ICR rated it as substantial. A substantial rating, however, does not reflect the crucial importance of this
demonstration project in support of China's strong thrust towards carbon reduction, which is in line with its commitments made at
the Paris Climate Agreement. The project fully achieved its objective to improve airline connectivity in northeastern Jiangxi
Province and to demonstrate the environmental sustainability of the development and operation of the Shangrao Sanqingshan
Airport. Efficacy is rated high. Efficiency is rated substantial. Overall, project outcome is rated highly satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory



7. Risk to Development Outcome

Operational Risk. The operational risk is low as Shangrao Municipal Government (SMG) signed an operational concession
agreement with the Jiangxi Airport Group (JAG, which currently operates all seven airports in Jiangxi), to operate the
Shangrao airport (ICR para 55). The SMG established Shangrao Municipal Civil Aviation Development Bureau (SMCADB)
to be responsible for airline marketing and related management works, and assigned the PMO Director as the director of the
SMCADB. Most of the PMO staff were also re-assigned to the SMCADB.

Financial Risk. There is a low risk that financial resources for operations and maintenance of the airport will not be
adequate. The Project Team clarified that Shangrao Airport is expected to cover its operation cost from operation revenue.

The ICR reports (para 77) that SMG provided an operational subsidy of RMB27 million to SAOC. The Project Team
clarified that this RMB 27 million was to subsidize for the operation loss and various preparatory aspects before the airport
became operational.

Institutional Risk. The institutional risk is low as the project improved the institutional capacity of the local civil aviation
bureau, including improved technical, project management and business development skills, and improved collaboration
between various sector stakeholders.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a.Quality-at-Entry



                                                                                                                           Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)



  The quality at entry was highly satisfactory.

        • The PDOs were realistic and clearly formulated and were in line with the Bank and country priorities.

        • The project design incorporated the best practice in technology i.e. "Green Airport" design. The project was aimed
          as a green airport demonstration for other feeder airports in China. The task team and the PMO jointly held
          several “Green Airport” workshops, and prepared the “Shangrao Sanqingshan Green Airport Design Guidelines”,
          which listed requirements for the general plan, deck bridge facilities, and comprehensive rainwater and sewage
          utilization system.

        • The readiness for implementation was strong with full support from all stakeholders. This facilitated the rapid
          take-off of civil works after the loan was declared effective in July 2013.

        • The risks were adequately identified during preparation, including (i) the capacity weakness of the PMO, (ii)
          inadequate counterpart funding from the national government, and (iii) delays in implementing the Green Airport
          concept. The risks were mitigated by procuring project management consulting services and securing commitment
          from Civil Aviation Administration of China (CAAC) and the National Development Reform Commission
          (NDRC) for funding.

        • The project’s results framework was based on a clearly defined PDO, and was supported by measurable
          performance indicators.

        • Appropriate safeguards policies were triggered.

        • The project supported gender-balanced consultation during the preparation of the resettlement plan. The Project
          promoted gender-balanced access to infrastructure investments and to training. Among the 104 staff that were
          hired by SAOC for the
          operation of the airport, 32 are female (ICR paras 40 and 41).




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The quality of supervision was highly satisfactory.

       • There was continuity in the Bank Team, with only two TTLs during implementation. The TTLs were field based
         and maintained a strong working relationship with the SMG and PMO. The Bank team provided technical support


                                                                                                                      Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)



         on the TOR for the TA study on Green Airport design and provided feedback on the draft report. The Bank Team
         also invited international experts and arranged two workshops on Green Airport design. The Bank Team also
         provided training on Bank procurement requirements.

       • The ICR reports (para 74) that social and environmental specialists satisfactorily supervised environmental and
         social safeguards through field visits and ensured timely submission of the external monitor’s report on safeguard
         implementation. Compliance with financial management and procurement was monitored satisfactorily by the Bank
         specialists from the Beijing office.

       • Under Component 2, the project had proposed to hire a management consultant to develop the airport operation
         model and support SSAC to prepare and implement a Human Resource Development plan, and an Operational and
         Financial Manual.

       • During implementation, the Bank and the Borrower agreed instead to adopt a Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
         approach, based on similar airport experiences in China. An operational concession agreement was signed between
         SMG and the Jiangxi Airport Group (JAG, which currently operates all seven airports in Jiangxi), to operate the
         Shangrao airport (ICR para 55).

       • The Bank team also invited several international aviation experts to join Bank missions or the workshops to
         introduce global best practices. The concept of green airport was well disseminated, and local institutional capacity
         was improved with a better understanding of “Green Airport” techniques and its sustainable benefits (ICR para 43).

       • The project was completed one year ahead of schedule.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO indicators 1 Travel time reduction between Shangrao and major destinations" adequately measured the
 achievement of the objective - to improve airline connectivity in northeastern Jiangxi Province. The methodology for the
 calculation of PDO indicator 1 was clearly described in the PAD Annex 1. The arrangements for data collection,



                                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)



 compilation, analysis and reporting were laid out in the PAD. The PAD (para 26) mentioned that the PMO would
 coordinate with relevant agencies in collecting data required for monitoring and evaluation of outcomes.

 The PDO indicator 2 "Shangrao Airport recognized as “Green Airport” through established recognition process" was
 adequate in measuring the objective - to demonstrate the environmental sustainability of the development and operation of
 the Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport.

 The main shortcoming of M&E design was that it did not have any indicator to measure the progress towards achieving the
 institutional development component.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reports (para 61) that the PMO collected real-time data from Shangrao Airport Operation Company (SAOC)
  records after the airport became operational in May 2017. For intermediate indicators, the Quarterly Progress Report was
  used as a basis to update the Results Framework. The ICR notes (para 63) that the quality of M&E data was good.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports (para 62) that the M&E data was used to improve project management and implementation, especially
  during the mid-term review and for the application of the “Green Airport” concept.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards

   The project was classified as category A for environmental assessment purposes and environmental assessment OP/BP 4.01
   was triggered. Construction was expected to cause temporary impacts on the surrounding environment, including vegetation
   loss, soil erosion, noise of machinery and trucks, vibration, dust, and wastewater (PAD para 51). All environmental safeguard
   documents (i.e. Environmental Assessment (EA), Environmental Management Plan (EMP), and Environmental Management
   Framework (EMF)) were prepared and were disclosed locally in September 2012 and at the Infoshop in October 2012.

   The ICR reports (para 65) that the EMP was implemented satisfactorily.


                                                                                                                  Page 13 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)



Social Safeguards

The project triggered Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) safeguards policy as construction would require (i) acquisition
of 150 hectares of village land (including 26 hectares of cultivated land) which would affect about 2500 people from 500
households; and (ii) demolition of 5760 square meters of existing structures which would affect 76 people from 16
households. The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared and
disclosed to the local people on September 20, 2012 and the English versions of the documents were sent to the Infoshop on
October 30, 2012 (PAD para 44).

The ICR reports (para 67) that actual land acquisition was slightly higher than planned due to detailed measurements during
implementation. The project carried out acquisition of 2,913 mu (or 194 hectares) of village land and the demolition of 7,708
square meters of existing structures which affected 21 households. Land acquisition and compensation was carried out in
accordance with RAP (ICR para 67).

The Project Team provided a detailed table of land acquisition comparing planned and actual figures as the units were
different in PAD and ICR.

The 4.65 km link road to the airport (which was paid for by the Borrower outside the project) was included in the RAP for
safeguard purposes. There were no delays in the payment of appropriate compensation.The project also triggered Physical
Cultural resources (OP/BP 4.11) safeguards policy as field surveys for the airport site found 137 household graves. The ICR
reports (para 66) that the relocation of household graves was carried out in accordance with the RAP.

                              Increase
                Quantity               Reason
                                (%)
              RAP
                     Actual
             Planned
Land Acquisition　
                                       1. Local design changes; lighting construction increased land acquisition; land
                                       acquisition for less than piecemeal 0.3 acres of the remaining area after land acquisition;
1. Total
             2241.9 2913          30   inconvenience arable land area blocked by the airport also increased land acquisition;
area (mu)
                                       2. 450 acres of land reserved by military requirements
2. arable
             383.75 506.52        32
land
Demolition           　        　
1.
               16        21       31   Local design changes, lighting construction increased land acquisition;
Households
2. area
(square       5760    7708        34   Local design changes, lighting construction increased land acquisition;
meters)

                                                                                                                   Page 14 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)



    3.
                    76       96    26.32 Local design changes, lighting construction increased land acquisition;
    Population



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). The ICR reports (para 68) that project's financial management was satisfactory. The Bank's
   team communicated the Bank's FM requirement to the Finance Bureau and provided timely advice. The Project
   Management Office (PMO) financial staff was proficient and the Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) and audit reports
   were submitted in a timely manner. All audit reports were unqualified and internal control issues detected by the audit
   reports were fully addressed by the PMO.

   Procurement. The procurement capacity was enhanced through (a) training provided by the Bank (or institutions acceptable
   to the Bank) throughout project preparation and implementation, (b) hiring of a procurement agent and project management
   consulting company by the PMO, and (c) designated procurement officer and contract management staff, who remained
   throughout project implementation. The ICR reports (para 68) that the procurement was carried out in accordance with
   Bank procurement policies, procedures and requirements.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR notes (para 47) that the implementing agency adopted several new technologies during project implementation,
   which greatly improved the efficiency of project management and airport operation, and lowered project costs. These
   includes:

          • Use of an unmanned aerial vehicle mounted with a camera to monitor construction progress and soil/water
              conservation during airport construction. This innovative approach complemented normal supervision and allowed
              the PMO and the supervision engineers to monitor the real-time status of implementation in inaccessible areas of the
              project site.

          • Use of the new technology of red sandstone construction during the rainy season. This was based on local geological
              conditions, and helped save more than RMB10 million on airfield foundation construction.



d. Other
    ---

11. Ratings


                                                                                                                     Page 15 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)



                                                                                            Reason for
 Ratings                              ICR                      IEG
                                                                                            Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                            The project objectives were highly
                                                                                            relevant to the Bank strategy and
                                                                                            government priorities. The relevance
                                                                                            of objectives is rated high by IEG,
                                                                                            whereas the ICR rated it as
                                                                                            substantial. A substantial rating,
                                                                                            however, does not reflect the crucial
                                                                                            importance of this
                                                                                            demonstration project in support of
                                                                                            China's strong thrust towards carbon
                                                                                            reduction, which is in line with its
 Outcome                              Satisfactory            Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                            commitments made at the Paris
                                                                                            Climate Agreement. The project fully
                                                                                            achieved its objective to improve
                                                                                            airline connectivity in northeastern
                                                                                            Jiangxi Province and to demonstrate
                                                                                            the environmental sustainability of
                                                                                            the development and operation of the
                                                                                            Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport.
                                                                                            Efficacy is rated high. Efficiency is
                                                                                            rated substantial. Overall, project
                                                                                            outcome is rated highly satisfactory.
                                                                                            No shortcomings were identified in
 Bank Performance                     Satisfactory            Highly Satisfactory           quality at entry and quality of
                                                                                            supervision.
 Quality of M&E                       Substantial             Substantial

 Quality of ICR                       ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

 Lessons identified in the ICR are summarized and rephrased below:

       • Technical Assistance reports can play an important role in dissemination of the benefits of the Green
           Airport approach for future airport expansion in China and around the world. The Technical Assistance
           reports supported under the Project not only documented the good design, implementation and
           operational approaches that the airport conducted for carbon reduction, but also provided several


                                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)



           recommendations to improve performance. The M&E system also played a key role in incentivizing the local
           implementing agencies to obtain the EDGE certification.

         • A public-private partnership operation model can improve the efficacy of the airport operation. In this
           project, SMG signed an operation concession agreement with the Jiangxi Airport Group (JAG) to operate
           the Shangrao airport. This greatly improved the efficacy of operations and management.

         • Use of new technologies can be used to enhance project management and supervision. New technologies
           adopted during project implementation, including the use of an unmanned aerial vehicle mounted with
           camera for supervision, and red sandstone construction during the rainy season, greatly improved project
           management and operational efficiency, and reduced project costs.

         • Early procurement planning, including the identification of Bank financed activities, as well as advanced
           contracting can facilitate successful implementation. The project experience demonstrates that the timely
           award of the most important airfield works contract, which was procured through International Competitive
           Bidding using prequalification, was key to successful implementation




13. Assessment Recommended?

   Yes

   ASSESSMENT_TABLE
   Please Explain

   This is a demonstration project, so a field study would be useful in assessing the actual benefits this project brought to the region
   especially in terms of stimulating development and would also help identify the cost involved.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was candid and internally consistent and provided useful lessons. It is evaluative and provides detailed tables on travel
time to major destinations. The economic and financial analysis as detailed in Annex 4 of the ICR is excellent.

However, there are some minor shortcomings. The ICR sets out the theory of change in a graphical way, but does not provide a
narrative. The ICR would have also benefited from a more articulate linking of the project’s theory of change and how this related
to the various project achievements. The discussion on the implementation of the environmental safeguard could have been more
detailed. On Involuntary Resettlement safeguards, the units for land acquisition are different, making the comparison difficult.




                                                                                                                        Page 17 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Project (P123729)



The ICR reasons for higher actual cost (compared to the appraisal estimate) for the airport component could have been stated
more explicitly but were found in the detail of the efficiency analysis.



   a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                                   Page 18 of 18
