     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021735

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P071250                                    IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                      Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-78160                                 31-Dec-2015                                        206,357,598.07

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Dec-2009                                31-Dec-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          300,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           300,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       197,638,549.44                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both the Financing Agreement (FA, p.5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph
   19), the Project Development Objective (PDO) was to help improve the urban services in Andhra Pradesh and
   the capacity of the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to sustain and expand urban services. In the PAD, the PDO
   mentioned that the ULBs were in Andhra Pradesh. In June 2014, Andhra Pradesh was divided into two states
   - one retained the name Andhra Pradesh, the other Telangana. The PDO in the FA remained unchanged but
   the 2015 Restructuring expanded the PDO to include the state of Telangana. Mission documents from that


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)



   time on indicated that the PDO included the state of Telangana (ICR, paragraph 16). This review will assess
   the unchanged PDO from the FA and will parse it as follows:

         to help improve the urban services in Andhra Pradesh (now Andhra Pradesh and Telangana)
         to help improve the capacity of the ULBs to sustain and expand urban services

   The following key outcome indicators (ICR, paragraph 6, and April 23, 2015 side letter):

         increase in residents satisfaction with municipal services in participating cities; in the 2015
          Restructuring this indicator was changed to the number of beneficiaries (ICR, paragraph 17).
         sub-project specific outcomes, including
               o increase in the number of hours of water supply per day
               o volume of liquid or solid waste collected and sanitarily disposed of
               o number of water and sewer connections
               o number of people benefiting from these improved services
         increase in ULB revenues
         number and quality of ULB service reports (assessment and plan) reflecting improvements in staff
          capacity and systems



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. State Level Policy and Institutional Development Support (US$9.2 million at appraisal, of which
   US$8.8 million was from the World Bank loan; revised to US$9.18 million; US$9.2 million actual, of which
   US$8.8 million was from the World Bank) financed the establishment of the Andhra Pradesh Urban
   Academy. The Academy would provide AP urban sector officials with works, goods, and technical
   assistance and incremental costs financing to monitor, analyze, train, and disseminate knowledge on urban
   development and management. In addition, this component financed studies on urban finance, town
   planning procedures, and technical assistance to implement programs of the Mission to Eliminate Poverty in
   Municipal Areas. This component financed computer hardware, software, and technical assistance to
   establish a Geographic Information System (GIS) cell to support the planning and monitoring of urban
   development.

   2. Municipal capacity enhancement (US$14.0 million at appraisal, of which US$12.7 million was from the
   World Bank loan; revised to US$26.51 million; US$26.51 million actual, of which US$12.7 million was from
   the World Bank). This component financed training and technical assistance to enhance ULB's institutional
   capacity in urban finance, management, e-governance, planning and development, procurement, and
   engineering as well as GIS mapping and spatial planning program.

   3. Urban infrastructure investment (US$306.0 million at appraisal, of which US$259.7 was from the
   World Bank loan; revised to US$298.93 million; US$298.83 million actual, of which US$182.12 million was


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)



   from the World Bank) financed sub-loans, sub-grants, and technical assistance to support investments
   prioritized by ULBs. ULBs were required to demonstrate adequate financial capacity to sustainably finance
   and operate the facilities with adequate plans to improve their financial and management capacities.

   4. Project management support (US$20.0 million at appraisal, revised to US$14.63 million; US$18.1
   million actual, of which US$14.63 million was from the World Bank) financed technical assistance and
   operating costs in support of project design, implementation, monitoring, and audit by state level agencies
   and ULBs.

   5. Front end Fee(US$0.75 million at appraisal, US$0.75 million actual, of which US$0.75 million was from
   the World Bank)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The total project cost reached US$350 million and disbursed US$233.6 million. The World
   Bank loan disbursed US$198.02 million. The remaining US$102.0 of the loan (almost a third) was unutilized
   because of the depreciation of the rupee, loss of disbursement momentum after AP was divided into two
   states in June 2014, deletion of some activities, and the joint decision of the Government and the World
   Bank not to extend the loan closing date beyond December 31, 2018 (ICR, paragraph 43).

   Financing: The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development financed this Investment Project
   Financed project with a loan of US$300.0 million.

   Borrower Contribution: The Government of Andhra Pradesh and its local governments committed US$50
   million in co-financing, all coming from the local governments (provincial, district, and city levels). The
   Borrower disbursed US$35.6 million, of which US$9.5 million was from the local governments.

   Dates: The project was approved on December 10, 2009 and made effective on March 23, 2010. The Mid
   Term Review (MTR) was conducted on May 20, 2013. The project was originally scheduled to close on
   December 31, 2015 but received two extensions for a total of 36 months under two restructurings. These
   were the following:

         On March 26, 2015 a level 2 restructuring to rename the project Andhra Pradesh and Telangana
          Municipal Development Project after AP became two states on June 2014. In addition, the closing
          date was extended to December 15, 2017; project activities were revised replacing the State
          Finance Framework Study with two state level studies on urban planning and sector specific studies;
          reallocating funds to accommodate this studies; revising the Results Framework and disbursement
          schedules; and entering into a new Project Agreement with the new state of Telangana, allocating
          US$126 million. AP was allocated US$174 million.
         On November 13, 2017, a level 2 restructuring to extend the closing date a second time to
          December 31, 2018




3. Relevance of Objectives



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)



               Rationale
               The PDOs - to help improve the urban services in AP and Telangana, and to help improve the capacity of
               the ULBs to sustain and expand urban services - remained relevant to the country's development plans.
               Urban development remained a government priority as evidenced by its continuing of the national programs
               such as the Smart Cities Mission (SCM) and the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation
               (AMRUT) until 2021. The national government's urbanization development strategy, embodied in its 12th
               Five Year Plan (2012-2017) called for stepping up investments in new urban infrastructure assets as well as
               maintenance, strengthening governance with clear accountability to its citizens, and strengthening the
               capacity of State governments, and Urban Local Boards (see 12th Five Year Plan, Section 12).

               The PDOs were also relevant to the World Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY18-FY22. In
               particular, under Objective 1.2 to improve the livability and sustainability of cities, the World Bank program
               included urban governance and finance by deepening engagement with selected cities and Urban Local
               Bodies (ULBs). World Bank operations and analytical work supported incremental improvements in ULBs
               including AP and Telangana. The CPF focus area 1 on Promoting Resource Efficient Growth aimed to
               improve the living conditions and sustainability of cities (CPF, Figure 4). In this connection, the PDO was
               relevant to the World Bank's engagement in urbanization policy issues at the national and state levels,
               focusing on urban policies, institutions, governance and finance. The 2018 Systematic Country Diagnostic
               (SCD) also identified support to local governments to strengthen India's service delivery system through
               incentives designed to improve operations and finances and improving accountability.

               However, while there is clear alignment between the project's development objectives and the country and
               World Bank strategies, the relevance of objectives is pitched at a level that does not adequately reflect a
               potential solution to a development problem. While acknowledging the difficulty of the operational
               environment, a shortcoming here was that the objective was not defined such that its achievements would
               be plausibly traceable to improvements envisioned to arise from improved urban services and improved
               capacity of the Urban Local Bodies to sustain and expand urban services. Focusing on "improved services"
               and "improved capacity" alone is not outcome focused and does not help in understanding what
               development results were expected as a consequence of the project, whether those results were improved
               health, improved income, or other factors affecting community livelihoods. These may be longer term
               targets but identifying and tracking them are important aspects of a successful development operation.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             • to help improve the urban services in Andhra Pradesh (now Andhra Pradesh and Telangana)


                                                                                                                         Page 4 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)




Rationale
In June 2014, the former state of Andhra Pradesh became two states -- Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. The
third project component adequately supported the 6 Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in Andhra Pradesh and 8
ULBs in Telangana to implement investment services identified under the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs).
These DPRs provided the rationale for the investment in water services improvement subprojects, targets,
and implementation schedules to achieve the stated PDO to help improve urban services in the two states.
This component resulted in investment activities that generated improved water service delivery sufficient to
achieve the stated outcomes.

OUTPUTS:

      211,713 new and rehabilitated piped household water connections (original target 200,000, target
       exceeded)
      14 ULBs participated in the project (original target 9, revised to 14, target achieved) Of these, 6 were
       in AP and 3 were in Telangana. Five ULBs in Telangana were added after the 2015 restructuring.
      The following were the subproject output indicators. No original targets were provided because of the
       framework nature of the project. Subprojects were identified during implementation. The project
       baselines were provided as reference:
            o increase in the hours of water supply per day expressed in the percent increase in network
               coverage. This ranged from 44.11 (baseline expressed as 730 km) to 193.06 (baseline 25 km)
               percent increase in AP, and 14.92 to 185 percent increase in Telangana (there was no
               equivalent presentation of baseline data for Telangana).
            o volume of waste collected and disposed of in a sanitary manner, expressed in percentage
               increase in storage capacity, ranged from 7.3 (baseline expressed as 13.707 Kilo Liters or
               KL) to 368.83 (baseline 1.235 KL) percent in AP ULBs, and 36.43 to 562.5 percent in
               Telangana.
            o number of new water and sewer connections - ranged from 9,676 (baseline 2,824) houses to
               33,132 (baseline 81,985) in AP to 5,063 (baseline 2,800) houses to 39,521 (baseline 35,542)
               houses in Telangana.
            o number of people receiving significant benefits - ranged from 40,450 (baseline 70,549) to
               271,500 (baseline 264,000) beneficiaries in AP and 24,000 (baseline 23,041) to 197,605
               (baseline 320,378) beneficiaries in Telangana.
            o increase in capacity of the water system (expressed in millions of liters per day or MLD). In AP,
               this increase ranged from 36 percent (baseline 33 MLD) to 125 percent (baseline 77.5 MLD).
               In Telangana, this increase ranged from 36,43 to 562.5 percent (no baseline provided).

OUTCOMES:

      The project reached 1.3 million (original target 1.2 million) beneficiaries. In AP, there were 822,299
       beneficiaries (target 800,000, target exceeded) and in Telangana there were 483,382 beneficiaries
       (target 400,000, target exceeded).
      Participating ULBs implemented urban investments worth US$182 million (original target US$300
       million, not achieved). The value of the completed investment costs was lower in US$ terms because
       of the depreciation of the Indian Rupee against the US dollar. This indicator did not substantiate how
       the investments contributed to achievement of the development objective.



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)




      Water supply network were expanded in both states of AP and Telangana. This expansion helped
       reduce the dependence of these communities on informal, untreated sources of water supply, ground
       water extraction, and tankers. The residents in the participant cities now have daily water supply,
       compared to unreliable once in 2-3 days supply before the project. The evidence for this claim came
       from the detailed achievements of the subprojects in Annex 4 of the ICR. In AP, the increase in
       network coverage expanded from 44 percent in Gunfur to almost 1 1/2 increase in expanded coverage
       in Badvel. In the case of Telangana, ULBs increased its network coverage from 14.92 percent in
       Malkajgiri to 185 percent in Manuguru project. The percent increase in coverage was somewhat
       confusing because of cases of over 100 percent increases (or more than twice the original coverage).

There was only one outcome indicator in the Results Framework (the number of beneficiaries of the improved
urban services). This outcome indicator was insufficient to determine achievement of the objective. The
outcome indicator that supported the expansion of the water supply network was mentioned as helping to
reduce the dependence of communities on informal, untreated sources of water supply, including through
ground water extraction and tankers. The details of these achievements were provided in Annex 4 of the ICR.
The communities now had access to treated water supply because they were part of the ULB's formal water
supply network. The connected households received daily water supply (previously once in 2-3 days in most
participant ULBs, see ICR, paragraph 26). In addition, assumptions made to capture economic efficiency
achieved by the project (ICR, Annex 5) noted time saved in collecting water, savings generated by replacing
the cost of water from other sources, and savings from lost earnings due to sick days because of water borne
diseases. Sub-project output indicators were presented in a summary table in the main text of the ICR with
details provided in an Annex (ICR, Annex 4). The detailed output indicators were reflected in "before" and
"after" scenarios. Despite the lack of relevant indicators at outcome level, there was sufficient evidence in the
additional information in the ICR to rate the achievement of this objective Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
• to help improve the capacity of the ULBs to sustain and expand urban services

Rationale
The two project components provided training, capacity building activities, sector specific studies, and
established an institution to support ULB urban planning and management in the two states. These activities
were sufficient to improve staff capacity and local government systems to achieve the PDO.

OUTPUTS:

      109 ULBs (original target 80, target exceeded) have made operational new systems of core municipal
       functions and citizen interface
      A digital door numbering system, based on a nine digit road network that uniquely identifies every
       house in the state of AP was implemented in all AP ULBs (target achieved).



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)




    Telangana implemented its own digital home address system in 72 ULBs using satellite imagery,
       ground survey to map properties, roads, by-lanes, vacant plots, and slums (target achieved).
      69 ULBs (original target 30, target exceeded) adopted improved urban planning frameworks as
       evidenced by the new GIS and general town plans The GIS maps included 44 layers of data for urban
       management was completed for 32 AP ULBs and 37 ULBs in Telangana. Planning studies were
       completed for 20 ULBs in Telangana, including preparation of sewerage plans and green intervention
       (i.e., creating public parks, green space, and general improvements of the urban space). GIS maps for
       the remaining 78 ULBs in AP, including revenue enhancement and 15 additional GIS data layers were
       completed, including digital door numbering system. The Government of AP indicated its intention to
       use its own resources for additional work using drone mapping. In Telangana, GIS maps covering an
       additional 22 ULBs was nearing completion by project closing and the Government of Telangana
       indicated its intention to complete this with own resources (ICR, paragraph 31).
      60 ULB staff (original target 30, exceeded) received professional certifications as part of their training
       in the fields of urban planning and financial management.
      5,393 (original target 500, target exceeded) local officials and staff, of whom 3,894 officials were from
       AP and 1,499 officials were from Telangana were trained and reported new skills or knowledge gained
       in e-governance and financial management.
      109 ULBs (original target 50, target exceeded) adopted measures to strengthen financial and
       technical capacities using new e-governance systems. This includes new e-municipal Enterprise
       Resource Planning (ERP) applications with 22 modules in 109 ULBs in AP. Online building permitting
       system was completed in all 110 ULBs in AP.
      GIS units at the state level were operational by project closing (original target achieved), producing 20
       GIS maps and analysis.
      AP completed a Revenue Improvement Survey for 100 ULBs.

OUTCOMES:

    On average, participating ULBs reported a 110% increase (original target 40%, target
       exceeded) in revenues
      The National Institute of Urban Management (NIUM) or the Urban Academy was made operational,
       trained staff, and conducted research.
      The project supported the design and implementation of a new municipal e-governance system called
       the Enterprise Resources Planning (ERP) module in all 110 ULBs in AP (no target). AP was a pioneer
       in ULB e-governance. Practice was adopted for wider replication as part of the Smart Cities Mission
       (SCM).
      The services included building permits, property taxes, integrated billing. The ERP module allowed the
       public to register 95 types of grievances, track the response times, and follow up actions. ERP
       benefited the state's 14.6 million urban residents through improved accountability, transparency, and
       citizen interface. The ERP enabled ULB departments to coordinate and prioritize initiatives.
      Revenues improved across all functions in all AP ULBs. Evidence was provided by the increase in
       water charges, in AP ULBs, for example, in Kakinada, charges rose from 23.36 percent crores in
       2009-2010 period to 70.39 crores in 2017-2018 or a 201.33 percent increase (ICR, footnote 5 and
       Annex 4). There was no data available for Telangana ULBs.
      AP prioritized identifying unassessed properties and unauthorized trade and water connections. In an
       August 17, 2019 email, the project team clarified that between FY 2010 -18, the average growth in
       total revenues of 13 participating ULBs (out of a total of 14 ULBs participating for both investment and

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)



                                   capacity building support) across AP and Telangana exceeded 110%. Data for the 14th ULB was not
                                   taken because it was merged with Hyderabad Municipal Corporation and no longer exists as a
                                   separate ULB. The percent increase in the ULBs in AP ranged from a low of 59.87 percent increase
                                   (in Vizlanagaram) to a high of 236.25 percent increase (in Markapur) (ICR, Annex 4,Question 9). In
                                   the case of Telangana, the project team provided additional information on August 17, 2019 showing
                                   that the increases ranged from 211 percent (in Manuguru) to 449 percent (in Malkajgiri). There was a
                                   30 percent increase in the identification of under assessed and unassessed properties.
                                  Processing time in assessing properties was reduced by an average of 7 days, a 52 percent savings
                                   in time (no target provided).
                                  The digital door numbering system implemented in both AP and Telangana assisted ULBs in providing
                                   public services and emergency response systems, as targeted.
                                  The NIUM was established as an autonomous think tank and action research institute, and has
                                   developed and delivered training modules and technical assistance to national, state, and ULB level
                                   stakeholders.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Almost all the original targets were exceeded by project closing although about a third of the loan proceeds
                            were not disbursed. The depreciation of the Indian Rupee against the US dollar resulted in considerable
                            savings, particularly in the use of resources for the investment contracts. There was sufficient evidence of
                            outcomes, particularly with regard to achieving the second objective. There was a lack of adequate and
                            sufficient outcome indicators to adequately measure achievement of the first objective. However, the
                            subproject indicators provided sufficient data in achieving the improvement in delivering water services. The
                            observed outcomes could be attributed to the project as evidenced by the "before" and "after" data of the
                            subproject interventions in Annex 4 of the ICR and data used in calculating project efficiency (ICR, Annex 5).
                            The project almost fully achieved its intended outcomes. There was no counterfactual or targets provided
                            during appraisal because the project was designed as a framework project. Subproject investments and ULB
                            participation were undertaken during implementation. Efficacy is rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency



                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)



Economic and Financial Efficiency: There was no cost benefit analyses for the project at preparation,
appraisal, or implementation (ICR, Annex 5, paragraph 4) because of the framework nature of the project. This
meant that sub-projects were not identified at appraisal. Like ULB participation, subprojects were determined
during implementation. These infrastructure subproject investments were subjected to economic analysis using
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs). These DPRs used Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
(JNNURM) guidelines. Since the Bank methodology was not comparable to these JNNURM guidelines, no
comparisons were made at closing (ICR, paragraph 38). Only subprojects with action plans to improve the
ULB's financial and operational capacities and included operations and maintenance (O&M) were proposed. A
guideline framework for ULB and sub-project selection ensured a demand-driven nature of the subprojects. At
closing, three tests of efficiency were conducted.

      The first was an economic cost benefit analysis. Benefits were derived from time saved in water
       collection, savings in resource cost for replaced water from other sources, savings in earnings loss
       during sick days attributed to waterborne diseases, savings in household health expenditure spent on
       waterborne diseases, and benefits from incremental water supply. Using the prescribed 9 percent
       economic opportunity cost of capital following World Bank guidelines for Bank-funded water supply
       projects, analysis established economic investment rates of return (EIRRs) that ranged from 19.64
       percent in AP subprojects and 18.84 in Telangana subprojects, both above the cost of capital.
      The second was a sensitivity analysis to assess the effects of changes in key variables including: (i) a 20
       percent cost overrun in operations and maintenance (O&M); (ii) a 20 percent decline in estimated
       benefits; and (iii) the combination of these two. The sensitivity analysis showed robust results for all
       water supply sub-projects.
      The third was a financial analysis of water supply operations that concluded that the ULBs in both states
       could absorb the O&M expenses of water supply services and the additional debt service requirements.
       However, analysis showed that existing water tariff revenues (except in Malkajgiri in Telangana), would
       not be sufficient to recover the annual O&M costs of the water supply systems. To achieve full O&M cost
       recovery, water tariffs in the other ULBs need to be raised in the range of 8-47 percent in AP and 14-90
       percent in Telangana.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency:

An earlier version of the project was negotiated in 2005. To negotiate, the Government of India (ICR, paragraph
6) required that 30 percent of subproject investments were ready to be awarded once the project was approved.
The Board required the repeal of the Urban Land Ceiling Act before the project could be approved. The state
legislature enacted the repeal of the Urban Land Ceiling Act in 2008. The project was then renegotiated. The
subproject investments were updated. Project design adopted a framework arrangement (see Section 8 below).
This meant that 70 percent of the subproject investments were identified during implementation. For two years,
residents of the region covered by Telangana expressed their concerns about the equitable distribution of
benefits among beneficiaries. This led to the AP Reorganization Act that divided AP into Telangana and AP in
June 2014. Implementation momentum was disrupted. The loan was split between the two states. Institutional
arrangements were updated. Five Telangana ULBs were added to the initial 6 AP ULBs and 3 Telangana ULBs
or a total of 14 ULBs. However, the reduced time available for their implementation reduced the opportunities for
capacity building support, training opportunities, and subproject investments for the additional Telangana
ULBs. Additional time was required to revise the ULB level water supply planning studies to cover levels that
addressed the equitable distribution of services among the different ULBs. Additional time was also needed for
permitting from various national departments such as the Ministry of Railways for water pipelines to cross
railway lines and the National Highways Authority of India (for water pipelines to cross national roads) and the


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)



Department of Archaeology (for project impact on cultural property), The loan closing date was extended by two
restructurings for a total of three years.

At closing, 34.1 percent of the US$300 million loan remained undisbursed. There was a significant depreciation
of the Indian Rupee against the US dollar that led to significant cost savings by as much as US$42 million in
2014 and another 14 percent rupee depreciation in 2018. Some activities were deleted during the 2015
restructuring. The Government and the Bank decided not to extend the loan closing date a third time for
additional activities. The Government also decided to retain the original loan amount. Slow disbursement and
delays in contract execution toward project closing downgraded the Implementation Progress to Moderately
Unsatisfactory. The extension of the disbursement grace period to June 30, 2019, was anticipated to result in
approximately 70 percent disbursement.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    78.05
 ICR Estimate                                             19.30
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective was rated substantial. Efficacy was rated substantial for both objectives 1 and
2. Efficiency was rated modest.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following posed risks to development outcomes:

      Government commitment. The Government of the State of Telangana committed budgetary
        provisions using own resources to complete subprojects by June 30, 2019. Both states committed to
        scale up the project outcomes using own resources and the two national government initiatives, SCM

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)



      and AMRUT. There was a risk that the Government of the State of Telangana may not release the
      promised resources. In its August 17, 2019 email, the task team confirmed that all works were
      completed as promised.
     Financial sustainability. There is a risk that the existing water tariffs that ULBs charged may not
      sufficiently cover the O&M requirements of the water supply improvement subprojects. Mitigating this
      risk requires that the State, ULBs, the Commissioner for and Director of Municipal Administration, and
      regulators work together to raise revenues that would fully cover O&M costs to reduce the need for
      subsidies.
     Institutional support. Rotation and reassignment of trained personnel continue as part of regular
      government operations. To mitigate losing the built capacity, the governments and the academy need
      to retrain replacement staff. The academy would be an avenue for institutionalized capacity building.
     Social support. During project implementation, ULBs consulted its residents in prioritizing subproject
      investments. Residents associations were involved in grievance resolution during implementation.
      These roles were not adopted as part of the institutional O&M processes of the ULBs. There is a risk
      that the consultative practice may not continue beyond the project. To mitigate this risk, ULBs could
      include the continued engagement by stakeholders as part of its e-governance or grievance
      mechanism.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At entry, the World Bank team incorporated the following lessons from previous AP and local governance
  service delivery projects in the project design: (i) from the $150 million grant U.K. Department for
  International Development (DFID) financed AP Urban Services for the Poor Project (APUSP) (PAD,
  paragraph 11), the value of a “challenge fund” mechanism where investment funding was conditioned
  upon institutional development and reform, the need for sufficient technical support and policy reform to
  accompany ambitious targets; and the need for adequate capacity in trunk infrastructure to facilitate
  service improvements at the neighborhood level; (ii) the importance of establishing state policies and
  institutions that support effective and sustained improvements in performance at the local level; (iii)
  establishing strong financial and management capacities at the ULB level to borrow from the capital
  markets. The project was relevant to the country's urbanization strategy. The approach focused on
  strengthening the capacity of the Urban Local Bodies and enhancing the capacity of the state to facilitate
  its sustainability.

  An earlier version of the project was negotiated in 2005. The Government required that 30 percent of
  subproject investments were ready for award after project approval. The Board required the repeal of the
  Urban Land Ceiling Act before project approval. The state repealed that Act in 2008. The Project loan
  was renegotiated. The 30 percent pipeline was updated.

  Design adopted a framework approach. This meant partial readiness for project implementation.
  Participating ULBs and the remaining subproject investments would be identified during implementation
  using agreed criteria and ULB determined priorities. Agreed criteria included the institutional
  strengthening factors under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission. Design supported
  building local capacity within the municipal administration system rather than enhancing ULB capacity to

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)



  access capital markets. Activities and components were designed to support state policies and
  institutions that would sustain local government performance.

  The PAD identified a number of moderate to substantial risks. These included political will for local
  autonomy and accountability, selection of suboptimal subprojects, weakened demand for state reform,
  financial management, and procurement risks (PAD, paragraph 41). Mitigating measures adequately
  addressed these risks. These included prioritizing institutional capacity building for accountability and
  effective local governance through citizen participation, consultations, and identification of training
  opportunities. Local stakeholders determined subproject investments. ULB participation and proposing
  subproject investments required demonstrating and committing to capacity improvements. Terms of
  reference for state level reforms were agreed before appraisal. Design adequately identified fiduciary and
  safeguard needs. Training on safeguards, procurement, and project management were conducted at
  appraisal. Safeguards documentation included a Manual for Urban Local Bodies and Information and
  Consultation Strategy (ICS) and Action Plan.

  There were moderate shortcomings in preparation as evident in the readiness to implement the project.
  The design also led to a less rigorous set of indicators that formed a weakened results framework (see
  Section 9 below). There were also shortcomings in assessing the risk of a condition for Board approval of
  the loan.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team, with the core team in country, conducted semi annual missions over the course of a nine-
 year implementation period. Focus on development outcome was evident in selecting the participating
 ULBs using agreed criteria and identifying locally determined subproject investments. These criteria
 included (i) satisfactory and current audit of municipal accounts; (ii) an operating budget surplus of more
 than 15 percent of the identified subproject; and (iii) an approved Municipal Reform Action Plan that
 included actions to increase the ULB's operating surplus to cover operating costs of the proposed
 subprojects. These criteria were also used by JNNURM (ICR, paragraph 52). The Bank team mobilized
 specialists to address technical aspects, social and environmental safeguards, and M&E project issues
 during implementation. Mission documentation including the 2013 Mid Term Review (MTR) candidly
 recommended corrective measures to expedite sub-project implementation. However, no changes were
 made to the conservative targets for the indicators to consider the impact of implementation progress
 during the two restructurings.

 In June 2014, Andhra Pradesh formally divided into two states after prolonged protests by residents of
 Telangana. The new state of Telangana included 10 former districts of AP and the former AP capital of
 Hyderabad. Subproject approvals awaited the finalization of the loan split between the two states. Project
 staff were re-assigned and re-trained. The two level 2 restructurings addressed the implementation issues
 brought by the division of AP state into AP and Telangana states and ensured the completion of the project
 activities (ICR, paragraph 12). The March 2015 restructuring retained the original PDO but modified the
 implementation arrangements. The original PDO in the FA referred to AP but subsequent documentation


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)



 indicated that the PDO referred to AP and Telangana. This restructuring also extended the closing date by
 2 years. The 2017 restructuring extended the closing date by another year.

 Outside the control of the Bank and the Government, the Indian rupee depreciated during implementation.
 The exchange rate losses in 2014 was noted as cost savings valued at about US$42 million. This
 negatively affected loan disbursements. With reduced implementation time left, the
 additional five Telangana ULBs were not provided sufficient opportunities for training, capacity building,
 and subproject investments. Both the Bank and the Government agreed not to extend project closing to
 accommodate the completion of these activities. The Government completed the rest of the project using
 its own resources. In addition, the Government and the Bank agreed not to reduce the original loan
 amount. In its August 17, 2019 email to IEG, the task team clarified that cancellations were discussed at
 multiple meetings between the World Bank, the Government of India’s Department of Economic Affairs,
 and the two states, highlighted in mission reports, and suggested as early as the 2013 Midterm Review.
 However, the Government of India decided to retain the original loan amount of the Project.

 There were moderate shortcomings in the proactive identification of opportunities and resolution of threats
 to achieving the PDO.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change of the project was sound. Building capacity at the local level would improve
 infrastructure (water) service delivery to satisfy beneficiary residents. The PDOs were clear although the
 FA did not specify the second state of Telangana in its original statement. In addition, the objectives were
 pitched at a conservative level that did not correspond to the development problem being addressed. The
 PDOs were not sufficiently defined to correlate the completion of the project activities to sustain the
 improvement in urban services and urban capacities. As noted earlier, how improved services and
 improved capacities resulted in improved health, income, and livelihood were not captured by the selected
 indicators. There were three key outcome indicators and none sufficiently addressed the development
 outcome expected in implementing this project. The ex-post efficiency discussion in the ICR (Annex 5)
 provided an insight on the development impact of the project. Twelve intermediate indicators measured 7
 timebound outputs to assess the progress of the four project components to achieve the PDOs. However,
 because of the framework design of the projects, the original target indicators were conservatively set.
 These targets were not updated during the two restructuring with the benefit of implementation progress.
 An outcome indicator could have been added to reflect the cost effectiveness of water sector
 improvements, e.g., the rate of increase in servicing all residents, and whether water tariff rates could
 support O&M needs in the long run. There was also an intermediate indicator (master plan for the capital
 city of AP) that was completed using non project funds but continued to be part of the results framework.

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)



 Baselines were reported at "0" in Annex 1 of the ICR. But the ICR Annex on Efficiency (Annex 4) provided
 baseline data of all 14 ULBs before and after the subprojects. The Municipal Strengthening Units (MSUs)
 were responsible for the project M&E. M&E included tracking the ULBs' project expenditures, the flow of
 funds, and functions of the state administration and the ULBs. The overall implementing entities of the M&E
 were the Municipal Administration and Urban Development departments of AP and Telangana.

 The Results Framework, while clear, contained output indicators under subproject outcomes. For example,
 the number of new or rehabilitated piped households water connections and the number of ULBs that have
 made new systems for core municipal functions and citizen interface operational. These indicators could
 have been clarified and made more rigorous during restructuring. Original conservative targets were not
 revised during restructuring. As a result, almost all subproject investment targets were exceeded, some by
 more than 100 percent.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project was implemented by the respective Municipal Administration and Urban Departments
  (MAUD) of AP and Telangana (ICR, paragraph 18). The project M&E tracked project expenditures by
  ULBs. The ULBs reports identified and designed the investment and TA programs, planned and
  managed implementation, and funds that were contributed to the sub-projects. The ULBs completed
  progress reports which included costs, payments, extensions, problems, amount and type of ULB
  contributions, and whether or not there were maintenance, business, and environmental management
  plans. At the state level, a Municipal Strengthening Unit (MSU) under the Commissioner and Director of
  Municipal Administration (CDMA) implemented the project and coordinated training for the ULBs and
  reporting. Both the MSUs and ULBs reported on funds flow and administrative functions. (ICR,
  paragraphs 57 and 62). The lack of robustness in the intermediate outcome indicators were not refined
  during the 2015 or 2017 restructuring.



c. M&E Utilization
  There were significant shortcomings in the M&E system’s design and implementation. It was difficult to
  test the links in the results chain, particularly in exceeding the conservative target indicators. Most of the
  target output and outcome indicators were exceeded. The ICR explained that this was due to "intense
  efforts" by both states following the 2015 division. In addition, the number of beneficiaries was not in
  itself a measurement of improved urban services. There were significant weaknesses in the use and
  impact of the M&E system. The M&E reports generated by the ULBs and MSUs were used to identify
  subprojects that were at risk of not being completed by project closing. Adequate commitments were
  secured from the government to ensure that the subprojects were completed. More information, for
  example, was needed to see how the M&E system was institutionalized using the e-governance portals
  of both states. The ICR reported that in AP, the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) module monitored
  performance indicators using ULB data plus GIS maps with ULB performance layers. Telangana's ERP
  system was redesigned in 2018 (ICR, paragraph 28) and was implemented using its own resources.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)




10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards: The project was classified as Category A. The following
   safeguards were triggered: OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.36 Forests, OP 4.09 Pests,
   OP/BP 4.11 Physical and Cultural Resources, OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples, and OP/BP 4.12
   Involuntary Resettlement. In the ICR, safeguards compliance was expressed as satisfactory, suitably
   responsive, and implemented in an acceptable manner (ICR, paragraphs 67, 68, and 69). A Social and
   Environmental Assessment and Management Framework (SEAMF) was prepared and revised in 2015. The
   revision included the provisions of the GOI's 2014 "Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land
   Acquisition and Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act." The SEAMF was developed into a Project Manager's
   Manual and a Manual for Urban Local Bodies to guide project implementation. These manuals included a
   Social and Environmental Capacity Building Action Plan (SECAP) and an Information and Consultation
   Strategy (ICS) and Action Plan to ensure that information was available to stakeholders throughout project
   implementation. The Action Plans also included facilities for feedback. The Project’s safeguard documents
   were adopted by the successor states. Implementation of social safeguards was generally satisfactory.
   Minimal issues relating to land acquisition or implementation of the Tribal Development Plan were noted but
   not specified. The final ISR downgraded compliance with social safeguards management to “Moderately
   Unsatisfactory" because of delays in providing house ownership titles in one of the ULBs in AP. The
   ownership titles were provided after project closing. This demonstrated the ULBs’ commitment to the
   Project. Environmental safeguards were rated “Satisfactory” in the final ISR. The Project enabled the
   adoption of several good environmental management practices, including provisions for recycling backwash
   water in water treatment plants, monitoring of air and water quality, use of personal protective gear by
   workers, public notices on work periods and contact details of staff in charge, systematic records on tree
   cutting and road restoration requirements, and the use of cautionary signage to restrict unauthorized access
   to work areas.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:: The Project financial management was adequate. Accounting and reporting in
   both states, as well as internal audits, were mostly on time. External audits were normally delayed. No
   qualified opinions were reported. However, there were no outstanding reports at closing. Both states
   submitted utilization certificates when funds were required, rather than on a monthly basis. This delayed
   accounting process was repeatedly highlighted in Project mission reports. The Project disbursed both sub-
   grants and sub-loans to the ULBs through the Finance and Infrastructure Development Corporations of AP
   and Telangana (APUFIDC and TUFIDC), which the Bank reimbursed. The APUFIDC and TUFIDC
   conducted fiduciary appraisal of subproject proposals and ULBs, verified and disbursed funds, and
   collected repayments. Both states had some issues with ULBs making less-than-agreed contributions to
   sub-projects. These shortcomings did not affect disbursement or implementation results. These affected
   the overall financial closure of contracted packages. In Telangana, ULBs reported unpaid bills and
   requested transfer of funds from TUFIDC to contractors rather than the state releasing funds directly to
   ULBs. Mission packages requested corrective measures because these delays affected project
   implementation.


                                                                                                 Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)



   Procurement: The procurement process complied with World Bank procurement rules and procedures.
   The ULBs and state agencies showed increasing capacity for conducting procurement planning and
   bidding.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                      IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presented five lessons from the operations, which could inform future similar operations:

      Using locally determined priorities as a platform to build capacity may
       reinforce incremental benefits. In this project, the focus was on building local government
       capacity at the ULB level to deliver improved infrastructure (water) services. At the state
       level, the assistance focused on how best the state could sustain the built capacity of the
       ULBs using state level policies, rather than acting as intermediaries for ULB access to
       capital. The project provided evidence that enhancing the state's capacity to foster an
       enabling environment could lead local bodies to adopt means and methods to implement
       locally determined investment priorities. By strengthening local capacities and adopting
       streamlined systems and processes, local governments could obtain the confidence to
       access capital markets.
      Unrealistic conditions for Board approval may delay project start up. In this project, the
       state legislature repeal of the Urban Land Ceiling Act was made a condition for the loan. That
       repeal occurred three years later delaying loan approval. The project was renegotiated and
       the requirement for a project pipeline needed to be updated. Loan conditions for similar
       future projects could be achieved by ensuring their reasonableness in the face of existing
       social and political climates.
      Indicators in framework designed projects may benefit from periodic updating. In this
       project the original conservative target indicators were not changed even as the project

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)



         progressed. The indicators could have been divided by state following the subdivision of the
         original state into two. Reviewing indicators as implementation progressed following the
         identification of subproject investments could provide a robustness in the outcome indicators
         to achieve the PDOs. A project using a framework design calls for frequent review of targets
         and appropriateness of indicators.
        Responding to demand by bundling capacity building technical assistance packages
         may optimize mainstreaming. In this project, the capacity building TA packages called for
         comprehensive studies across a wide range of ULBs. This approach was designed to
         facilitate cross learning and coordination. However, recipient ULBs showed uneven progress.
         Capacity building TA packages for local governments may be piloted to address issues
         based on demand, Provision for adoption and mainstreaming through wide dissemination
         and follow on projects could be added to a bundled TA package.
        Added water meters to measure water consumption as part of the provision of water
         services may improve willingness to pay and increased tariff collections. New
         household water connections plus new meters equal improved water services collection
         rates. In this project some new household connections reported that metering was not
         included in the delivery of water service improvements. Integrating the meter to deliver
         improved water services allows the provider to collect the correct fees and gives the
         consumer confidence in paying for service received. Increased collections could lead to self-
         financing O&M needs of water projects without resorting to subsidies from ULBs.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was thorough, succinct, and provided evidence to support the narrative and the ratings. The
report followed OPCS guidelines and was internally consistent. For example, the Quality at Entry of Bank
Performance (Section 8) was reinforced by discussions regarding the key factors during preparation (section III
of the ICR). The theory of change guided the reader in understanding how the ratings were
determined. Evidence was obtained from mission and implementation reports as well as reports coming from
the state and from the ULBs themselves. For example, an independent third party conducted ) an impact
evaluation of land acquisition and resettlement implementation in two towns (see ICR, Annex 6). The ICR
focused on results as evidenced by the discussion on project efficacy (ICR, paragraphs 24 - 34). With its
annexes, the ICR provided additional evidence to support the subproject outcomes. It is candid, accurate and
generally aligned to the PDOs. Lessons were clear, useful, and based on analyzing project operations. These
lessons were noted elsewhere in the report as evidenced by the citations throughout the report on the impact
caused by the division of the state of AP into two, the rationale behind the restructurings, and the exchange rate
losses negatively affecting disbursement. The quality of evidence and analysis reinforced the project design
and results although there were minor shortcomings in the completeness of baseline data and information.




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  IN:AP and Telangana Municipal Devlpmnt (P071250)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                  Page 18 of 18
