     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GD Safety Net Advancement (P123128)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0021747

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P123128                                   GD Safety Net Advancement

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Grenada                                   Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-49930                                 31-Dec-2015                                           4,258,813.81

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Jul-2011                               30-Sep-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            5,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             4,631,939.72                                              0.00

 Actual                                         4,258,813.81                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Salim J. Habayeb           Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Behrens                    IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the project were to: (i) strengthen the basic architecture of the consolidated Conditional
   Cash Transfer Program (CCT Program) and the capacity of the Ministry of Social Development and Housing
   (MOSDH) to implement it; (ii) improve coverage of poor households receiving cash transfers; and (iii) improve
   education outcomes of poor children and health monitoring of vulnerable households (Financing Agreement
   9/20/11). The statements of objectives in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) and ICR were identical.



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GD Safety Net Advancement (P123128)



   The objectives were revised on 11/24/15 to simplify the project and were stated as follows: “to strengthen the
   basic architecture of the SEED Program and the capacity of the Ministry of Social Development and Housing
   to implement it," at which point 64% of the proceeds were disbursed. As such, the 2015 project restructuring
   dropped the objectives to improve education outcomes of poor children and to improve health monitoring of
   vulnerable households. It also dropped the second original objective to improve coverage of poor households
   receiving cash transfers while retaining coverage as an outcome indicator. The revision increased the focus
   on the original objectives related to CCT Program strengthening under a new title, “Support for Education,
   Empowerment and Development” (SEED).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  24-Nov-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Improving Conditional Cash Transfers (Appraisal: US$ 22.2 million, consisting of a Borrower
   contribution US$17.7 million equivalent, and an IDA financing estimated at US$4.5 million. Actual IDA
   financing for this component was US$3.7 million. Actual Borrower costs were not available; however, the
   ICR (p. 19) stated that the government has covered related costs and has been paying SEED transfers from
   the beginning of the project, to ensure sustainability beyond the life of the project).



   The component consisted of the provision of cash transfers to beneficiaries (Financing Agreement 9/20/11,
   p. 4), with disbursements made against actual payment of benefits and achievement of selected
   performance milestones (PAD, p. 6).



   2. Improving Implementation Capacity of MOSDH (Appraisal: US$1.0 million, consisting of a Borrower
   contribution of US$0.5 million and an IDA financing of US$0.5 million. Actual Borrower costs were not
   available, and actual IDA financing for this component was US$0.6 million).



   The component aimed at strengthening MOSDH capacity to support the implementation of the consolidated
   CCT Program by providing technical assistance to MOSDH on coordination, management, supervision as
   well as monitoring and evaluation of the CCT Program. According to the PAD (p. 10), activities were
   organized around areas of consultant services such as design and piloting of a Proxy Means Test;

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GD Safety Net Advancement (P123128)



   development of a Beneficiary Management Information System; design of a central beneficiary registry;
   design of materials and protocols for educational workshops and training; (v) design of a training plan for
   MOSDH and partner Ministries’ staff; M&E; and funding external audits.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Costs and financing. The original project cost was estimated at US$23.2 million, consisting of an IDA
   Credit of US$5 million equivalent (SDR 3.2 million) and a Borrower financing of US$18.2 million equivalent.
   Actual IDA financing cost was US$4.3 million, reflecting an IDA Credit disbursement of 86%.



   Dates. The project was approved on 7/5/11 and became effective on 12/5/11. A Mid-Term Review was
   carried out on 5/5/14. A level 1 restructuring was undertaken on 11/24/15 to revise the development
   objectives, results framework, and allocations among disbursement categories. The restructuring extended
   the Credit’s closing date by two years to December 31, 2017. A second restructuring on 12/20/17 further
   extended the closing date by nine months to September 30, 2018, to finalize the information system, at
   which date the project closed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At appraisal, the objectives were responsive to social protection challenges faced by Grenada, notably in
the context of a substantial economic crisis during 2007-2010 that further affected poor households, and
where spending on social assistance was variable (PAD, p. 2). A Social Safety Net Assessment carried out
in 2009 found that Grenada’s safety net required improvement in several areas. Separate social assistance
programs were inefficiently spread across ministries. There was under-coverage among the poor and
inclusion of non-poor households. None of the programs had clear operational manuals or reliable
information systems to track beneficiaries and payments. The programs lacked M&E and adequate public
awareness about their key aspects. With support from the Bank’s Non-Lending Technical Assistance, the
Government began preparatory work in 2010 to facilitate an intended consolidation of the CCT
Program. The government established an Inter-Sectoral Steering Committee, including NGO
representation, to guide safety net reform, including a unified and transparent targeting mechanism (PAD,
pp. 1-3). Project objectives related to safety net reform were consistent with the Bank Group’s Regional
Partnership Strategy (RPS) for the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States for the period 2010 – 2014
that aimed to strengthen safety nets that would alleviate potential declines in living standards while
maintaining investments in human development under its second pillar for Protecting and Improving Human
Capital (PAD, p. 5). However, the original objectives to improve education outcomes of poor children and to
improve health monitoring of vulnerable households were not aligned with RPS (ICR, p. 12).

At project closing, the revised project objectives were aligned with the Bank’s RPS FY15-19, namely under
the resilience pillar of the RPS Framework, although the objectives could have been better
formulated. Related RPS development goals were to facilitate protection and inclusion of vulnerable and
marginalized groups, and to strengthen implementation and targeting of social safety nets. Outcome 6 of

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GD Safety Net Advancement (P123128)



               the RPS consisted of “Improved targeting and reduced fragmentation of social protection system”, as was
               pursued by the project which established and used a reliable targeting mechanism, the Grenadian Living
               Conditions Indicator, and reduced fragmentation by merging three previously separate CCT programs
               under one single program.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen the architecture of the consolidated Conditional Cash Transfer Program and the capacity to
                             implement it.

                             Rationale
                             It was reasonable to expect that the development of key building blocks of a unified cash transfer delivery
                             system, including a central registry for beneficiaries, effective targeting tools and proxy means testing,
                             development and utilization of a beneficiary management information system, human resources development,
                             and technical assistance would result in a new consolidated delivery framework that would plausibly
                             contribute to strengthening the basic architecture of the consolidated CCT program and sectoral capacity to
                             implement it.



                             Outputs and intermediate results

                             With the aim of strengthening the capacity of MOSDH to implement the CCT Program, the project established
                             and staffed the SEED Unit with a Manager, a Safety Net Officer, a Data Entry Officer, and six CCT program
                             Officers and one MIS officer as the core team, in addition to an M&E officer, a field supervisor, three clerical
                             officers, and 17 SEED field officers.

                             Training of staff from MOSDH, the Ministry of Finance (MOF), and the Ministry of Education (MOE) on the
                             administration and implementation of social safety nets was undertaken.

                             The MOF, MOE, Ministry of Health (MOH), and MOSDH agreed on the formula for proxy means testing and
                             signed related memoranda of understanding, and the Cabinet approved the formula's use.

                             The Grenadian Living Conditions Indicator (GLCI) was developed and used as a robust targeting mechanism
                             to re-certify existing beneficiary households and identify new ones. By project completion, 99 percent of
                             beneficiary households in the registry were assessed using the new targeting tool (ICR, p. 14).


                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GD Safety Net Advancement (P123128)



The project developed an Operational Manual outlining program implementation arrangements and
operational rules.

A modernized Beneficiary Management Information System was developed and operationalized. The system
generated one beneficiary list and used one payment method.

The project established a Program Appeals Committee and made it operational (ICR, p. 35).

In 2015, the government initiated a phase-out plan to remove ineligible beneficiary households. About 70% of
prior beneficiary households were identified as ineligible and non-vulnerable. Households that were deemed
to be in the non-vulnerable category were notified and phased out, and only 8% appealed the decision (ICR,
p. 15). According to the ICR, the removal of ineligible beneficiaries allowed the government to increase
coverage of the poorest households under the SEED Program, and the total number of poor households
benefiting from the program reached 5,849 households by the end of the project (ICR, p. 21).

The project carried out a communications campaign to familiarize the public with the SEED Program. Also,
beneficiaries’ information meetings were included in the enrollment process to ensure that beneficiaries were
adequately informed about key aspects of the program (ICR, p. 16).

Program evaluation was institutionalized, and results were published and disseminated in contrast with 2011
when there was no evaluation program (ICR, p. 36).

The percentage of beneficiaries who received information about rules and procedures of the SEED program
reached 95% in 2018, attaining the target.



Outcomes

Building on prior Bank technical assistance and a 2011 Cabinet Conclusion for the establishment of the
unified CCT Program, the project institutionally merged three CCT programs [(i) MOSDH’s Public Assistance
Program, which targeted the elderly, disabled and indigent poor; (ii) the Necessitous Fund of MOE; and (iii)
School Transportation Allowance Scheme of MOE] under a single flagship cash benefit program targeted at
poor households. The unified program had one single budget governed by MOSDH. By contrast, the three
programs had been operating apart under separate budgets prior to the project. At the end of the project, the
country had an effective consolidated CCT Program that was well targeted and monitored, with adequately
improved capacities that, according to the ICR, would also allow the government to examine options for
expanding the system in the future to address the needs of other vulnerable population groups.

The percentage of poor households receiving SEED cash transfers increased from 68% in 2016 to 82% in
2018, exceeding the target of 80%.

The percentage of program transfers that reached poor households with children increased from a baseline of
47% in 2015 to 75% in 2018, attaining the target of 75%.




                                                                                                Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GD Safety Net Advancement (P123128)



In conclusion, the intended objective was fully achieved by the end of the project.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve coverage of poor households receiving cash transfers. Note: The objective was dropped in 2015 for
simplification purposes, while coverage was retained as an outcome indicator for the project.

Rationale
The rationale above under Objective 1 also applies here.



Outputs

As above under Objective 1.



Outcomes

As noted above under Objective 1, activities and results of Objectives 1 and 2 were inter-linked, and the
percentage of poor households receiving SEED cash transfers increased from 68% in 2016 to 82% by project
completion in 2018, exceeding the target of 80%.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve Education Outcomes of Poor Children. Note: The objective was dropped in 2015.

Rationale
The theory of change assumed that increased school attendance of beneficiary children would improve
education outcomes for related SEED beneficiaries (ICR, p. 7). However, improved education outcomes were
dependent on other interventions within the education sector (ICR, p. 26).




                                                                                                 Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GD Safety Net Advancement (P123128)



Outputs

No outputs were reported, although the ICR stated that MOE was very involved in the SEED Program.



Outcomes

According to the ICR, the Borrower reported that disaggregated data pointed to increased access to higher
education by children of SEED beneficiaries, as well as exceptional academic performance among those
students (ICR, pp.17-18). The SEED program increased the number of poor children receiving financial
support, which may have helped to retain students in secondary school (primary school enrollment was nearly
universal in the country), but available data were insufficient to assess specific impact of the SEED Program
(ICR, pp. 17-18).



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Improve health monitoring of vulnerable households. Note: The objective was dropped in 2015.

Rationale
The theory of change assumed that increased health check-ups for beneficiary household members would
result in improved health outcomes for related SEED beneficiaries (ICR, p. 7), and that the operation would
act as an incentive to increase the number of beneficiaries receiving preventive primary health
services. However, such improvements were dependent on health sector interventions, including supply-side
aspects in the health sector (ICR, p. 26).



Outputs

No outputs were reported.



Outcomes

While it was possible that SEED transfers may have contributed to increased use of preventive health
services, there was no related monitoring or evidence that would substantiate such a development (ICR, p.
18).




                                                                                               Page 7 of 15
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 GD Safety Net Advancement (P123128)




                              Rating
                              Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Under the original objectives, the aggregation of two fully achieved objectives with a third partially achieved
                            objective and a fourth barely achieved objective indicate a Substantial rating for overall Efficacy.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The revised objective was fully achieved, as explained under Objective 1.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            High



    5. Efficiency
   The PAD’s economic analysis discussed three types of economic returns that were expected from project
   interventions (PAD, pp. 13-14) based on: (a) income effect for families receiving cash transfers, where the
   analysis concluded that simulated consumption distributions showed a significant direct impact, as the poverty
   headcount in the six districts in Grenada could fall by between 6.6 and 19.1 percentage points due to income
   transfer; (b) increase in future earnings along with the higher educational attainment of CCT beneficiaries.
   Aggregate net present economic gains were estimated to be between US$24.4 million (for the group of children
   13-17 years old) and US$34.4 million (for the 5-12-year-old group). Preventive health check-ups were expected
   to lower the cost of secondary and tertiary care and decrease morbidity risks; and (c) more efficient program
   delivery and accountability, where the benefits of consolidating and improving delivery capacity were assumed
   to contribute to lower operating costs and increased legitimacy, but such benefits were not quantified.

   The ICR (p. 18) stated that the ex-post economic analysis could not be compared with the ex-ante economic
   analysis prepared at appraisal, as objectives and planned interventions for education outcomes and health
   monitoring were dropped. The ICR also stated that, while a full economic analysis was not prepared following
   project closing, the project undoubtedly had a positive impact on poverty reduction through improvements in the
   program’s targeting efficiency and expansion of the program’s focus to households with children. The ICR (p.
   19) provided generic arguments stating that international experience indicated that well-designed CCT programs

                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GD Safety Net Advancement (P123128)



have substantial impacts on poverty and human development, with significant effects on schooling and health of
beneficiary households.

The project had significant shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation. The project suffered from slow
implementation and, in 2015, its closing date was extended by two years, with an additional extension of nine
months in 2017, as the Beneficiary Management Information System was not finalized and some of its key
modules were still incomplete. According to the ICR (p. 10), slow progress was attributed to the following: (i) an
ambitious project design that did not anticipate implementation capacity constraints; (ii) challenges in
maintaining inter-sectoral coordination; (iii) a change in government following the 2013 elections; and (iv)
frequent turnover and limited staff capacity. There were significant delays in contracting consultants for
important activities such as the Proxy Means Test, Beneficiary Management Information System, and
Information, Education and Communications (ICR, p. 28). By the end of 2015 (original project closing year), it
was not possible to measure progress toward targets for any of the key outcome indicators because
arrangements to measure and monitor such indicators were still being developed (ICR, p. 12). There was no
progress towards improving the educational outcomes of poor children and improving health monitoring of
vulnerable households (ICR, p. 13). The ICR was inconsistent in its statements on efficiency: although the ICR
correctly reached a conclusion of low efficiency (ICR, p. 20), it also stated that the project was implemented
efficiently (ICR, p. 19).

In view of a cursory economic analysis and significant shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation, overall
efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the original objectives, relevance of objectives is rated Substantial in view of alignment between CCT
Program objectives at the time of project closing and the Bank’s Regional Partnership Strategy FY15-
19. Efficacy is rated Substantial, as the objectives were almost fully achieved, and efficiency is rated Modest in
view of insufficient economic analysis and significant shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation. The
outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory under the original objectives.


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GD Safety Net Advancement (P123128)



Under the revised objectives, relevance of objectives is rated Substantial and efficiency is rated Modest, as
noted above. Efficacy is rated High, as the project fully achieved its revised objectives. The outcome is rated
Moderately Satisfactory under the revised objectives.

According to IEG/OPCS guidelines, when a project’s objectives are revised, the final outcome is determined by
the weight of Bank disbursements under each set of objectives. Since the outcomes under both sets of
objectives are similar, a formal calculation is unnecessary. Therefore, the overall outcome rating is rated
Moderately Satisfactory, consistent with essentially moderate shortcomings in the project’s preparation,
implementation, and achievement. More specifically, the project achieved its objectives, but with efficiency
concerns.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to sustaining development outcomes appear to be relatively limited, although general risks related
to macroeconomic challenges and vulnerability to external shocks remain. The government commitment to
social protection is strong, as demonstrated by its legal and institutional framework for the SEED Program,
its continued support to SEED transfers, and its recent budgetary allocations that exceeded previous
years. According to the ICR, the budget includes resources for further program strengthening. The term of
the current government will last through 2023, and hence changes in political commitment in the near term
appear unlikely. According to the ICR (p. 29), the government is also considering linking the SEED Program
and its registry of beneficiaries to help in disaster response.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design aiming at institutionalizing a consolidated social safety net that would assist poor
  households was appropriate. The design was supported by thorough analytical work (ICR, p. 22), namely
  the Social Safety Net Assessment carried out in 2009, and preparatory work that the government had
  initiated to facilitate the consolidation of separate programs, supported by the Bank’s Non-Lending
  Technical Assistance, which resulted in the formation of an Inter-Sectoral Steering Committee to guide
  the social safety net reform effort, and the Cabinet approval allowing the establishment of a unified
  program. Preparation considered and incorporated lessons from international experience on safety net
  improvements, including those related to the importance of Borrower commitment, accurate selection of
  beneficiaries, information systems, staff training, and information campaigns. Fiduciary arrangements
  were planned by MOSDH in concert with the MOF, in which the Project Coordination Unit was
  housed. The Project Coordination Unit at MOF had overall responsibility for fiduciary aspects (PAD, p.
  11). The project planned for competitive selection of a private audit firm to audit project accounts (PAD, p.
  14).


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GD Safety Net Advancement (P123128)



  However, the project design was overly complex, and it did not anticipate implementation capacity
  constraints, challenges in maintaining inter-sectoral coordination, and the frequent turnover of staff (ICR,
  p. 19). M&E arrangements to measure outcome indicators were not ready at entry. There was
  unfamiliarity with new results-based disbursement processes. Arrangements for monitoring co-
  responsibilities in education required strengthening, while those in health were only being established.
  Further, it was not clear that the planned interventions in education and health were priorities for
  Grenada, nor that the project alone would have been able to support their achievement (ICR, p. 28). The
  above issues were subsequently confirmed by the lack of progress made on the objectives concerning
  education outcomes and health monitoring, and which led to their dropping in 2015.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 28), the Bank Team provided strong and timely implementation support, which
 contributed to improved implementation and achievement of the revised development objectives. The
 Team organized a thorough Mid-Term Review in 2014, and was pro-active in addressing project
 challenges as evidenced by the project restructuring in 2015, although an earlier restructuring could have
 been considered. The Team catalyzed the 2015 restructuring to strengthen focus on the development of a
 unified and effective social protection system, which was a main priority for the government. Fiduciary
 aspects were adequately monitored. The ICR (p. 28) stated that implementation support was intensive, and
 that the Team exhibited dedication and realism. Team members held weekly audio or video conferences
 with their government counterparts to ensure implementation progress. In addition, the ICR stated that the
 Team worked closely with another team preparing the Programmatic Resilience Building Development
 Policy Credit series to ensure coordination of social protection aspects of those operations, further
 supporting the achievement of the Safety Net Advancement Project objectives. The government reportedly
 recognized the Bank’s strong partnership and technical support (ICR, p. 28).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were clear, but their statement could have been better formulated in reflecting the RPS
 strategy. The theory of change for two original objectives (improve education outcomes of poor children
 and health monitoring of vulnerable households) was not established. By contrast, the theory of change for
 strengthening the consolidation of the CCT Program was sound and was based on the assumption that

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GD Safety Net Advancement (P123128)



 CCT consolidation and strengthening, improved targeting, strengthened staff capacities, and the
 establishment of a Beneficiary Information System with a unified registry would result in a strong and
 effective CCT Program, with improved coverage. The theory of change for the CCT Program could be
 tracked by the indicators that were set by the project.

 The original Results Framework was complex and included 25 intermediate outcome indicators, ten of
 which were linked to education and health. The ICR (p. 26) stated that it was difficult to attribute results that
 involved co-responsibilities and interventions in the education and health sectors.



b. M&E Implementation
  During the initial phase of project implementation, M&E information was sporadic, but gradually improved
  including for disbursement-linked indicators (ICR, p. 27). The Beneficiary Management Information
  System became fully functional during the last year of the project after a long delay. The 2015 project
  restructuring dropped education and health interventions and related indicators, and improved the
  Results Framework. M&E indicators were adequately adjusted to reflect the restructured and simplified
  project.



c. M&E Utilization
  Apart from monitoring project progress, the development of an effective Beneficiary Management
  Information System was instrumental to the functioning of the overall SEED Program, and also served to
  inform the government on further development of social safety net options in the future, including
  eventual linkages with other programs, such as those addressing disaster response (ICR, p. 27).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified under Environmental Category C and did not trigger any safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. Financial Management was handled by the Project Coordination Unit located at
   MOF, in coordination with MOSDH, using government systems. A consultant was hired to provide
   additional support in financial processes and procurement. Disbursements were linked to the achievement
   of pre-defined milestones. supported by documentation certifying eligible expenditures. With the 2015
   restructuring, the DLIs were no longer dated, and disbursements were triggered whenever DLIs were


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 15
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        GD Safety Net Advancement (P123128)



   met. Also, DLI compliance verification no longer required an external audit verification. Instead, clear
   protocols for verification by the Bank were established for each DLI, and verification was undertaken
   independently by Bank experts who were not part of the project team (ICR, p. 10). The revisions were
   meant to ensure that disbursement processes would match the pace of implementation with institutional
   capacity (Restructuring Paper 11/12/15, p. 7).



   The ICR did not offer information on fiduciary compliance, such as on audit qualifications and
   timeliness. The TTL stated (clarifications provided on 8/8/19) that audits were received on time, and that all
   project audits were unqualified. The TTL also confirmed that financial management and procurement
   procedures were undertaken in accordance with Bank guidelines.



   Procurement. Procurement involved (i) consultancy services for the design of the Beneficiary
   Management Information System, proxy means testing, information and education campaign, impact and
   process evaluations, and financial audits; and (ii) non-consultant services, including training on the SEED
   program, both centrally and at the district level. The ICR (p. 28) stated that no major issues were
   encountered in procurement, other than significant delays in contracting consultants for important activities
   such as the Proxy Means Test, Beneficiary Management Information System, and for information and
   communications. As noted above under Financial Management, the TTL confirmed on 8/8/19 that
   procurement was carried out in accordance with Bank guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GD Safety Net Advancement (P123128)




12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 29-30) offered several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons
restated by IEG:



Project progress is facilitated by keeping its design in line with implementation
capacity. Under the project, the original design was unnecessarily complex in a limited capacity
setting at entry. Implementation improved after a project restructuring simplified its scope and
design.



When adopting innovative approaches such as results-based financing, ensuring the client’s
full understanding facilitates the application of such approaches. Under the project, reaching
an adequate level of understanding of complex disbursement mechanisms required more time than
standard investment lending.



In-house support facilitates the development of a management information system, as was
experienced under the project, along with the importance of filling critical staff positions at an early
stage of project implementation.



In addition, IEG identified a lesson on crafting objectives more carefully to match strategy and a
single project’s potential for meaningful impact. While the project intent and actual activities
judiciously aimed at improving targeting, inclusion of vulnerable groups, and reducing fragmentation
of the social protection system, these strategic directions were not well captured by the objectives
statement to strengthen the basic architecture of the CCT Program and the capacity to implement it.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear, well organized, and results-oriented. It provided a thorough and succinct overview of the
project experience. The theory of change for strengthening the CCT program consolidation was aligned to
related development objectives, but, as adequately recognized by the ICR, the theory of change was not

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GD Safety Net Advancement (P123128)



established for other objectives to improve education outcomes of poor children and to monitor health of
vulnerable households. The evidence for the revised objectives and the ICR's narrative were aligned to the
messages outlined in the ICR and supported its main conclusions. Lessons were derived from project
experience, as outlined in the ICR.

The ICR had some shortcomings. Its economic analysis was insufficient. The ICR was consistent with
guidelines, but it did not offer information on fiduciary compliance, such as on audits. The TTL subsequently
provided adequate information on 8/8/19. Within the larger context of other favorable criteria, these
shortcomings are considered to be relatively moderate.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 15
