     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA- GEF Social & Integrated Agriculture (P129774)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021816

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P129774                                    MA- GEF Social & Integrated Agriculture

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Morocco                                    Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-14398                                   31-Dec-2017                                           6,323,914.31

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Mar-2013                                31-Dec-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              6,440,000.00                                   6,440,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               6,440,000.00                                   6,323,914.31

 Actual                                           6,323,914.31                                   6,323,914.31




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl              J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. vii) and the Global Environment Facility Grant
   Agreement of April 16, 2013 (p. 7) the project development objective (PDO) for the “Social and Integrated
   Agriculture Project (ASIMA) was “to increase the implementation of land and biodiversity conservation
   measures in selected projects directed to small farmers located in targeted marginal areas in the Project
   Area.”



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA- GEF Social & Integrated Agriculture (P129774)



   The project was the second project financed by the Global Environment Facility (GEF) supporting the Green
   Morocco Plan (PMV).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included two components:

   Component 1: Development of the capacities of public and private institutions on land and
   biodiversity conservation (appraisal estimate US$1.32 million which completely disbursed): This
   component was to develop the capacities of selected staff of public and private institutions involved in the
   planning and implementation of Pillar II projects on land and biodiversity conservation measures. Activities
   to be financed included: (i) training, study tours, and field visits; (ii) studies and dissemination materials; (iii)
   awareness campaigns; (iv) Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and reporting; and (v) audits.

   Component 2: Transfer of land and biodiversity conservation measures among small-scale farmers
   (appraisal estimate US$5.12 million which completely disbursed): This component was to
   disseminate land and biodiversity conservation measures in selected projects directed to small-scale
   farmers located in the two target regions of Souss-Massa-Draa and Marrakech-Tensift-Al Haouz. Activities
   to be financed included: (i) works and goods for implementing land and biodiversity conservation measures;
   (ii) training, study tours, and field visits; (iii) awareness campaigns; and (iv) Monitoring and Evaluation
   (M&E). Selection criteria for the selected projects were “proven conservation measures in agri-food chains
   typical of marginal areas, and with engagement of women”. The final selection was based on a three month
   study and consultations with famers including: i) the use of cactus and argan-based livestock feed as a
   means of reducing pressure on rangeland; ii) soil enrichment using olive by-products; iii) methods of
   protecting soil and water from wastewater produced during olive oil processing; and iv) ways of conserving
   biodiversity by sustainable harvesting and adding value to medicinal and aromatic plants and by
   conservation of the Saharan yellow bee.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$6.44 million. Actual cost was US$6.32 million.

   Financing: The project was to be financed by a Trust Fund in the amount of US$6.44 million of which
   US$6.32 million disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution: It was not planned for the Borrower to make any contributions.

   Dates and Restructuring: The project was restructured twice:



                                                                                                           Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA- GEF Social & Integrated Agriculture (P129774)



         On September 23, 2016 the project was restructured to drop the PDO indicator “the number of
          successful pilot sub-projects” and replace it by the indicator “the number of small farmers using at
          least one biodiversity or soil conservation measure in the sub-projects”. Also, the target for the PDO
          indicator “the number of direct project beneficiaries” was changed from 12,000 to 8,500 beneficiaries
          since the original number incorrectly referred to all the beneficiaries of the eight Pillar II projects of
          the national Plan Maroc Vert (PMV) which focused on the smallholder sector covering 122 rural
          communes whereas this project covered only 30 rural communes. Also, four intermediate outcome
          indicators were added to measure the achievement of the second intermediate result “transfer of
          land and biodiversity conservation measures among small farmers.”
         On September 28, 2017 the project was restructured to change the closing date from December 31,
          2017 to December 31, 2018 to allow for the operationalization of the processing units, including the
          creation of microenterprises for their management.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 1), at the time of project appraisal agriculture was an important asset to the
Moroccan economy and represented on average 15 percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), 23 percent
of exports, and employed close to half of the labor force. However, the sector experienced a large disparity
between large commercial and small farmers. Half of Morocco’s agricultural GDP and 75 percent of
agricultural exports were generated by a limited but efficient group of commercial farmers producing high-
value irrigated crops for international markets and milk for domestic consumption. The other half of
Morocco’s agricultural production came from low-productivity smallholders working on mainly rain-fed lands
located in marginal areas characterized by less favorable agro-climatic conditions, limited basic
infrastructure, difficult accessibility, and unsatisfactory agricultural services. Also, smallholders accounted
for 70 percent of agricultural holdings but they had access to only 26 percent of all cultivated land (PAD
p.1).

Morocco also experiences high erosion rates, is vulnerable to droughts, and agricultural development is
increasingly impaired by dwindling resources and inadequate support services in marginal areas. According
to the ICR (p. 5) at the time of appraisal, the government was implementing an ambitious plan Plan Maroc
Vert (PMV) which aimed to promote market-oriented agricultural growth, doubling sector value added and
creating 1.5 million jobs to close the gap between the highly efficient export-oriented commercial farming
sector and the lower productivity small farm sector. The objective of this project supported Pillar II of the
PMV which was also in line with the latest Global Environment Facility (GEF) Strategy, especially its focal
areas on “sustainable use of plant genetic resources” and “sustainable land management and restoration of
degraded production landscapes”.

The project objective at closing was also aligned with the Bank’s latest Country Partnership Framework
(FY2019-2024) and its focus areas on “promoting inclusive and resilient territorial development”, “improving
access to sustainable water resources”, and “enhance adaptation to climate change and resilience to
natural disasters, adopting effective spatially targeted interventions where they are needed”. Furthermore,
the objective of the project was in line with the World Bank 2019 Strategy for the MENA Region and its



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MA- GEF Social & Integrated Agriculture (P129774)



               objectives to increase sustainable growth, strengthen resilience in relation to natural resources, support
               female inclusion, and increase the number of projects with a gender tag.

               While the project’s objective was highly relevant to the Government, World Bank and GEF strategies for
               Morocco, expected project achievements of the PDO, namely “to increase the implementation of land and
               biodiversity conservation measures in selected projects directed to small-scale farmers located in targeted
               marginal areas in the Project Area” lacked specifics. It was not clear what increase in land and biodiversity
               conservation was expected. The project’s PDO indicators provided no clarity on this matter. For these
               reasons the relevance of objectives was rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase the implementation of land and biodiversity conservation measures in selected projects directed
                             to small farmers located in targeted marginal areas in the Project Area

                             Rationale
                             The project’s theory of change linked the outputs of improving capacity of public and private institutions for
                             planning and implementing conservation measures in PMV Pillar II projects, increasing beneficiaries’
                             awareness and knowledge of conservation measures and beneficiaries’ skills to incorporate land and
                             biodiversity conservation measures, and constructing and equipping Processing Units (UVs) and planting
                             terraces with outcomes for farmers applying the land and biodiversity conservation measures in their own
                             production systems and small-scale farmer beneficiaries using at least one land conservation or
                             biodiversity measure in Pillar II sub-projects.

                             Outputs:

                                        3,021 small-scale farmers received training, not achieving the original target of 4,000 small-scale
                                         farmers but surpassing the revised target of 1,200 beneficiaries. 34 percent of these farmers were
                                         female, surpassing the original target of 15 percent of farmers trained and the revised target of 20
                                         percent. Among these small-scale farmers trained 41 percent were female, surpassing the original
                                         target of 15 percent and the revised target of 20 percent.
                                        520 staff from public institutions was trained, surpassing the original target of 120 staff and the revised
                                         target of 450 staff.
                                        50 staff from private institutions was trained, not achieving the original target of 700 staff and
                                         achieving the revised target of 50 staff.



                                                                                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                MA- GEF Social & Integrated Agriculture (P129774)




                                  Seven processing units (called unites de valorization or UVs) for olive processing were constructed,
                                   surpassing the target of two units.
                                  Five beehive manufacturing units were constructed, achieving the target of five units.
                                  Four animal feed production units for producing feed from agriculture by-products (cactus and argan)
                                   were constructed and equipped, achieving the target of four units.

                                    Outcomes:

                                  2,526 small-scale farmers used at least one biodiversity or soil conservation measure in the sub-
                                   projects, surpassing the target of 2,500 farmers. According to the Bank team (October 9, 2019), this
                                   outcome did not have a baseline since the project was a pioneer in introducing the biodiversity and
                                   land conservation measures, as a complementary measure to pillar 2 projects.
                                  180 hectares of land adopted sustainable land management practices, achieving the target of 180
                                   hectares.
                                  96 percent of small-scale farmers were satisfied with the project, surpassing the target of 70 percent.
                                  94 percent of targeted clients were satisfied with agricultural and rural advisory services, surpassing
                                   the target of 70 percent



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of the objective is rated Substantial.

                            According to the Bank team (October 9, 2019) the outcomes of the project can be solely attributed to the
                            project since the project was a pioneer in introducing the biodiversity and land conservation measures.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency:

   The PAD (p. 18) did not conduct a traditional cost-benefit analysis but only stated that with an expected 12,000
   small-scale farmers benefiting from the selected eight Pillar II projects and corresponding ASIMA sub-projects,
   the GEF grant was to invest approximately US$427 per beneficiary, leveraging the approximately US$2,962

                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MA- GEF Social & Integrated Agriculture (P129774)



invested in each beneficiary by the government. As the GEF grant totaled US$6.44 million and the government
co-financing was expected to be US$35.54 million, every dollar invested in the ASIMA by the GEF was to be
leveraged by the government’s investments at a ratio of 1:5. The PAD stated also that this ratio did not account
for the fact that the government intended to scale up successful land and biodiversity conservation measures to
other Pillar II projects throughout Morocco, suggesting that the value of each dollar invested through the GEF
grant was to enhance the benefits of the PMV even beyond the scope of the eight ASIMA sub-projects. While
this leverage of GEF financing by the government by a factor of 0.5 was a highly valued contribution it had no
implications for the efficiency with which the project would be implemented.

The ICR did not conduct a traditional cost benefit analysis either. The ICR (para 38) stated that ASIMA invested
approximately US$544 per farmer due to the correction of the number of direct project beneficiaries, slightly
more than the US$427 per farmer as calculated during appraisal. The Bank team (October 9, 2019) stated that it
did not conduct an economic analysis of the diversification of agriculture on degraded lands due to limited
financial resources. Based on an average per capita income for Morocco in 2017 of about $8,000 and a share of
agriculture in this income of about 12%, the average per capita income of the rural population is probably $900
per capita. For a farm household of five the average household income would be about $4,500. The actual
investment in land subject to land degradation and under diversified production by ASIMA per household would
be about 12% of household income. This suggests a significant incentive to engage in more diversified
production but it is not a measure of the project’s efficiency.

According to the ICR (para 39), data on projected costs and benefits of five out of the ten processing units were
collected by the National Institute for Agronomic Research (INRA). Based on these data the ICR estimated an
Internal Rate of Return (IRR) for the “Al Haouz Beekeeping” project of 55 percent, for the “Rhamna Cactus”
project an IRR of 27 percent, for the “Essaouira Argan” project an IRR of 39 percent, the “Agadir PAM” project
an IRR of 24 percent, and the “Tiznit Beekeeping” project an IRR of 22 percent. The projected average Internal
Rate of Return (IRR) was 33.4 percent across all sub-projects, for which data was available. According to the
Bank team (October 9, 2019), 33.4% represented the average Internal Rate of Return for 5 UVs put in place
under the ASIMA project for which data to conduct Cost Benefit Analysis was available. This is the unweighted
average of the IRRs of the following five projects: Essaouira Argan, Agadir PAM, Tiznit Beekeeping, Al Haouz
Beekeeping, and Rhamna Cactus. The average cannot be regarded as representative, as it includes UVs of
significantly different sizes under the ASIMA project. Annex 4 of the ICR reported that the Marrakech Cactus
Project is “currently facing problems acquiring raw materials due to a cactus disease outbreak in 2018. The ICR
noted that the UV cactus unit can be adapted to process tomato and apple waste instead of cactus but there is
no comment on the implications for the IRR.

Operational Efficiency:

The project experienced implementation delays due to procurement and financial management related issues
such as delays in payments to contractors and slow implementation of contracts for the construction of the UVs
etc. (see Section 10b for more details) resulting in the need to extend the project closing date by 12 months.

Based on the assessment above, the project’s overall efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA- GEF Social & Integrated Agriculture (P129774)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was rated Substantial given the objective’s alignment with the Bank’s latest Country
Partnership Framework (FY2019-2024) but the lack of specificity. Efficacy was rated Substantial but Efficiency
was Modest because of a lack of evidence on the project's specific investment returns. Overall the project’s
achievements had moderate shortcomings and hence its outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The Bank team stated (September 17, 2019) that the government is interested in scaling up the pilot model.
According to the ICR (para. 31) several new investments will be implemented based on the model of ASIMA.
For example, the Green Climate Fund will finance the PMV Argan project (US$49 million) which will build on
the ASIMA project conservation model on 18,000 hectares in the Marrakech/Souss Massa region. Also, a
project by the National Agency for Development of Oasis Zones and the Argan Tree (ANDZOA) is using the
ASIMA model to cultivate 2,000 hectares for medicinal and aromatic plants. The ICR (para. 33) stated that
through the project, staff in public agencies have obtained the necessary capacity for planning and
implementing conservation measures to scale up the ASIMA model. However, the project was not able to
create linkages between Pillar II projects and private investors, traders, and entrepreneurs. According to the
ICR (para. 34) interest by the private sector might grow once the current UVs will be fully operational and
profitable.

The ICR (para.81) stated that not all sub-project sponsors have experience in the management of UVs. At
the time of project closure not all UVs had implemented management arrangements and several UVs were
dependent on subsidized technical assistance for which it was unclear what the future assistance would be.
According to the ICR (para. 82) the PMV provides support for the management of UVs and the responsible
DPAs.

According to the ICR (para.83) the risk, which was identified during project preparation, that long-term
preservation of the environment may become secondary to short-term livelihood activities. The sustainability

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA- GEF Social & Integrated Agriculture (P129774)



of continuing improved production techniques to conserve land and biodiversity will depend on the success
of the management of UVs.

The Bank project team advised IEG (September 17, 2019) that no Bank follow on of this pilot project is
planned. Nevertheless, lessons from the project were incorporated in the ongoing project on Strengthening
Agri-Food Value Chains, e.g. including construction of basins for storage and treatment of olives by-products
and production of compost. These lessons will be also included in the Digital and Climate Smart Agriculture
Project under preparation.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (para. 49) the project design was built on lessons learned from the implementation
  of a previous Bank project (Integrating Climate Change in the implementation of the PMV – PICCPMV).
  Lessons learned from this project included the importance of building a partnership between the
  Agricultural Development Agency (ADA) as financing agency and the provincial departments of the
  Ministry of Agriculture, Maritime Fisheries, Rural Development, Water and Forestry (MAPMDREF) as the
  implementing agency. The ICR (para. 50) stated that while some aspects of the project design were built
  on a relatively well-developed technical basis and had been studied in previous studies and GEF
  projects, other aspects lacked knowledge such as the practical approaches to monitoring erosion and the
  behavior of medicinal plants in cultivation.

  The ICR (para. 51) also stated that the design did not include sufficient incentives to engage with the
  private sector even though the project aimed to develop new income streams to ensure sustainability.
  However, engagement with the private sector was limited to training and was not designed to foster its
  role in promoting or managing the processing units (UVs).

  During project preparation the Bank identified relevant risk factors. At the stakeholders’ level, the risk
  concerning the limited participation of farmers in project design and implementation was rated
  Substantial. This risk was addressed by de-concentrating procedures for the selection of Pillar II projects,
  stronger focus on consultations and training, increased transparency in information sharing, and efforts to
  include female beneficiaries. Also, the Bank tried to mitigate the moderate risk of weak capacity by
  providing training and recruiting staff. However, the ICR (para. 70) stated that the project experienced
  procurement related implementation delays due to lack of experience of the procurement teams.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA- GEF Social & Integrated Agriculture (P129774)




b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (para. 53) stated the project experienced implementation delays due to procurement, slow
 disbursements and slow implementation of the contracts for the construction of UVs. Even though these
 were risks identified during appraisal and the Bank provided training and capacity building activities, delays
 occurred. According to the ICR (p. 18), during the Mid-Term Review in December 2015 the Bank
 addressed this issue by providing additional training, revising procurement plans and thresholds and
 setting up a task force consisting of the Bank, the Ministry of Finance, ADA and MARMDREF to develop
 guidelines and an action plan to speed up disbursement. The Bank team stated (September 17, 2019) that
 the Bank addressed the delays resulting from the land issue by visiting all the proposed sites and providing
 advice to ensure that the sites were appropriate to the proposed construction and to their proposed
 function. Also, the Bank ensured that agreements for the legal and administrative formalities were correctly
 provided for, and that the sites were both environmentally and socially acceptable.

 According to the ICR (para. 78) project supervision was moved from Washington DC to Rabat in 2014 to
 allow for intensified supervision with on-the-job coaching, and regular field visits with task forces and
 working groups. The ICR stated that the involvement of the Ministry of Finance in the disbursement task
 force allowed for a high level of engagement from a key agency and resulted in a nearly full disbursement
 despite initial delays. According to the ICR (para. 76) the Bank maintained its focus on development impact
 throughout implementation and provided candid and detailed reporting in aide memoires and
 Implementation Status Reports (ISRs). Also, supervision of safeguard and fiduciary aspects was
 satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change and how key activities and outputs would lead to intended outcomes was
 sound. However, the project’s objective lacked specifics. It was not clear what increase in land and
 biodiversity conservation was expected. The project’s PDO indicators provided no clarity on this matter. At
 appraisal indicators lacked a baseline.

 Also, the PDO indicator “the number of successful pilots” lacked clarity in terms of what a successful pilot
 would look like. This indicator was revised during the Mid-Term Review to “the number of farmers using
 conservation measures”.

 According to the PAD (para. 43) ADA was to be responsible for the preparation of the project reports each
 semester, on the base of the contributions of the DPAs, consolidated at a regional level by the DRAs. In
 addition, a summary of the status of the physical implementation and on the result indicators of the ASIMA

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA- GEF Social & Integrated Agriculture (P129774)



 were to be shared with the farmers. The ICR (para. 62) stated that the project’s M&E was integrated into
 the overall M&E system of pillar II projects to avoid duplication.



b. M&E Implementation
  A study was carried out in October 2015 to define the baselines and the indicators included in the Results
  Framework.

  During the restructuring in 2016, the PDO indicator “the number of successful pilot sub-projects” was
  dropped and replaced by the indicator “the number of small farmers using at least one biodiversity or soil
  conservation measure in the sub-projects”. Also, the target for the PDO indicator “the number of direct
  project beneficiaries” was changed from 12,000 to 8,500 beneficiaries since the original number
  incorrectly referred to all the beneficiaries of the eight pillar II projects covering 122 rural communes
  whereas this project covered only 30 rural communes. Also, four intermediate outcome indicators were
  added to measure the achievement of the second intermediate result “transfer of land a d biodiversity
  conservation measures among small farmers.”

  The Bank team stated (September 17, 2019) that most of the indicators were followed by the Provincial
  Agriculture Directorates, with data submitted on a regular basis to the Agricultural Development Agency
  (ADA), which was responsible for project coordination. Only two intermediate indicators were tracked
  directly by ADA, through surveys (small farmers who are satisfied with the project and Targeted clients
  satisfied with agricultural and rural advisory services). The Bank team also stated that the data was found
  to be reliable and of good quality. Furthermore, the Bank team stated that the M&E functions are likely to
  be sustained as the project’s M&E was integrated into the overall M&E system of pillar II projects of Plan
  Maroc Vert (PMV), which will continue after 2020, in a new agricultural strategy, which is currently under
  preparation.

  According to the ICR (para. 63) the M&E component for measuring the pilot aspect of the project was not
  implemented.



c. M&E Utilization
  The Bank team stated (September 17, 2019) that the M&E function provided systematic management
  information on project implementation activities, procurement and disbursement. As such, it allowed the
  project agencies, the government and the Bank to keep on top of implementation, to identify delays and
  bottlenecks, and to intervene on a ‘just in time’ basis to correct anomalies.

  M&E also tracked all project results as they occurred, and so allowed all parties to keep abreast of
  progress towards the intended outcomes. The M&E system was used for the first project restructuring of
  September 2016, following the MTR in order to change one performance indicator and the target value
  of others.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA- GEF Social & Integrated Agriculture (P129774)




10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and was classified as category B. According
   to the ICR (p. 20), the project prepared an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Framework (ESIA)
   which guided the Environmental and Social Impact Assessments for sub-projects related to olive and argan
   processing, and for simple Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for sub-projects on cactus, red meat,
   bee keeping, and medicinal and aromatic plants. The ICR stated that the required ESIAs and EMPs were
   adequately prepared but experienced some delays. The Provincial Agricultural Directorates (DPAs)
   monitored compliance with the Bank’s safeguard. According to the ICR, the project only experienced a
   minor issue when during the construction of the Processing Units (UVs) some minor safety measures were
   not complied with. According to the Bank team (October 9, 2019 these issues were resolved.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   The Bank project team identified moderate financial management risks during project preparation.
   Mitigation measures included capacity building and recruitment. According to the ICR (p. 20) fiduciary
   aspects were satisfactory throughput project implementation. Also, unaudited Interim Financial Reports
   were submitted in a timely manner and audit reports were submitted on a regularly basis with slight delays.
   The Bank accepted the audit reports and comments by the auditors were addressed in a timely fashion.
   However, the ICR (para. 69) stated that disbursement was low at the beginning of project implementation
   due to delays in procurement and payments to contractors. The Bank set up a task force with key partners
   such as ADA, the Financial Directorate in the Ministry of Agriculture, and Budget Directorate in the Ministry
   of Finance to address these delays which resulted in an increase of disbursements made. According to the
   Bank team (September 17, 2019) the external auditor’s opinion was not qualified and the project complied
   with the Bank’s financial covenants.

   Procurement:

   During project preparation, the Bank assessed the procurement risk as Moderate and mitigated any
   associated risks by providing training. However, according to the ICR (para. 70) despite these efforts the
   project faced significant delays due to issues related to the identification of the required land and
   confirmation titles and weak capacity of the procurement team. The ICR (para.70) stated that the Bank
   addressed these issues by working closely with ADA to speed up the procurement processes and revise
   the payment calendar to systematically to accelerate the processing of invoices from contractors and
   suppliers. The ICR stated that no misprocurement was found and the grant was fully disbursed.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA- GEF Social & Integrated Agriculture (P129774)



   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   Relevance of the objective was
                                                                                   Substantial. Efficacy was rated
Outcome                         Satisfactory             Moderately Satisfactory   Substantial and Efficiency
                                                                                   (contrary to the rating in the ICR)
                                                                                   was rated Modest.
Bank Performance                Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Modest                   Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 23-24) included several lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:

      Identifying and assigning land rights during project preparation supports a timely
       project implementation and could be used as an eligibility criterion for sub-project
       sponsors. As an example, in this project, the contribution of the farmer associations to sub-
       projects was typically in the form of land. However, the process of legally assigning land
       rights resulted in implementation delays and the lesson that legally assigning land rights is
       always subject to institutional risks.
      In order to ensure the sustainability of sub-projects that are part of the commodity
       production chain, attention needs to be paid to the commercial viability of these sub-
       projects. This project provides an example of a program aimed to train trainees from the
       private sector in order to create linkages with private investors, traders, and entrepreneurs to
       integrate small farmers in local markets in a vertical integration of the agri-food chain that
       was fostered by the public financing of PMV Pillar II projects. However, the number was
       substantially decreased to 50 trainees during the 2016 restructuring due to weak demand.
       The Bank team stated that the reason why the private sector showed less interest than
       expected was that although farmers, officials and the general public at the local level readily
       grasped the project purpose and value, the larger scale commercial sector preferred to await
       the results of the pilot project before engaging. The lesson is that the interest of the private
       sector at the pilot stage was simply over-estimated at appraisal in the absence of any
       evidence that UVs could provide evidence of actual long-term profitability.




                                                                                                      Page 12 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MA- GEF Social & Integrated Agriculture (P129774)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a good overview of project preparation and implementation. The ICR is concise, internally
consistent, and candid. The ICR could, however, have benefitted from including additional information and solid
data in areas such as the project's efficiency, how M&E data informed decision making, and potential risks to
development outcomes.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 13 of 13
