     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Education System Stabilization (P152898)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0021717

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P152898                                   Emergency Education System Stabilization

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Lebanon                                   Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-18789                                  30-Nov-2018                                         32,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Mar-2015                               30-Nov-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           32,000,000.00                                   32,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            32,000,000.00                                   32,000,000.00

 Actual                                        32,000,000.00                                   32,000,000.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz        Judyth L. Twigg               Joy Behrens                   IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 5) and the Grant Agreement (page 5), the project
   objectives were as follows:

           To support the operational needs of Lebanese public schools; and
           To improve the learning environment in response to the continued influx of Syrian refugee
           children.


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Education System Stabilization (P152898)



   The project objectives remained the same throughout the project period; however, three key outcome targets
   were revised during a project restructuring (December 2017). At that time, two of the outcome targets were
   revised upward and one was revised downward. Due to the latter, a split evaluation is undertaken for this
   project.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Support to Schools (Appraisal: US$ 13.5 million; Actual: US$15.1 million): This component aimed to
   provide financing for schools in order to remain operational, through two separate school funds that the
   government uses to channel finances to schools: School Fund (US$100/student) and Parent Council Fund
   (US$60/student). Due to the rising costs associated with the influx of Syrian refugee children, this
   component supported the ability of schools to remain open and operational, by financing student enrollment
   fees.

   2. Learning Environment Quality (Appraisal: US$ 16.6 million; Actual: US$ 15.8 million): This component
   aimed to improve the quality of the public school learning environment through several activities:
   rehabilitating school facilities in greatest need of repair; providing small emergency funds to primary schools
   to help schools improve classrooms and foster greater social cohesion among the different student
   communities through extra-curricular activities; and providing a full set of the required textbooks to all public
   school students in grades 1-9 (for two academic years). This component also included support to Direction
   d’Orientation Pédagogique et Scolaire (DOPS), the department within the Ministry of Education and Higher
   Education (MEHE) that provides pedagogical, health, and psycho-social counseling.

   3. Project Management and Support (Appraisal: US$ 1.9 million; Actual: US$ 1.1 million): This component
   was to finance the operations of the Project Management Unit (PMU) in the MEHE.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

          The appraised project cost was US$32.0 million, which disbursed in its entirety.
          Project funds were reallocated within and between Components 1 and 2 in order to meet a financing
           gap (due to the failure of some donor commitments to materialize). The immediate need to increase
           financing for school enrollment (Component 1), combined with the delays in Ministry of Finance
           (MOF) transfers to the MEHE and the implementation of a similar school grants program in an



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Education System Stabilization (P152898)



           ongoing Bank project (Second Education Development project), led to the decision to reallocate
           funds .

   Financing

         The project was financed entirely by a multi-donor Lebanon Syrian Crisis Trust Fund grant of
           US$32.0 million, which disbursed in its entirety.

   Borrower contribution

         There was no planned Borrower contribution.

   Dates

         December 2017: The results framework was revised such that two key outcome targets were
           revised upward (an expansion of project achievement) and one key outcome target was revised
           downward (a reduction in project scope). The latter target - the number of schools that receive
           school grants - was reduced from 1700 to 400, due to the slow transfer of funds from MOF to MEHE
           to finance the grants. At this point in the project period, about 85% of the funds had disbursed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Lebanon is a high middle-income country with a relatively high level of human development; however,
political instability and proximity of external conflicts - most recently, the Syrian crisis - have had
destabilizing effects on both the economy and the social fabric. In particular, the public education system is
being challenged to maintain quality education for both its own citizens and the recent influx of
Syrian refugee children. In 2014, the country was hosting 1.15 million Syrian refugees (of which almost half
a million were school-aged children), representing the highest concentration of refugees per capita in the
world. The number of Syrian refugee children in Lebanon was already exceeding the number of Lebanese
students in the public school system (just over half of all school-aged children in Lebanon attend private
schools).

The MEHE developed the "Reaching All Children with Education (RACE)" strategy in 2014. The
strategy sought to provide continued access to education for refugees, while also preventing a deterioration
in the quality of education in the public school system. The strategic framework promoted donor
coordination and financing through government mechanisms, and it had the goal to support the
development of long-term prospects for refugees, while also reducing the risk of future conflict and regional
destabilization.

The project objectives were in line with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework for FY17-22, which
included a focus area to "expand economic opportunities and increase human capital." Also, the project
represented an emergency response to the regional crisis, according to the provisions of World Bank



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Emergency Education System Stabilization (P152898)



               Operational Policy 10.0 (Situations of Urgent Need). However, one of the objectives - to support the
               operational needs of Lebanese public schools - was imprecisely articulated.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support the operational needs of Lebanese public schools

                             Rationale
                             In order to keep schools operational during the crisis as well as enable vulnerable and refugee children to
                             attend public schools, this objective aimed to cover operating expenses for schools (i.e. maintenance, water,
                             heating and cooling, security). Outputs were primarily direct financial transfers to schools, on a per capita
                             basis, through a School Fund and a Parent Council Fund. The total per capita amount covered the enrollment
                             fee, thus enabling access to education for poor and vulnerable households. The theory of change for this
                             objective was straightforward, albeit focused on outputs/process rather than on actual outcomes (i.e.
                             maintained enrollment rates for Lebanese school children), given the emergency nature of the Bank's
                             response.



                             Outputs

                                        Provision of financing to public schools to cover enrollment fees (and thus operating costs for
                                          schools).



                             Outcomes

                                        201,851 enrollment fees were financed over three years, surpassing the original target of 90,000
                                          (30,000 fees for three years per student) and the (upward) revised target of 190,000. This financing
                                          comprised 18 percent of all enrollment fees covered by the government's RACE program over three
                                          years. In 2014-15, the public school system contained 347,415 students (of which 237,872 were
                                          Lebanese and 93,627 were Syrian refugees); in 2017-18, the public school system contained 483,054
                                          students (of which 264,364 were Lebanese and 209,721 were Syrian refugees). The ICR suggested
                                          that this 39 percent increase in capacity is attributable to the government's RACE program. The ICR



                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Emergency Education System Stabilization (P152898)



       (page 15) also stated that this financing decreased the cost of education for vulnerable and refugee
       households, although no specific evidence was provided.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the learning environment in response to the continued influx of Syrian refugee children

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was overall sound, with the quality of the learning environment likely
improved through improved school facilities, provision of textbooks, and provision of supplemental financing
for extracurricular activities that would increase social cohesion, particularly in communities with a large influx
of refugees. Operational support to the MEHE counseling department also included training to staff on
working with vulnerable children. According to the project team, the school system was able to absorb
the additional children by enrolling them in under-capacity schools in first shifts and also creating second
shifts in existing schools.



Outputs

      Provision of financing to 410 schools for supplemental school activities (classroom improvements and
       extracurricular activities) aimed to foster social cohesion between different student communities
       (original target: 1700). The financing was used to provide sports equipment, music equipment, field
       trips, instructional materials, and small scale classroom rehabilitation.
      Provision of over 8.5 million textbooks (original target: 4.5 million; revised target: 6.0 million). The ICR
       reported that the higher output level was due to the provision of textbooks for three academic years,
       whereas the original planned output was for two academic years. The project also financed a study on
       the textbook supply chain to identify areas of improvement.
      Rehabilitation of 10 schools from the priority list (target: 10).
      Financing of operational costs all 16 DOPS regional centers, which provide tailored coaching to
       teachers on pedagogical, health, and psychosocial issues. During supervision visits, school principals
       and teachers reported that they were highly satisfied with the support provided by DOPS.



Outcomes

      The textbook quantity and quality study, which included spot checks to schools to ensure availability of
       textbooks, indicated that more than 90 percent of students in basic education had individual textbooks
       in the classroom and that the quality of the textbooks was acceptable. During the third project year,
       the project provided textbooks for all non-Lebanese students in second shifts and for around 75

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Emergency Education System Stabilization (P152898)



       percent of non-Lebanese students in morning shifts. The remaining cost of textbooks was covered by
       UNICEF for 25 percent of non-Lebanese students in morning shifts and by the Lebanese Government
       for all Lebanese students.



The ICR also reported the following data on learning and perceptions:

      Available data from national exam results showed that pass rates for non-Lebanese children rose from
       59.8 percent in 2015/16 to 72.6 percent in 2017/18, despite a 70 percent increase in Grade 9
       enrollment during this same period. The Bank's Research for Results (R4R) program also measured
       student learning according to morning shift vs. afternoon shift schools, as well as in private schools,
       for Grades 4 and 7 to study progress of student learning outcomes over the course of one academic
       year (2016-2017). The results showed that second-shift Syrian refugee students start with the lowest
       baseline learning scores in all subjects (Arabic language, foreign language, and math) at the
       beginning of the year, but show the greatest improvement in learning outcomes, reaching similar
       scores to first-shift public school students by the end of the year.
      A perception survey also conducted by the Bank's R4R program showed that Lebanese and Syrian
       parents had positive views on education quality in Lebanon, with 76 percent of parents rating
       education quality in Lebanon as good or excellent, and 59 percent believing that it is improving.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve the learning environment in response to the continued influx of Syrian refugee children (SAME
OBJECTIVE but one revised outcome target)

Revised Rationale
Outputs

      410 schools benefitted from supplemental financing (revised target: 400). The ICR (page 16) reported
       that negative impacts from the downward revision from the original target (due to delays in transferring
       funds from MOF to MEHE) was likely mitigated by the implementation of a similar grant mechanism
       under a parallel Bank project (Education Development 2) and also due to the fact that 300 of the
       beneficiary schools operated double shifts.



Outcomes

      100% of supplemental grant beneficiary schools were displaying school improvement activities at the
       facilities (such as displaying results of grant activities on school walls) to raise confidence and improve


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 13
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Emergency Education System Stabilization (P152898)



                                    the perception of Lebanese and refugee parents regarding public schools. Anecdotal evidence of
                                    impact of school grants included school principals reporting that the activities improved the learning
                                    environment by making the schools more welcoming learning places.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Achievement of the first objective to support the operational needs of Lebanese public schools is rated
                            Substantial due to achievement of targets in the number of school children supported through financing
                            school fees. Achievement of the second objective to improve the learning environment is rated Substantial,
                            under both the original and revised targets, due to achievement of targets in school rehabilitation
                            and textbook provision, although the target for financing schools for extracurricular activities was achieved
                            only under the revised target.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal, a cost-benefit analysis for the project was not prepared; instead, the PAD provided a narrative
   rationale for the project, including a justification for public sector intervention, the need to alleviate fiscal
   pressure on the MEHE, and expected benefits such as maintaining school operations, investing in school
   infrastructure, and improving the learning environment. The project design included several elements that likely
   contributed to project efficiency. These elements included a marginal cost approach to education provision for
   refugees (compared to a parallel systems approach) and the use of the existing textbook distribution system
   (compared to commissioning a separate procurement).

   At project closing (ICR, Annex 4), a cost benefit analysis was conducted with the following elements:
   assumption that benefits realized were due to increased enrollment of vulnerable Lebanese and Syrian school
   children, leading to preservation of work productivity and future wages; costs were calculated according to direct
   project costs. The ratio of benefits to costs was calculated as 1.43, and the internal rate of return was estimated
   at 12%, with a net present value of US$ 15 million.

   In addition, the implementation phase included several areas of cost efficiency. These included cost savings of
   US$ 2.16 million in the school rehabilitation activity, due to the use of in-house engineers (in the PMU) for the
   planning, design, and supervision phases, and a low unit cost for textbooks (US$ 0.87 compared to US$ 0.91 in
   Jordan and US$ 2.00-4.00 in Turkey). Minimal PMU staff turnover and on-time project closing also contributed

                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Emergency Education System Stabilization (P152898)



to efficient use of project resources. However, the ICR noted that the slow transfer of funds from the MOF to the
MEHE was a significant bottleneck in the pace of implementation; although potential negative impact on school
enrollment and textbook distribution was mitigated, the school grants component was only able to launch two
rounds rather than three.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    94.10
 ICR Estimate                                              12.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objectives is rated Substantial due to strong alignment with emergency country conditions, as
well as Bank and country strategies. Efficacy is rated Substantial under both the original and revised outcome
targets, due to achievement of both objectives to support the operational needs of Lebanese public schools and
to improve the learning environment. Efficiency is rated Substantial due to evidence of efficient use of project
resources in project design and implementation, along with results of the cost benefit analysis. Overall outcome
is therefore rated Satisfactory, consistent with only minor shortcomings in Relevance, Efficacy, and Efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The key project activities, along with the institutional arrangements, are being continued under a follow up
operation (RACE 2, P159470, US$100.0 million) that became effective in 2017. The follow up operation
also focuses on the long-term goal to improve quality of education, alongside ensuring access to refugee and
Lebanese children in the short term. Therefore, development outcomes from this project are likely to be
sustained. However, unpredictability in donor financial commitments from year to year poses substantial risk
to ensuring that all refugee children have access to public school.



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Education System Stabilization (P152898)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This emergency response project was designed while an ongoing Bank operation - the Second Education
  Development Project (P118187) - was already under implementation. Thus, this project was designed to
  align with the longer term objectives of the ongoing project (improved quality), with a much simpler design
  due to the immediate short-term needs being addressed. The project design was also informed by
  a comprehensive Economic and Social Impact Assessment of the Syrian conflict's impact on Lebanon, as
  well as a preparatory analysis of financing options for the enrollment of refugee children. There was
  strong commitment from the government due to the clear alignment with its own RACE strategy and the
  designation of the RACE PMU as the main implementing agency for this project. The risk assessment
  accurately identified the risk of slow MOF fund transfers as a critical risk, though the ICR (page 30) noted
  that feasible mitigation measures to avoid these delays could not be identified. Lastly, as noted in the ICR
  (page 26), the results framework was simple but "limited in its ability to measure impact."



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Proactive supervision, led by a country-based task team leader, ensured effective responses to
 implementation challenges. The Bank team adopted extra measures to monitor implementation and
 measure progress, including independent fiduciary audits, assessments of expenditures, and an online
 platform for more timely data entry on school attendance. Revisions to the project design, results
 framework, and institutional processes were cleared as needed, thus minimizing any negative impact on
 achievement of outcomes. For example, the Bank team worked with the MOF to streamline bureaucratic
 processes such that the transfer of funds between MOF and MEHE was reduced from a six month delay
 for Tranche #3 to a two month delay for Tranche #4. In the meantime, the Bank approved a direct
 payments mechanism even though the payment amounts were below the regular threshold amount. The
 ICR (page 30) also noted that the Bank team was effective in "using the project as a platform to support
 MEHE in moving from an emergency response to a longer-term development of the sector," citing analytic
 work to strengthen national systems and partnering with donors to help establish a research program. The
 latter, in combination with the Bank's convening power, has contributed to the development of longer-term
 education policies in coordination with the broader donor community.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Education System Stabilization (P152898)



  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The key project indicators in the results framework were largely output-oriented (i.e. number of textbooks
 distributed, number of schools rehabilitated), given the emergency nature of the operation, but nevertheless
 encompassed all outcomes in the project objective statement. The ICR (page 26) noted some specific
 shortcomings in the indicators with regards to the limited ability to measure impact, although all indicators
 included realistic targets. The project's M&E arrangements also included funding for an M&E Specialist
 position in the PMU to support data collection and reporting, and established a data collection and
 verification process at the school level.



b. M&E Implementation
  Indicators included in the results framework were measured as planned. Regular progress reports
  provided data to track progress on the work program, and also identified challenges to implementation.
  School directors and field coordinators reported on and verified enrollment data, and an online platform
  was later introduced to monitor daily attendance on a more timely basis. The results framework was
  modified in recognition of some weaknesses in the original design, leading to revised targets to more
  accurately capture project achievements. Independent audits, in addition to the regular data reporting
  activities, were used to verify and inform project implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (page 28) reported examples of the use of M&E in decision-making. During the Mid-Term
  Review, a decision was made to strengthen data collection activities (more timely and accrurate) to
  better inform future operations; project indicators were revised to better capture project achievements,
  according to data reporting progress to date; and the RACE Executive Commission was kept up to date
  with periodic factsheets.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project due to minor civil works (school
   rehabilitation). Appraisal support included preparation of an Environmental Management Plan and
   an Environmental and Social System Assessment, as well as training for PMU staff on implementing
   recommendations from the Assessment.


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Education System Stabilization (P152898)



   The ICR (page 28) reported that safeguards compliance was satisfactory, citing school site visits by Bank
   safeguards specialists and PMU staff to ensure compliance.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The implementation period included annual independent technical audits to assess school-level fiduciary
   processes, which identified areas that needed improvement in school management capacity. In response
   to the findings, trainings were provided at the regional level, which, according to the ICR (page 23),
   supported both meeting of fiduciary requirements of the project and strengthening institutional capacity.

   Financial management: Financial management performance was overall satisfactory and in compliance
   with requirements, albeit with delays in the submission of two interim financial reports and some annual
   audit reports. According to the ICR (page 29), the submission delays were due to the extra time needed by
   the PMU to install new financial management software, as well as differing donor requirements for annual
   audits. An independent financial audit was conducted to verify the use of project funds.

   Procurement: Two post-procurement reviews (covering 60 percent of awarded contracts) confirmed
   satisfactory procurement performance at the Ministry level. At the school level, a technical audit of school-
   level fiduciary processes revealed some shortcomings: differences in how procurement processes were
   implemented among the schools and among the regions; and problems with procurement
   documentation. The MEHE responded to the findings by developing unified national procurement
   guidelines and providing tailored training to regional and school staff on procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   High



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Emergency Education System Stabilization (P152898)



12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 31-32), adapted by IEG:

        In an emergency education system stabilization operation, flexibility coupled with intensive
         supervision support by the Bank can help ensure project effectiveness. In the case of this
         project, timely restructuring, reallocation of project funds, and the use of direct payment
         mechanisms were examples of flexible and timely Bank responses to implementation
         bottlenecks.
        Even in an emergency situation that demands immediate and short-term support, the Bank
         can provide additional value through analytic work and research to support longer-term
         outcomes. In the case of this project, the Research for Results (R4R) program was linked to
         the project to generate evidence on the education sector, and the project's analytic work
         helped inform institutional strengthening activities.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR's evidence base was strong, with supplemental data provided beyond indicators defined in the results
framework. Inclusion of supplemental data was necessary because, as noted above, the key project indicators
were primarily output-oriented and therefore limited in measuring actual project impact. In particular, the ICR
reported additional information on the objective to improve the learning environment (improved learning
outcomes, parent perceptions) to present a more complete evidence base and thus further
substantiate outcomes. The narrative on project implementation was clearly written and informative, as well
as candid about minor shortcomings. Lessons provided some specific examples of learning from an
emergency operation regarding implementation (i.e. use of direct payment mechanisms) and support for longer-
term outcomes (i.e. use of analytic work).




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 13
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Emergency Education System Stabilization (P152898)




                                                                                  Page 13 of 13
