     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Integrated Sanitation & Sew. Infra. 2 (P120161)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0021784

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P120161                                     EG-Integrated Sanitation & Sew. Infra. 2

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Egypt, Arab Republic of                     Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80690                                  31-Dec-2016                                       110,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2011                                 31-Dec-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            200,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                             110,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                         110,000,000.00                                             0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Ranga Rajan                  Dileep M. Wagle              Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   The Project Development Objective as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, page 4);




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Integrated Sanitation & Sew. Infra. 2 (P120161)



   " To provide targeted populations in the Governorates of Menoufia, Sharkeya, Assiut and Sohag with
   increased access to improved sanitation and sewerage services".



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   There were three components at appraisal (PAD, pages 4 - 5).

   1. Water infrastructure systems in rural areas in Menoufia and Sharkeya. (estimated cost at appraisal:
   US$149.75 million, of which US$99.75 from the World Bank, and the balance from the Government; actual
   cost: US$25.70 million). The actual cost was lower than appraised due to a significant reduction in project
   scope during implementation (see Section 2e). This component financed construction of wastewater
   infrastructure systems in nine villages in the Governates of Menoufia and Sharkeya. Activities funded
   included construction of sewerage systems (wastewater treatment plants and collection networks).

   2. Water infrastructure systems in rural areas in Assiut and Sohag. (estimated cost at appraisal:
   US$149.75 million, of which US$99.75 from the World Bank, and the balance from the Government; actual
   cost: US$79.50 million). The actual cost was lower than appraised due to the reduction in project
   scope during implementation. This component financed activities similar to the ones described above in 22
   villages in the Governates of Assiut and Sohag.

   3. Project Management. (estimated cost at appraisal: US$10.00 million; actual cost: US$5.20 million). The
   actual cost was lower for reasons cited above. This component provided technical assistance
   support for project management, monitoring and evaluation and environmental management to the National
   Organization for Potable Water and Sanitary Drainage (NOPWASD - the national agency in the Ministry of
   Housing, Utilities and Urban Communities (MoHUUC) in charge of planning water and wastewater
   infrastructure systems) and the Holding Company for Water and Wastewater (HCWW- the agency in charge
   of implementing water sanitation investments at the local level in the 26 governates).

   A component was added with the project restructuring on June 22, 2015.

   4. Support to MoHUUC Project Management Unit. Cost at appraisal US$0.00 million. Actual
   cost US$2.60 million. This component provided financing for establishing a PMU within the MoHUUC
   and preparing a follow-up project in the sanitation sector.




                                                                                                  Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EG-Integrated Sanitation & Sew. Infra. 2 (P120161)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


  Project cost. The cost at appraisal was estimated at US$310.00 million. The scope of the project was
  reduced considerably during implementation for two reasons: (i) substantial reduction in counterpart
  financing: and (ii) partial cancellation of the Bank loan (discussed below). After restructuring in 2017 the
  revised estimate of project cost was US$120.00 million, against an actual cost at closure of US$113.50
  million.

  Project financing. The main source of funding for this project was an IBRD loan of US$200.00 million at
  appraisal. There were major exchange rate changes during implementation, with the Egyptian Pound
  depreciating vis-à-vis the US$, by about 6% at the time of signing of the loan to about 8%, when most
  contracts were signed and further by 18% during implementation. The exchange rate changes generated
  savings in local currency terms. About 45% (US$90.00 million) of the Bank loan was cancelled, as
  they were deemed to be unusable in the remaining project lifetime, given the low disbursements during
  implementation. The revised estimates of the loan US$110.00 million. This amount was fully disbursed by
  project closing.

  Borrower contribution. A borrower contribution of US$110.00 million was originally envisaged for the
  project. Actual counterpart funding was however reduced to only US$10.00 million during implementation,
  on account of the government's fiscal constraints. The actual counterpart funding at closure turned out to be
  even lower – at US$0.35 million.

  Dates. The project was approved on June 30, 2011 and became effective 18 months later on December 16,
  2012. It was scheduled to close on December 31, 2016, but was extended to December 31, 2018, for
  reasons discussed below.

  Other changes. The project went through two Level 2 restructurings. The first restructuring took place on
  June 22, 2015, at which time only 1.5% of the loan had been disbursed. The poor disbursement rate was
  due to a combination of factors, including procurement delays by the National Organization for Potable
  Water and Sanitary Drainage (NOPWASD) and the Holding Company for Water and Wastewater), and
  disruption to activities during and after the Arab Spring from January 2011 to 2014. These changes were
  made through the restructuring: (i) Following the government's decision to reduce counterpart funding, the
  targets for the number of direct project beneficiaries and the volume of treated wastewater in project areas,
  were reduced by 27% and 34% respectively; (ii) The implementation arrangements were changed, with the
  Ministry of Housing, Utilities and Urban Communities (MoHUUC), placed in overall charge of project
  implementation and the MoHUUC was to delegate the responsibility for day-to-day responsibilities to the
  NOPWASD; (iii) The closing date was extended by a year to complete activities that had been delayed due
  to a combination of factors, including changes in implementation arrangements and the general political
  uncertainty in the wake of the Arab Spring.

  These changes were made with the second project restructuring on November 1, 2017, a month before the
  revised project closing date, when 25% of the loan was disbursed; (i) US$90.00 million of the Bank loan
  was cancelled, as they were deemed to be unusable; (ii) The targets of the indicators were reduced
  (discussed in section 9b); (iii) A project component was added: and (iv) The closing date was extended by a
  year for completing activities that had been subject to delays, following the devaluation of the Egyptian
  Pound and partial suspension of loan (discussed in sections 5 and 10a).



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Integrated Sanitation & Sew. Infra. 2 (P120161)



   Split rating. Although targets for key outcome indicators were substantially reduced during implementation,
   through the project restructurings in June 2015 and November 2017, given that the project achieved limited
   results at the PDO level as compared to the targets and efficacy was negligible for all phases, this
   assessment is not based on a split rating of the project.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. There were vast regional and rural-urban disparities within Egypt in the years before
appraisal. The incidence of poverty was disproportionately higher in Upper Egypt, with 34% of the
population classified as poor, as compared to the heavily populated Delta region. Further, there were rural-
urban disparities, with the poorest 40% of the Egyptian households located in rural areas. In terms of social
indicators, only 12% of the rural population had access to sanitation services (as compared to 89% of the
urban population) and only 6% of the Egyptian villages had facilities for safe collection, conveyance and
treatment for wastewater. The PDO of improving sanitation and sewerage services in priority governates
was outcome-oriented and aimed at addressing the overarching goal of reducing geographic and rural-
urban disparities in social indicators, that were in line with the Bank’s strategy for Egypt discussed
below. Egypt was undergoing a process of political and social transformation in the aftermath of the
January 2011 revolution at appraisal. Although the transformation process was expected to take a relatively
long period, it was also deemed that external assistance could yield disproportionate social returns.

Government strategy. The PDO was strongly aligned with the Government’s Governorate-wide "National
Rural Sanitation Master Plan' of 2008. This plan accorded high priority to safe disposal of wastewater in
rural areas and targeted comprehensive sanitation coverage to the population in these areas, by 2037. The
Master Plan prioritized sector investments and provided a roadmap for comprehensive rural sanitation
coverage. The sector reform agenda was articulated by the MoHUUC in 2010 in a policy paper titled
"Development Policies: Water and Wastewater Sector in Egypt". This policy paper provided a framework
and direction for further sector development and for institutions operating in the sector.

Bank strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with these three goals of the Bank's Country Assistance
Strategy (CAS) for 2006-2009 at appraisal, namely: (i) reducing disparities between Upper and Lower Egypt
(CAS, page 27); (ii) enhancing provision of public goods through expanded supply and improved efficiency
of infrastructure services (CAS, page 95); and (iii) strengthening the accountability of public sector
agencies in the water and sanitation sectors (CAS, page 26). The PDO continues to be relevant to the Bank
strategy articulated in the Bank’s current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the 2015-2019
period. Focus Area Three of the CPF reiterated the need for improving service delivery of water and
sanitation services in rural areas through strengthening the accountability of public sector agencies in these
sectors.

The Bank has a long history of engagement in Egypt. In support of the Government’s sector reform agenda,
the Bank was supporting an ongoing project -the Integrated Sanitation and Sewerage Project - aimed
at improving sanitation in the three governates in the Delta region, at appraisal. This project continued Bank
support to the sector in priority governates identified by the government.



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      EG-Integrated Sanitation & Sew. Infra. 2 (P120161)



               Despite the relevance of the PDO to the government and Bank strategy, the project was unrealistic in terms
               of the number of direct project beneficiaries (defined as people benefitting from improved sanitation and
               sewerage services). The ICR (paragraph 16) notes that the original calculation of 1.2 million project
               beneficiaries, included in addition to the actual targeted households under the project, potential
               beneficiaries through household connections, not financed under the project and outside the scope of this
               loan. The revised target of 285,000 beneficiaries was more realistic in terms of what was feasible with
               this project.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             To provide targeted populations in the Governorates of Menoufia, Sharkeya, Assiut and Sohag with increased
                             access to improved sanitation and sewerage services.



                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The project’s results framework was appropriate and adequate to capture the intended
                             results. The intended outcomes were clear and monitorable. The project activities, aimed at
                             constructing additional wastewater connections, pumping stations and sewerage pipelines, were likely to
                             increase the number of people with access to improved sewerage services. Constructing additional
                             wastewater treatment plants to make the whole sewage chain functional to Egyptian effluent standards, was
                             expected to increase the volume of treated areas in the selected villages. These activities together with the
                             technical assistance activities aimed at environmental management at the national level and to the agency in
                             charge of implementing water sanitation investments at the local level, were expected to contribute to the
                             intended outcome of increasing access to better sanitation and sewerage services in the selected villages.

                             Outputs (ICR, pages 35-43).

                                        None of the planned wastewater treatment plants for sewage disposal were operational when the
                                          project closed (original target 15 and revised target five). The ICR (paragraph 28) notes that the
                                          government remains committed to constructing the plants using its resources.

                                          For the governates of Menoufia and Sharkeya.

                                        No additional working wastewater connections were provided (target 5,637 connections).

                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               EG-Integrated Sanitation & Sew. Infra. 2 (P120161)




                                  Eight pumping stations were constructed, as per the revised target.
                                  None of the wastewater treatment plants were operational at the 2017 design flow rate (target three).
                                  There was no treatment of wastewater plants in the project intervened areas, as none of the planned
                                   wastewater treatment plants were operational.
                                  89.50 kilometers (km) of sewerage pipelines were provided, lower than the target of 93.40 Km.

                                     For the governates of Assuit and Sohag.

                                  5,000 additional working wastewater connections were provided at closure. This represented 10% of
                                     the target (51,285 connections).
                                    24 pumping stations were constructed, as targeted.
                                    241 km of sewerage pipelines were provided, as compared to the target of 282 pipelines.
                                    None of the wastewater treatment plants were operating at 2017 design flow rate, when the project
                                     closed (target of 2).
                                    1.80 tones a year of Biochemical Oxygen Compound pollution load was removed under
                                     the Wastewater treatment plants when the project closed. This represented under 5% of the target
                                     of 39.96 tones a year.

                            Outcomes.

                                  25,000 people beneficiaries all located in the Sohag governate, were provided with improved
                                   sanitation and sewerage services at closure. This represented about 9% of the revised target of
                                   878,340 beneficiaries in the four governates.
                                  Since the planned wastewater treatment plants were not functional at closure, the outcome pertaining
                                   to the number of wastewater treatment plants meeting Egyptian effluent treatment standards was not
                                   monitorable. However, as noted in the beginning of this section, the government remains committed to
                                   completing the plants using its own financial resources.
                                  3,262 cubic meters of wastewater was subject to treatment when the project closed. This represented
                                   about 6% of the target (55,000 cubic meters). The ICR (page 35) notes that since the wastewater
                                   treatment plants were not functional when the project closed, only additional wastewater at the
                                   existing Sohag wastewater treatment plant was being treated.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                            Only 84% of the planned construction activities were completed. The implementation arrangements with two
                            centralized agencies was complicated and lack of collaboration between the agencies contributed to

                                                                                                                            Page 6 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EG-Integrated Sanitation & Sew. Infra. 2 (P120161)



  implementation delays. About US$90.00 million of the Bank Loan was cancelled, as they were deemed to be
  unusable in the remaining project lifetime. Although changes to encourage decentralization to the Water
  Sanitation Companies in the local level helped implementation in the final years, there was very limited
  achievement of objectives and targets and less than 10% of the beneficiaries were using the service. As the
  ICR (paragraph 24) notes the Wastewater treatment plants were the keystone to making the whole sewage
  chain functional. Without the plants and connection of households to a fully operational sewage, the economic
  impact of the project was negligible.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
  Negligible                                                  Low achievement


5. Efficiency


Economic and Financial analysis. The PAD (paragraph 35) notes that there was no economic analysis at
appraisal, in view of the difficulties associated with quantifying project benefits. The expected qualitative benefits
of the project were assumed to come from: (i) avoiding the direct negative impacts associated with the use of
on-site systems (such as reducing the risk of flooding and inconvenience of removing septage); (ii) positive
health and environmental benefits.

Cost effectiveness considerations. The PAD (page 10) notes that a cluster approach was used as the
preferred option (Under this approach, several villages would be connected to a central treatment plant).
This approach was deemed be cost effective as compared to other options (such as improved on-site sanitation,
decentralized treatment systems and constructing conventional sewer networks) for these reasons: (i) A
treatment plant in an optimal location was expected to serve maximum number of villages; (ii)
connecting project-financed networks to existing pumping stations and wastewater treatment plants was
expected to minimize costs and maximize coverage with existing resources: and (iii) optimize treatment costs,
by permitting contractors to submit a technology selection from a menu of treatment technologies appropriate for
rural settings.

An ex post economic analysis was conducted at closure for project activities, which accounted for 93% of the
actual cost under two scenarios: (1) The economic returns of completed household connections: and, (2) the
potential economic returns, were the government to complete the connections for the remaining households.
The project cost was not cost-effective at closure, (with the cost per connection high at US$4,400.00), since only
9% of the population had been connected. If the remaining connections were to be completed with
government financing, the project was expected to be cost-effective, with the cost per connection to households
reducing to US$657.00. The economic rate of return (ERR) for Scenario One was negative and for Scenario
Two, 7.2% .The ICR (paragraph 34) notes that though the household sewerage tariffs had increased, the
targeted water sanitation companies were making losses when the project closed.

Administrative and Operational Issues. The project became effective 18 months after the signing of the
loan, due to delays in land acquisition land and external factors such as political uncertainty and security issues
in project areas. Considerable reduction in counterpart funding and exchange rate fluctuations resulted in
reduction in project scope, and scaling back of project outcomes. There were further delays during
implementation due to a combination of factors, such as ineffective implementation arrangements (with two

                                                                                                        Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EG-Integrated Sanitation & Sew. Infra. 2 (P120161)



national agencies and water and sanitation companies at the local level), and temporary suspension of the Bank
loan in the wake of a fatal accident at a construction site (discussed in section 10a).

 In sum, given that the positive economic returns of the project is contingent upon construction of remaining
household connections and the sewer network, efficiency is rated as negligible.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     93.00
 ICR Estimate                                              7.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



Though the PDO remained substantially relevant to the Government and to the World Bank's strategy, efficacy
of the single objective - to provide targeted populations with increased access to improved sanitation and
sewerage services - is rated as negligible, before and after restructuring, in view of the limited achievement of
objectives and the low likelihood of additional results by October 2019, given the unpredictability associated
with government financing. Efficiency is rated as negligible as the economic returns of the project is contingent
upon completion of ongoing activities by the government.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



Government commitment. Given that none of the planned wastewater treatment plants were operational
when the project closed, there is risk that these plants may not be completed for lack of government
financing. The ICR (paragraph 79) notes that although the government is committed to constructing the

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Integrated Sanitation & Sew. Infra. 2 (P120161)



plants, project implementation had stalled, as the contractors had not been paid since the closing date.
About 200 million Egyptian Pounds (EGP) had been due to the contractors while the funding needs were
estimated at 345 million EGP until June 2019, and 690 million EGP until the end of the project in October
2019. Given that the government had only paid 145 million EGP (42% by June 2019, there could be further
delays if the contractors are not paid for their services.

Institutional risk. There is risk associated with the weak technical, procurement and financial management
capacity of the Water Sanitation Companies. It is also not clear if there would be adequate funds for
Operation and Maintenance of the wastewater treatment plants and the connections.

Financial risk. The water and sanitation companies do not have robust financial flows and depend
on government subsidies. Without concerted action by the local water sanitation companies to improve cost
recovery, there are risks associated with the financial sustainability of the companies.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project was prepared based on the experience from an ongoing Bank-financed project (First
  Integrated Sanitation and Sewerage Infrastructure project). Lessons incorporated at design from the
  experience of the ongoing project included managing procurement more effectively through smaller
  procurement packages, detailed engineering designs in the bid documents of network cluster packages,
  and deferring activities associated with the more expensive decentralized wastewater systems until
  detailed cost evaluations had been conducted and implemented through a pilot operation. The
  arrangements made at appraisal for fiduciary and safeguards compliance were appropriate (discussed in
  section 10a and 10b).

  There were major shortcomings at Quality at entry. (i) Despite the experience with the ongoing Bank
  financed project, the project underestimated the time required for land acquisition. This contributed
  to delays in project effectiveness, with the project becoming effective 18 months after loan approval. (ii)
  As indicated in Section 3, the target for intended project beneficiaries was unrealistic and based
  on erroneous calculations. This together with a substantial reduction in project activities due to the
  reduction in government and bank funding, necessitated substantial revision of targets during
  implementation. ((iii) The implementation arrangements at design, with agencies at the national level and
  Water Sanitation Companies (WSCs) were clearly inappropriate, as demonstrated by the experience of
  the ongoing Bank-financed project; (iv) The design focused mainly on hard infrastructure investments and
  did not incorporate activities pertaining to sector reforms in general, and financial sustainability of WSCs
  in particular (Borrower ICR, page 50); (v). Inadequate attention to safeguards resulted in a temporary
  suspension of the loan and to delays during implementation (discussed in section 10a) and (vi) There
  were shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in section 9a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Integrated Sanitation & Sew. Infra. 2 (P120161)




b. Quality of supervision
 On average, supervision missions were held twice a year and 17 Implementation Status Results Reports
 were filed over the project lifetime of eight years. The support provided by the team aided in fiduciary
 compliance (discussed in section 10b). The proactive support of the team aided in resolving the issue
 associated with the partial suspension of the loan and the loan was revoked within three months. The
 support provided by the team aided in modifying the implementation arrangements and the project was
 restructured for resolving issues such as increasing the Bank financing percentage in the wake of drastic
 reductions in counterpart funding.

 There were shortcomings during implementation. Given limited progress during implementation, the project
 restructuring, which extended the project closing date, was effected just a month before the revised closing
 date. The ICR (paragraph 78) notes that the Bank decided to cancel part of the loan, while the project still
 needed US$38.00 million for completing ongoing activities. The continuity of leadership on the part of the
 Bank team was undermined by frequent changes in Bank leadership (with four task team leaders
 over eight years).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 The three key outcome indicators - direct project beneficiaries (defined as the number of people with
 improved sanitation and wastewater services in the project intervened areas), the number of wastewater
 treatment plants meeting Egyptian effluent treatment standards and the volume of wastewater treated in
 the project areas - were appropriate for monitoring project performance. The Holding Company for Water
 and Wastewater (HCWW) was to be responsible for monitoring project performance.

 There were shortcomings in M&E design: (1) the original target for direct project beneficiaries (1.2 million)
 was unrealistic and as explained in Section 3, based on erroneous calculations of beneficiaries. This
 necessitated recalculation of project beneficiaries during implementation; (2) The M&E framework relied on
 indicators (such as the number of wastewater treatment plants meeting Egyptian effluent standards and the
 volume of treated wastewater) which were achievable only after completion of the major infrastructure
 works. This limited the ability to measure economic indicators until all the infrastructure works had been
 completed. The ICR (paragraph 53) notes that M&E design could have included indicators to monitor
 progress on the interim, of some infrastructure projects, like the wastewater treatment plants.


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Integrated Sanitation & Sew. Infra. 2 (P120161)




b. M&E Implementation
  The implementing agencies identified the M&E staff responsible for data collection, verification and
  monitoring of the relevant indicators. According to the information provided by the team, the project
  management staff visited the project sites regularly to monitor progress during implementation.

  The ICR (paragraph 60) notes that shortfalls in occupational safety procedures could not be captured,
  due to shortcomings in the M&E system. This led to the partial suspension of the Bank loan, during
  implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  The quarterly reports, submitted regularly by the Project Management Unit, were used during
  supervision and the Mid Term Review for evaluating physical progress. The ICR notes that there were
  issues relating to candor and realism, and of adequacy of monitoring on safety issues. The ICR notes
  that though there were problems with the M&E system, it was adequate to perform the basic functions
  (such as assessing the achievement of objectives and testing links in the results chain).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


   The project was classified as a Category B project. Two safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal:
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) (PAD, page ii). The
   PAD (paragraphs 57, 59 and 60) states that an Environmental and Social Management and Monitoring
   Framework (ESMMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and publicly disclosed at
   appraisal.

   Environmental safeguards. The ICR (paragraph 61) notes that site-specific ESMMF was prepared during
   implementation. The ICR (paragraph 62) reports that a fatal incident occurred at one of the construction
   sites in Assiut Governate on October 14, 2016, due to a failure in the Occupational and Health Safety
   (OHS) measures. Following the incident, the Bank suspended the project and asked for a root cause
   analysis of the incident and an action plan to improve OHS measures. The action plan to improve OHS
   measures was completed and the suspension was lifted on March 26, 2017. The ICR notes that after the
   incident, dedicated safeguard missions conducted field visits to all construction sites to review the
   implementation of the action plan. The mission confirmed compliance with the plan and compliance with
   safeguards was deemed to be satisfactory during the remaining lifetime of the project.


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Integrated Sanitation & Sew. Infra. 2 (P120161)



   Involuntary resettlement. The ICR (paragraph 64) notes that land plots were acquired in consultation with
   community members and with the help of community leaders and local nongovernmental organizations. The
   ICR (paragraph 65) notes that the multichannel grievance redress mechanism was established in the
   project intervened areas. About 561 complaints were received, of which 82% were resolved. The ICR also
   notes that various community-raising awareness measures were applied during the implementation of the
   project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


   Financial management. A financial management assessment of the Water and Sanitation Companies
   (WSCs) of Sharkeya, Menoufia, Assiut and Sohag, was conducted at appraisal. The assessment
   concluded that the financial management arrangements of the companies were satisfactory (PAD,
   paragraph 51). The ICR (paragraph 69) reports that financial management was deemed to be satisfactory
   during implementation and audit and interim financial reports were submitted in a timely fashion.

   Procurement management. A procurement assessment of the four WSCs, mentioned above, was
   conducted at appraisal. Several procurement risks were identified at appraisal, including risks associated
   with lack of procurement specialists with experience in internationally-funded donor projects and output-
   based performance contracts, and lack of computerized systems. Mitigation measures incorporated at
   design, included appointing qualified procurement staff in the Rural Sanitation Unit of the four WSCs and
   training procurement staff (PAD, paragraph 54). The ICR (paragraph 67) notes that although there were
   some procurement delays during implementation, these were rectified with support from the bank team.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                      Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                      Disagreements/Comment
                                 Highly
Outcome                                                   Highly Unsatisfactory
                                 Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately               Moderately
Bank Performance
                                 Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                   Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                      Substantial


                                                                                                        Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       EG-Integrated Sanitation & Sew. Infra. 2 (P120161)




12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

(1) Lessons from prior experience need to be appropriately reflected in project design.
Lessons from prior projects had highlighted the need for strong implementation arrangements. The
implementation arrangements of this project (with two centralized implementing agencies) were
clearly inappropriate, as demonstrated by the experience of the prior Bank financed project. This
contributed to delays during implementation.

(2) The project scope should be based on a careful assessment of macroeconomic
conditions at appraisal. The estimates of counterpart funding for this project were clearly
unrealistic, given that economic growth had stalled in the wake of the 2007-2008 global financial
crisis and economic growth was further expected to decline, in the wake of the unrest, following the
January 2011 revolution. This risk could have been compartmentalized, by ensuring that the project
could be scaled down, if the Government’s contribution was not realized.

(3) Infrastructure investments aimed at improving service delivery need to be complemented
with activities aimed at strengthening the capacity of implementing agencies at
appraisal. This project focused mainly on financing and building infrastructure, without a clear focus
on strengthening the capacity of water sanitation companies or sector reforms at the outset.
Technical training, which aided in improving project performance during the final years, was
provided only during the latter years of implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



The ICR is for the most part clear. It candidly discusses the methodology followed that led to erroneous
estimates of direct project beneficiaries at design, reduction in project scope (due to the rather drastic drop in
counterpart funding and cancellation of part of the Bank loan) and the deficiencies in M&E. The ICR is for the
most part, evidence-based. The ICR draws reasonably good lessons from the experience of implementing this
project. The ICR's rating for overall outcome is consistent with the guidelines.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
EG-Integrated Sanitation & Sew. Infra. 2 (P120161)




                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
