     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity (P121116)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021758

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P121116                                     MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Mexico                                      Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-12908                                    31-Aug-2017                                          10,798,143.03

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Aug-2012                                 31-Dec-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             11,688,182.00                                    11,688,182.00

 Revised Commitment                              11,688,182.00                                    10,798,143.03

 Actual                                          10,798,143.03                                    10,798,143.03




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Ridley Nelson               Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The PDO, as stated in both the Grant Agreement and the PAD was to, “conserve and protect nationally and
   globally significant biodiversity in Mexico through mainstreaming biodiversity friendly management practices in
   productive landscapes in priority biological corridors.”

   There was no change in the objectives during the project period.



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity (P121116)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1. Sustainable Production Systems and Biodiversity Mainstreaming (Original US$16.86
   million; Actual US$10.28 million). This was to assist Producer Groups (PGs) to carry out sustainable
   production practices against approved business plans, shifting farming away from conventional practices to
   more biodiversity friendly practices; to provide training through Technical Service Providers (TSPs) and
   establish Technology Transfer Units (UTT) to conduct research development and innovation to build
   capacity in PGs and Producer Associations (PAs).

   Component 2. Producer Associations and Biodiversity-Friendly Market Initiatives (Original US$8.01
   million; Actual US$4.63 million). This was to strengthen PAs and networks of PGs and to establish business
   alliances for bio-labeled products. It included financing technical assistance to establish collaborative and
   contractual arrangements between buyers and PAs and to support market studies and plans for product
   promotion and other support like trade fairs with an aim to reach national and international markets.
   Implementation was to be through business-oriented subprojects with each supported PA.

   Component 3. Institutions, Eco-labelling, and South-South Cooperation. (Original US$4.60 million;
   Actual US$2.75 million). This included the development of a strategy for strengthening institutional capacity,
   support for the design and use of market differentiation tools, and the promotion of partnerships and South-
   South cooperation including study tours and workshops for PA members.

   Component 4. Project Management and Monitoring (Original US$3.70 million; Actual US$4.45 million)
   this included the financing of consulting services, operational costs for project management, supervision,
   procurement, financial management, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost

   The Total Project Cost at approval was expected to be US$33.17 million (this did not include any private
   sector amount which later, by project closing, had totaled US$2.63 million). The actual total at project
   closing was only US$22.11 million, about 66% of the original approved. The difference was due partly to a
   substantial change in the value of the local currency allowing more local investment for the dollars provided
   and partly due to a substantial decrease, by about 60%, in the borrower contribution. (See further
   discussion below under Financial Management). Despite the reduced $ cost, a larger number of PAs and
   beneficiaries than planned were provided support under the project.

   Financial




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity (P121116)



                       At approval, IBRD (GEF) financing was to be US$11.69 million but by closing was somewhat lower at
                       US$10.80 million. The project had no cofinanciers.

                       Borrower Contribution

                       At approval, the borrower contribution was expected to be US$19.20 million, but this fell substantially to
                       US$7.11 million due to national budget problems. Beneficiary contribution was expected to be US$2.28
                       million at approval but by project closing was US$1.57 million, a drop of about one third. This was despite
                       a significant increase in the number of PAs and beneficiaries. The reason for this shortfall is not clear.

                       Dates

                       The project was approved August 30, 2012, became effective February 28, 2013, and closed December 31,
                       2018, one year and four months after the original planned closing date. A Midterm Review took place in
                       September 2015.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were well aligned both at closing and over the lifetime of the project with the Bank’s
Mexico Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, 2014 – 2019), particularly the CPS pillar “Promoting Green and
Inclusive Growth” and the CPS pillar “Unleashing Productivity”. The intent was to introduce environmentally
conscious practices but ones that were able, through a win-win strategy, to increase producer incomes and
profitability. However, this highlights a weakness in the formulation of the objective statement. As it was
formulated, the intent to increase producer incomes and profitability was not treated as an equal outcome to
the biodiversity element, it was treated as a means to achieving biodiversity conservation although, in the
ICR, biodiversity friendly management practices and productivity incentives were treated and rated in the
assessment as two objectives on a par with the first biodiversity objective. In this IEG ICRR, given the
objective formulation that places the intermediate outcome or output objectives after the word "through", we
treat these as intermediate outcomes under the overarching outcome objective of conserving and protecting
biodiversity.

The project objectives and design were consistent with other parallel Bank-funded projects including the
Sustainable Productive Landscapes Project (P159835) and the Strengthening Entrepreneurship in
Productive Forest Landscapes Project (P164661).

The project objectives and investments were also aligned with the Mexico National Biodiversity Strategy
which was consistent with the global Convention on Biological Biodiversity and its associated Sustainable
Development goals. There was also consistency with Mexico’s National Climate Change Strategy Vision
10-20-40.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating


                                                                                                                       Page 3 of 17
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity (P121116)



               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Conserving and protecting nationally and globally significant biodiversity in Mexico through mainstreaming
                biodiversity friendly management practices in productive landscapes in priority biological corridors.

                Rationale
                The central element in the theory of change was that improving the quality of, and extending the area of,
                biodiversity-friendly land use practices in productive agriculture would lead to conserving and protecting
                biodiversity. This was to be achieved through ensuring win-win changes that gave farmers incentives to
                develop more biodiversity friendly landscapes.

                A. Conserving and Protecting Biodiversity

                Outcomes

                The language "conserving and protecting" in the objective is not entirely clear. It could be interpreted as
                merely maintaining existing populations of flora and fauna. However, the fact that many of the investments
                were aimed at enhancing and extending the area of improved habitat rather than holding it at its' current state
                suggests that there was an expectation that species within these corridor-connected ecosystems would
                expand in terms of numbers of individuals and numbers of species. In other words, there was an expectation
                that there would be, in due course, an enhancement of biodiversity not merely the conservation of a pre-
                existing state.

                In assessing the achievement of this core element of the objectives, the question therefore becomes what
                measurable evidence of enhanced biodiversity at outcome or intermediate outcome level is it reasonable to
                expect within the five plus years of project effectiveness and what would be expected over a longer
                timeframe. Since most investments initiated in the early years after the planning process did not get more
                than two years into implementation by the date of project closing, it is unreasonable to expect measurable
                and attributable outcome level evidence in measured biodiversity, particularly given the inevitable fluctuation
                in populations due to seasonal fluctuations and population dynamics.

                However, there is quite strong evidence on the substantial achievement of the means applied towards
                conserving longer-term biodiversity. The land area “brought under enhanced biodiversity protection” which
                was 81,462 ha against an original target of 34,500 ha. So the achievement was 233% of the original and 20%
                above the May 2017 revised target. While this area “under” enhanced biodiversity is classified in the ICR
                Theory of Change tabulation as an outcome, it was really an intermediate outcome, a means to the ultimate
                end of conserving biodiversity.

                As reported in the ICR (Annex 6, page 51) the productive systems in the project areas held twenty species,
                three of them threatened and five of them endangered. The main mammal reported is the jaguar. The ICR

                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity (P121116)



argues that the demonstration of the presence of the jaguar in the project communities, “in and of itself is a
huge achievement because for a top-level predator to exist in an environment requires preservation of habitat
with flourishing prey animals.” In other words, it proves there is a pyramid of prey support. The ICR presents
evidence of a video compiled from the monitoring of jaguar and other species within one community,
asserting that it “provides compelling evidence for the protection and conservation of biodiversity within the
project area”. While perhaps promising, this finding alone does not offer any evidence of changes in numbers
from the period prior to the project. However, as noted above, IEG accepts that it is too soon to measure
attributable fauna impacts, especially for large mammals with relatively slow population growth capacity.

The ICR reports that there was a consultancy funded on “the jaguar as a key element in the biological
monitoring of the project” but beyond the verification that the jaguar is a key species as an indicator of habitat
quality, it is not clear that this consultancy revealed any evidence of changes attributable to the project.

In addition to the jaguar, there was a focus on avian monitoring. The ICR reports a baseline survey census of
birds followed up by crosscutting samples in communities to measure the abundance of birds observed by
trained producers. The ICR reports that, as a baseline, a total of 388 species were recorded in the area of the
Mesoamerican Biological Corridor of which 75 were either endangered (6), threatened (28), or under special
protection (41). However, it is difficult to link this wider species data with the data later collected locally by
project producer beneficiaries. The ICR reports that at the project baseline, using 95 points of contact, 105
bird species (27% of the 388 baseline in the total corridor area) were identified in the project area and at the
time of the follow-up identification surveys by producers, 63 of these (60%) were observed of which two were
threatened species. The ICR asserts that “the observation of such a large share of species by producers
signals a high degree of conservation of biodiversity in project communities.” It is certainly plausible that
observing 60% of the known species population supports a hypothesis of improved habitat but nevertheless it
is difficult to interpret this figure in relation to the baseline.

A weakness in the indicators was that, although it was clear from the outset that the measurement of
biodiversity changes by the time of project closing was going to be difficult because of the lag in impact,
intermediate outcome indices of vegetation changes were not designed. For example, in a project with
significant tree planting, the survival rate of seedlings and the biodiversity spread of the surviving planted
trees and shrubs could have been measured. However, any such poor survival rates would presumably have
been reflected in a failure at the PG level to meet the defined biodiversity criteria on the inspection of
subproject activities.

On the achievement of the biodiversity outcome locations in relation to the need for connectivity of habitat for
the overall corridors, the maps presented in the ICR do indicate that selection of sites was substantially
consistent with the location of important corridors.

Overall, there is substantial evidence of the improvement of vegetation and habitat by the project actions
through the certification of project-supported PG/PA investments, for example towards shade tree coffee
production systems, but there is limited quantitative evidence of resultant changes to date in fauna, although
some indication that bird numbers were starting to build. IEG concludes that, given the clear improvement in
habitat, there is a reasonable expectation that the project interventions will achieve enhanced spread and
depth of biodiversity over the next few years. There is also a reasonable expectation that, with producer
monitoring now established, biodiversity changes will become measurable. Based on this reasonable
expectation argument, the achievement of this element of the objectives is rated Substantial but with the
important qualification that an expectation should not continue to be a valid argument in any second or third


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity (P121116)



phase activities because by then biodiversity change measurement in terms of area and quality should be
possible.



B. Biodiversity Friendly and Sustainable Management Practices.

Outputs

The number of producer groups participating in the biodiversity friendly activities was 182 which was 94% of
the original target. Approximately 10,000 producers completed training, 120% of the target. All the
overarching 27 Producer Associations covered in the revised target provided quality control services to group
members. 42 business alliances with buyers were established, exceeding the revised target by 31%. Some
22 activities were undertaken for capacity strengthening, achieving 88% of the original target. There were
also a number of South-South exchange training activities implemented as planned. For each subproject set
of activities implemented by producers supported under the project, there were formally specified biodiversity-
friendly criteria related to that activity that were required to be verified as being under implementation by the
producer for him/her to be classified as meeting the project’s biodiversity friendly criteria. Parallel to this was a
moderate level of product certification, although in the end this did not reach the highest levels of certification
planned.

Intermediate Outcomes

The theory of change for this intermediate outcome was that improved land management practices,
addressing vegetation and soils, would lead to more landscapes supporting improved biodiversity, an
intermediate outcome that would lead towards the ultimate outcome of improved conservation and protection
of nationally and globally significant biodiversity.


As noted above, there is considerable evidence that targets were largely met or exceeded in creating a
biodiversity friendly environment. This was partly aided by the fact that significant exchange rate changes
provided more local funds to allow upward revision of a number of targets including numbers of producers
and treated land area. However, this windfall in local funds was partly negated by the lower government
contribution but then partly boosted by the additional private funding added later.

Considering changes in the value of benefit streams due to price changes, especially the decline in coffee
prices, and other negative impacts such as coffee yellow rust and bee diseases, not all the practices that
were supported show strong evidence of being sustainable.

The main biodiversity friendly activities supported (showing % subproject costs in total costs and the
beneficiary hectares), and certified as meeting the biodiversity-friendly criteria, were:
1.Coffee (31% of costs; 22,864 ha; modest IRR). This included machinery and infrastructure to improve
quality, coffee plantation renewal, pest and disease control, fostering a wider range of varieties, rainwater
collection systems, and studies including baseline studies to guide plantation renewal plans and soil studies.
2.Cocoa (6%; 1,366 ha; no IRR estimated). This included seeds for native cocoa plants, fruit and timber
species for the diversification of plantations, community nurseries, infrastructure, tools, and organic fertilizer.
3.Honey (17%; 11,815 ha; negative IRR). This included investments in equipment for production and
extraction, collection centers, training in biodiversity friendly pest control, technical assistance, and training

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity (P121116)



workshops for Producer Associations.
4.Ecotourism (14%; 8,150 ha; low IRR). This included solar and wind powered power systems for ecotourism
centers and resorts, equipment including low-impact boats, dry toilets, and storm water collection.
5.Silvopastoral (4%; 2,200 ha; high IRR). This included the division of paddocks with hedgerows and
investment in rainwater collection for paddocks.
6.Forestry (28%; 22,864 ha; very high IRR). This included participatory monitoring systems, investments in
environmentally friendly pest control methods, wood drying equipment, nurseries, chilling rooms, workshops,
firefighting equipment, impact assessments on forest sanitation and regeneration.


By project closing, the total area brought under enhanced biodiversity protection was 81,462 hectares which
was somewhat above the revised target but more than double the original target. The number of producers
meeting the criteria for applying biodiversity friendly practices was 12,956, marginally less than the revised
target late in the project but about twice the original target. The share of sales of goods and services
produced under biodiversity friendly practices was estimated at 24%, approximately equal to the formally
revised target but about double the original target.



While there is somewhat limited quantitative evidence on vegetation changes attributable to the project (as
noted earlier, data on, for example, changes in tree seedling survival rates would have been informative)
there are selected samples of photographic evidence and more reportedly available outside that presented in
the ICR.

Overall, the achievement of biodiversity friendly and sustainable management practices was substantial.
However, the current low financial and economic returns to the coffee, cocoa and honey enterprises raises
questions about financial sustainability and future prioritization of component activities. However, it is
plausible that prices, the main issue for coffee, will rebound in due course since current international prices
are well below the long-term average.



C. Productivity and Marketing Benefit Incentives for Producers

Intermediate Outcomes

The theory of change here was that producers would only have the incentive to support and sustain
biodiversity friendly land use practices if productivity could be sustained or improved and if there were
sufficient incentives created by improved marketing offering higher sales values. This was a point strongly
emphasized during IEG's discussion with the Project Team on sustainability.

Some 182 Producer Groups (94% of the total) participated in biodiversity friendly business plans which were
then supported through investments, training, and technical assistance.

As noted above, the ICR reports (page 10) that 24.4% of sales by the project producers were products that
had been produced under the recommended biodiversity friendly practices. This was marginally above the




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity (P121116)



                            target set. The evidence for this achievement was based on reports from PAs. The ICR notes that there
                            were no silvo-pastoral sales reported from this activity, possibly due to a classification issue in reporting.

                            All the 27 PAs provided product quality control services to their networks. Some 42 business alliances with
                            buyers for market differentiated products were established which was about 30% above the target set. The
                            ICR notes (page 29) that this was the number of alliances “in which the value added of services and products
                            produced under biodiversity friendly practices is recognized”.

                            Third-party certification of biodiversity friendly products from productive systems was carried out by
                            CERTIMAX, the national agency responsible for certifying such biodiversity friendly products. CERTIMAX
                            reported results for 24 of the 27 PAs. Subsequent verification of the sustaining of these practices on the
                            ground was done by contracted consultants reportedly applying random sampling procedures.

                            There were six “differentiation instruments” developed and in use in the third party product verification
                            mechanisms. This was originally intended to result in “bio labels” developed and in use under third-party
                            verification. However, the bio-labels proved difficult and this indicator was revised to a less stringent criteria
                            labelled “instruments for differentiation”, a first step towards a more stringent “bio label”.

                            While there is an assertion by the ICR that market differentiation helped to increase sales, and while there is
                            some photographic evidence of transaction receipts covering biodiversity friendly sales, it is not clear from the
                            evidence presented what the aggregate impact of this value added activity was on sales volume and value of
                            products.

                            There were a number of information and knowledge activities through forums, trade shows, and exhibitions
                            promoting biodiversity friendly products.

                            The ICR reports the achievement of 22 capacity strengthening activities in biodiversity friendly business
                            practices.

                            While there is limited aggregate data on increase in sales from biodiversity friendly products, there is
                            evidence of substantial activity aimed at increasing the earnings of products coming from biodiversity friendly
                            land management producers including the Maya Forest Alliance.

                            Overall, given the limited evidence of aggregate changes in sales or profitability, IEG finds a moderate level of
                            achievement of the productivity, marketing and incentives element of the intermediate outcomes. which,
                            through enhancing profitability, was expected to support the biodiversity friendly practices.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                                                                                                                                  Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity (P121116)



  The achievement of the objective of conserving and protecting nationally and globally significant biodiversity
  is rated, on balance, Substantial. However, this is largely on the basis of an expectation that the conditions for
  future measurable conservation of biodiversity will be attained since it is too soon for attributable outcome
  changes to be measured. This outcome expectation is built on a substantial level of achievement of the first
  intermediate outcome which was biodiversity friendly management practices and a somewhat less than
  substantial level of achievement of the second intermediate outcome which was to create productivity and
  marketing incentives for producers. In weighing the overall Efficacy rating for the elements of the stated
  objective, we treat the second intermediate objective of creating the incentives, where sales improvement
  evidence is limited mostly to individual cases, as being at a lower level in the hierarchy of the theory of
  change since it is one of several means supporting the achievement of the higher level intermediate outcome
  of biodiversity friendly practices. It is these biodiversity friendly practices that ultimately are expected to
  support the biodiversity protection outcome that is rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
There was no aggregate economic analysis provided ex ante in the PAD, only the standard GEF required
incremental cost analysis. However, subsequently, during project implementation, each subproject was required
to produce a business plan which included a financial feasibility analysis for each case.

Overall, the project achieved considerably more than planned in terms of area covered with somewhat less
funds than anticipated.

The ICR finds an ex post internal rate of return of 15.2%. The methodology was discussed with the Project
Team (August 1, 2019) and appears to be generally sound. The baseline pre-project year was 2014 and the
project cost streams and sub-project models investments that were aggregated ran from 2015 to 2018. The
15% IRR is above the assumed social discount rate of 10% which, according to the ICR, is the rate currently
recommended for project economic feasibility analysis of public projects in Mexico.

The analysis found a Net Present Value of US$5.4 million and a Benefit/Cost ratio of 1.2. The assumptions used
were the total costs of the project including counterpart funding and in-kind contributions taking into
consideration the costing structure for the individually prepared Business Plans. The analysis estimated an
incremental Net Present Value per beneficiary per year of US$329 and per hectare per year of US$69. The ICR
reports that the rate of return and net present value found in this case “approximates those reported by similar
projects … in the Latin America and Caribbean region that finance business plans promoting the adoption of
good agricultural practices”.

A sensitivity analysis is presented in the ICR which tested a number of alternative scenarios including: without
indirect cost; with increased gross income of 20%; with production cost increases of 20%; and with a gross
income increase of 10% on top of a production cost increase of 20%. Overall, the sensitivity scenarios show that




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity (P121116)



the internal rate of return is relatively insensitive to changes. This is to be expected with several very high
component IRRs within an aggregated stream.

The most significant finding of the efficiency analysis is that there is a wide range of rates of return and
benefit/cost ratios across the different subproject categories showing forestry and silvopastoral subprojects to
have very high rates of return and coffee, eco-tourism, and honey production with rates of return below the
social discount rate. The low rate for coffee is attributed in the ICR partly to the impact of yellow rust disease,
with farmers having to replace diseased trees, and partly to a substantial decline in international coffee prices.
Given that coffee prices by project closing were well below the long term average, it would be a reasonable
expectation that prices would rebound and therefore that this low coffee IRR may be a temporary phenomenon.
The efficiency analysis did not use international real price projections,however these are highly speculative. The
disease future for coffee is unpredictable and partly dependent on climate.

The low rate of return from honey, according to the ICR, may be due to informal marketing of honey so that
incremental productivity did not pass through the associations’ books. Other reasons include Colony Collapse
Disorder and the fact that maximum productive potential of colonies is only achieved in the medium to long-term,
suggesting higher production in future years that was not fully factored into the benefit stream.

The fact that it was the components involving trees, both forestry and silvo-pastoral, that had the high rates of
return raises two sets of questions. First, for the longer term, about the design and direction of future projects,
whether they should focus less on the lower return (and possibly lower biodiversity?) coffee, cocoa, and honey
activities. Second, whether the methodology and the attribution and cost assumptions are, in fact, correct for the
components involving trees since some of the investments were quite modest incremental investments not easy
to link to the entire gains in the sales values.

It is important to note that the aggregate rate of return is likely an under-estimate since it includes no valuation of
biodiversity changes nor any tourism benefits that may arise from improved biodiversity and the corridor
connections, nor any carbon sequestration valuations.

Administrative efficiency was generally sound. Although the project had to be extended for 16 months, this was
largely due to the increased project coverage enabled by the substantial exchange rate change although it was
also partly due to implementation delays. There were quite serious budgeting problems during the project but
the PIU was able to largely compensate for these with other resources and the favorable exchange rate shift
helped. The ICR reports (page 13) that the institutional support from CONABIO for technical services and
technology transfer units worked efficiently, helping to facilitate implementation efficiency. The ICR also points to
the design of good quality investments aiding implementation efficiency at the group level.

Overall, Efficiency is rated Substantial but noting for the future that the higher return activities are, in economic
terms, subsidizing the lower return ones. This suggests room for future changed priorities and redesign but still
with an eye to how such redirection of priorities would affect the less easily valued biodiversity objective.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                        Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity (P121116)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        90.00
ICR Estimate                                                 15.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated Substantial. The project fitted well with the national and Bank strategies at project closing as
well as at the start of the project, although in a project that was intended to offer a win-win strategy pursuing
biodiversity benefits and farmer profitability benefits, the objective outcome statement could have been
formulated in a way that gave both these outcomes equal importance. Achievement of the stated project
objective was Substantial on balance, although, at this early stage, this rating relies on a "reasonable
expectation" argument for future biodiversity impact.

 Efficiency is rated Substantial but the analysis shows a skewed distribution of rates of return across the range
of subprojects supported, suggesting potential for future improvements in allocative efficiency. Overall, Outcome
is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There is moderate risk.

Promising factors for the future of the project investments include: (i) that the PAs and farmers have an
interest in success and the PAs demonstrated this interest during the project by putting in funds of their own;
(ii) that there are price premiums for sustainable and organic quality products which gives some assurance of
an incentive to producers to continue their AB investment activities (in discussion, the Project Team
considered this extremely important for the future); (iii) that some of the project PAs are receiving continued
support under the Forest Management and Entrepreneurship Project and the Sustainable Productive
Landscapes Project; (iv) that the institutional capacity building, and the internal and external (south – south)
knowledge transfer that was fostered offers hope of longer-term sustainability; (v) that the reorganization
within CONABIO gives it improved capacity for the future; (vi) that government policy is favorable towards
the promotion of biodiversity, allowing a reasonable expectation that incentives and support will continue to
be offered for biodiversity friendly production; (vii) that the requirement in the future for the legal constitution
of PAs, is likely to improve their capacity and their longer-term sustainability.


                                                                                                        Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity (P121116)



However, one weakness noted in the ICR that may have an impact on sustainability is the lack of direct
financing channeled to producers themselves. This leaves the sustaining of much of the incentive more with
the associations than with the individual farmers. However, while this suggests some risks, it would seem
also to offer some advantages in institutional strength and stability at the intermediary level.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  A World Bank preparation grant of US$130,000 was provided to assist in the design of the project and
  there is evidence in the PAD that lessons from similar projects were incorporated. The project was
  generally well-designed and creative. Design was thorough and took into account the lessons from other
  projects, particularly the substantial experience in the region built around similar producer organizations.

  Most of the risks were well identified and mitigated in the design.

  The institutional arrangements were carefully considered at both central and local levels. The support
  designed into the project to enhance the capacity of groups and associations was particularly strong as
  was the linkage to existing institutions and certification mechanisms.

  There was a strong focus on technical support, especially at the group and association level. And this
  was well linked in activities such as species counting to the wider national and corridor on-going
  measurement activities, for example the bird counting program.

  However, there were a few weaknesses. First, as noted earlier, and as noted by the ICR (page 20) there
  could have been a stronger linkage between the conservation objective and the productivity and
  livelihoods objective. Second, the Results Framework had no indicator measuring directly the
  conservation and protection of biodiversity. The implicit assumption in the Results Framework was that
  bringing a landscape area “under enhanced diversity protection” was sufficient to measure an outcome.
  The Project Team advised that this was considered sufficient by GEF. While measuring the total area that
  is following an agreed set of land management practices, as specified in PDO indicator 1, allows some
  degree of expectation that the desired outcome will eventuate, it is not itself a direct measure of the
  conservation of biodiversity.

  It has been noted earlier that the project timeframe was insufficient to be able to measure changes in
  species numbers and distribution but more focus on intermediate outcome indicators, for example tree
  seedling survival rates, would have given better evidence that the project was on track for the biodiversity
  aim.

  The ICR (page 20) notes that the design could have done better at enabling the transfer of funds not only
  to collective activities but to individual non-farm investments and that this would have strengthened
  participation, a valid observation but with challenging financial management and procurement
  implications in relation to intermediary capacity.

  The ICR also notes some weakness in anticipating counterpart funding risk.


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity (P121116)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were regular and involved a substantial range of specialists. The ICR particularly
 notes the role of procurement and financial support staff. There is evidence that Bank staff were proactive
 in dealing with implementation issues including slow disbursement.

 The ICR notes that, following the Midterm Review, there was a downgrading to Moderately Unsatisfactory
 of several key performance ratings, mostly due to financial management issues and flow of funds problems
 to Producer Groups. There is evidence of creativity in finding solutions with the conducting of an online
 satisfaction survey of the 27 Producer Associations. There was also the development of an Action Plan and
 a disbursement plan to resolve problems.

 Bank staff were instrumental in changing aspects of the original M&E system and maintaining pressure on
 the PIU to implement evaluation. However, there were limitations in the client’s experience that were not
 within the Bank team’s control.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E system was established within CONABIO (the National Commission for Knowledge and Use of
 Biodiversity). An integrated Information System for Management and Evaluation was designed at the start
 of the project. This M&E tool is available on a website (pspsb.info). The intention was that the biodiversity
 information collected through the system would be integrated into the CONABIO database and passed on
 to the World Information Network of Biodiversity.

 The ICR characterizes the M&E system as “well-designed” but assesses that it would have benefited from
 a comprehensive plan, a clear information flow chart, and clarification of roles and responsibilities. The ICR
 notes that the exception was species monitoring.

 Some weaknesses in the user-friendliness of software design by producers were noted.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity (P121116)



b. M&E Implementation
  There was regular reporting. The Project Implementation Unit prepared good quality reports and carried
  out targeted studies and evaluations. The PIU provided a strong midterm evaluation report, an end of
  project evaluation report, and a Borrower Completion Report.

  However, the ICR finds that there was a lack of clarity in the roles and responsibilities for information
  management and operational issues affecting management of the system. Some modules of the system
  were not fully installed until 2017. This caused problems at the beneficiary level of evidence.

  There were weaknesses in the survey firm contracted for the impact evaluation due to lack of experience.

  The ICR reports that a strength was the associated third-party verification by the agency responsible for
  certifying organic products and processes which enabled triangulation of the achievements in
  biodiversity-friendly and sustainable production land management systems.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports that stakeholders relied heavily on the M&E system including for verifying the
  achievements set in the Results Framework and for financial management and procurement. The
  information was presented in regular reports and the ICR reports that it was useful for keeping the Bank
  informed during supervision missions for input into the Implementation Supervision Reports.

  The results of M&E findings were useful as inputs for the South-South knowledge exchange activities
  including training and workshops. CONABIO carried out a number of studies on sustainable production
  systems and biodiversity impact in the Mesoamerican Biological Corridor.

  The ICR reports (page 18) that the biological monitoring made an important contribution and that this
  knowledge was promulgated at regional workshops and contributed to the first Manual of Biodiversity
  Monitoring in Sustainable Rural Production. However, as noted earlier in discussing the achievement of
  objectives, there is still limited data presented in the ICR on species numbers and location and changes
  in the numbers of fauna and flora although it is still early to expect to be able to measure such changes.

  On balance, the performance of the M&E system is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Environmental Assessment Category B both at appraisal and at closing. The OP/BPs
   that were to be applied at appraisal, which were still applicable at closing, were the following: Environmental




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity (P121116)



  Assessment OP/BP 4.10; Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04; Forests OP/BP 4.36; Pest Management OP 4.09;
  Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11; and Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10.

  There was an Environmental Assessment which produced recommendations for each of the production
  systems. PAs were expected to report on specific questions related to meeting the environmental
  standards. The ICR reports that compliance with all the triggered OP’s was satisfactory. However, there
  were some problems with some PAs not responding to the survey questions on environmental standards
  with the required frequency.

  With respect to Social Safeguards, 22 of the 27 PAs included members from indigenous populations and
  the requirements of OP/BP 4.10 were met. The ICR reports that women’s participation increased over the
  period of the project in 14 of the associations although it is not clear from the ICR what criteria were used to
  measure this. Five additional women were in managerial positions by the end of the project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  There were funding problems during implementation and Financial Management ratings by the Bank were
  lowered to Moderately Unsatisfactory in 2016 due to issues with government counterpart funding and
  delays in the system of funding release. However, in the final 18 months, the FM rating was upgraded to
  Moderately Satisfactory as disbursements accelerated and as the project implemented Bank
  recommendations to improve the systems weaknesses.

  Interim Financial Reports, unaudited, were often submitted late with delays between two and three months.
  However the Interim Financial Reports were deemed satisfactory and acceptable by the Bank. Audit
  reports found minor issues related to internal controls, mainly at the PA level, however the control
  recommendations made by independent auditors are reported to have been addressed.

  The Borrower Comments (ICR page 49) note quite serious problems with disbursement delays from
  government agencies. Starting with fiscal year 2015, the PIU did not receive the resources agreed with the
  Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development. The first contribution did not arrive until the end of October
  2016. The second contribution arrived late in 2018 and was only 40% of the agreed commitment. Also,
  from the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources, contributions were received in 2013, 2014 and
  2015 but, again, the total was less than agreed and after 2015 no further contributions were received.

  There were also financial management issues due to weak PA capacity since some of the newer PAs
  lacked experience and business maturity and some did not even have access to the Internet, requiring
  paper records. These weaknesses significantly lengthened the procurement processes.

  The PIU was proactive in seeking alternative funds to make up shortfalls and received a significant
  additional amount in 2017 and 2018. They were also able to reach agreement with the World Bank to allow
  the use of GEF resources to support implementation of PA business plans as a stopgap pending receipt of
  government counterpart resources.



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity (P121116)



   Procurement

   The PIU was given assistance by Bank procurement staff to resolve some early problems and to improve
   their understanding of the Bank procurement guidelines. Training was carried out. No mis-procurement
   was reported.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are drawn partly from the ICR but with a number of adjustments of language.

    1. Understanding local markets and market access mechanisms at the outset of a
       biodiversity-focused agriculture project can contribute to increased differentiation and
       value of products. There is a substantial market information element in biodiversity friendly
       land use projects, therefore understanding markets and market access is important. In this
       case, the project put considerable effort into differentiating products and developing levels of
       certification.
    2. The scale of local and national demand for higher value products in a land use project
       relying on biodiversity friendly practices may limit the scale of biodiversity friendly
       activity that can be achieved unless there are significant international markets for
       some products. In this case, the size of markets for some niche products may be
       insufficient to achieve greatly expanded adoption suggesting the need for sustained market
       research and nimble marketing.
    3. In projects calling for substantial government counterpart budget, project design
       needs to take into account federal budgetary regulations and practices and past
       counterpart funding performance to try to reduce the risk of unanticipated financing
       shortages. In this case, funding from several agencies fell short or was delayed, a risk not
       fully addressed in the PAD and, to some extent, predictable.

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MX Sust Production Systs & Biodiversity (P121116)



     4. Testing and applying cost efficient methods for measuring and tracking local
         biodiversity changes may improve the effectiveness and efficiency of M&E in
         biodiversity projects. The measurement of changes in biodiversity to evaluate the
         performance of project interventions in agricultural land use is costly and may become
         difficult to justify against the benefit stream. Therefore, it is important to find cost efficient
         technologies and methodologies. In this case, the high cost of statistically significant species
         monitoring over a sufficiently sustained period would be difficult to justify solely against the
         modest cost and short project time period.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is rated Substantial. It is generally well presented, well written, and analytical. The lessons are well
formulated.

There is somewhat limited evidence on biodiversity, but whatever data was available by project closing has
been presented.

Given the significant changes in the exchange rate, on top of shortfalls in government agency contributions and
producer contribution, but with the addition of private funding, and PA and PG funding, some analysis of how
each of these sources/changes affected the aggregate resources invested would have been helpful. Also, some
discussion of the allocative efficiency implications of the wide differences in activity IRRs would have been
useful to map future directions.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                        Page 17 of 17
