     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A (P129565)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021804

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P129565                                      West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Western Africa                               Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51350,IDA-51360,IDA-52860,IDA-           31-Dec-2017                                        186,527,792.38
 58110

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 22-May-2012                                  31-Dec-2018

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             120,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              199,816,092.82                                              0.00

 Actual                                          186,626,543.73                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Keith Robert A. Oblitas      Ridley Nelson                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   To scale-up the generation, dissemination and adoption of improved technologies in the Participating
   Countries’ priority agricultural commodity areas.

   (Source: Financing Agreement, Republic of Senegal, August 24, 2012)



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A (P129565)



   The Project Objectives in the Financing Agreements for the Ghana and Mali operations are identical.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project – “the Second Phase of the Support Program for the West Africa Agricultural Productivity
   Program (WAAPP-2A)” was the second phase of an Adaptable Program Loan for Ghana, Senegal and Mali
   and a cross-country coordinating entity for the programs of these countries. It was part of the multi-country
   overall WAAPP program involving WAAPP-1B (2007-2016: Burkina Faso, Cote d’Ivoire and Nigeria); and
   WAAPP-1C 2018-2019: Benin, Gambia, Guinea, Liberia, Niger, Sierra Leone and Togo.

   Component 1: Enabling Conditions for Regional Cooperation in the Generation, Dissemination and
   Adoption of Agricultural Technologies.

   (Estimated costs at appraisal: US$ 10.9 million; actual costs US$ 8.8 million)

   Strengthening mechanisms and procedures for the exchange of technologies between participating
   countries including: common regulations on genetic materials, pesticides, fertilizer and veterinary products;
   development or improvement of regional strategies into national action plans, including knowledge
   management, information and communication systems; mainstreaming of gender and climate change
   activities; sustained mechanisms for financing agricultural research and development of intellectual property
   rights; and including environmental and social management safeguards.



   Component 2: National Centers of Specialization

   (Estimated costs at appraisal: US$ 42.3 million; actual costs US$ 40.8 million)

   Strengthening regional cooperation in technology generation by aligning national priorities with regional
   ones; upgrading national research to Regional Centers of Excellence; strengthening national research
   agencies; developing synergies with the CGIAR (Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research,
   and other research institution; capacity building grants for the West and Central African Council for
   Agricultural Research and Development (CORAF) for research planning and workshops; and regional policy
   development and market integration to improve the sustainability of Research and Development.

   Component 3: Support to Demand-driven Technology Generation, Dissemination and Adoption

   (Estimated costs at appraisal: US$ 131.1; actual costs US$ 120.0 million)

   Strengthening priority focused, demand-driven agricultural research, scaling up technology dissemination
   and adoption, facilitating access to genetic material, including strengthening the Competitive Agricultural


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A (P129565)



  Research Grant Scheme in each of the participating countries, strengthening technology delivery systems
  and cooperating with other development activities and agencies.

  Component 4: Project Coordination, Management and Monitoring and Evaluation.

  ((Estimated costs at appraisal: US$ 14.7 million; actual costs US$ 17.0 million.)

  Coordination and Management of the overall WAAP-2A was handled by CORAF at the regional level, and
  by each state’s national coordinating body at country levels.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Costs


  Project costs estimated at Appraisal were US$ 200 million and actual costs at project closing were US$
  186.6 million, 93 percent of the appraisal estimate. The shortfall (while implementation targets were
  generally exceeded) was due to use for some project expenditures of national funding rather than regional
  IDA sources. The ICR does not provide a break-down of funding by source. The cost reduction for
  Component 3 (demand-driven technology generation, dissemination and adoption) which fell from the US$
  131.1 million at appraisal to US$ 120 million at project completion, was the primary factor in the project’s
  overall cost reduction. There are some discrepancies between the cost figures in the ICR’s paras 14 to 18
  and the project costs in the ICR’s Annex 3. As Annex 3 provides more complete data, including costs
  estimated at appraisal as well as actual costs, Annex 3 data is used throughout this ICRR.

  Financing

  Each of the three participating countries (Senegal, Ghana and Mali) received an initial IDA Credit of US$
  60.00 million. Senegal received a further US$ 20 million to expand component 3’s program to include a
  value-added chain for groundnuts. The borrower contribution was US$ 15 million.

  Key dates

  The project was approved on May 22, 2012 and became effective on 12 December, 2012.The mid-term
  review was in October 2015. Project closure was planned to be 31 December, 2017, but was extended by
  one year to 31 December, 2018 to provide time for implementing the Mali program, which had started late
  due to security concerns. The Ghana program was closed on December 31, 2017, as planned at Appraisal.
  The Senegal program continued during the extra year, but primarily to finance development of the value
  chain for groundnuts.

  Reallocations

  Three adjustments were made during project implementation comprising two reallocations of funds (on
  January 27, 2017 and August 22, 2017) and the extension of the project by one year on January 11, 2018.
  There was no change to the project objectives and project components. The inclusion of the groundnut
  value chain for Senegal was the same design as for the original project components under objective 3.



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A (P129565)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
WAAPP-2A was responsive to the agricultural development needs of three participating countries –
Senegal, Ghana and Mali – and also supported the rural development strategies in regional and Bank
policies. The central problem was the agricultural sector’s low productivity: agricultural growth in the three
participating countries was below potential and dominated by low income subsistence farming; farmers,
typically smallholders, had limited access to new technologies and extension advice; there was a dearth in
sharing of new technologies across countries; Government interventions such as subsidies were inefficient;
the private sector had a limited presence; and Research and Extension was not adequately addressing the
needs and productive potential of women. There was also an increase in climate extremes such as
unusually high precipitation, droughts, and floods. The consequences of such weaknesses were
considerable. Regionally, agriculture contributes about 30 percent of GDP, 28 percent of exports, and two-
thirds of employment; and improved agricultural growth is key to boosting all three of these.

Policies proposed to address such problems were broadly the same in Government, Bank and other
stakeholder assessments. Regionally and nationally, the ECOWAP (Regional Agricultural Policy),
subscribed to by all of the participating countries, provides a regional action plan supporting each country’s
National Agricultural Investment Program, and cross-country research is also allied to this plan coordinated
by the regional research agency, CORAF, a primary implementer of agricultural research across the region,
and the coordinator of WAAPP-2A.

The project was also consistent with Bank policy for the countries and region. The Regional Integration
Strategy for Sub-Saharan Africa, updated in 2011, supports cross-country collaboration for regional
development and for growth in agricultural productivity. The Country Assistance Strategies for the
participating countries promote improving agricultural productivity and sustainability, and support of regional
integration. For Ghana, the Country Partnership Strategy 2013-2016, extended to 2018, targets improving
competitiveness (the essence of the WAAPP program) and job creation. In Mali, the FY14-15 Interim
Strategy note emphasizes strengthening capacities and delivering basic services. The project approach is
also supported by Senegal.

WAAPP was, effectively, the operational manifestation of much of Government’s and the Bank’s strategy.
The project - WAAPP-2A – was an integral part of the overall WAAPP program. WAAPP was financed
through a ten-year Adaptable Program Loan in two tranches intended to be five years each. This project
was the second and final tranche of the APL.

The project’s objectives to improve the (i) generation, (ii) dissemination and (iii) adoption of agricultural
technologies responded directly to the agricultural sector’s central need – the goal of improving productivity
– thereby impacting positively on both GDP growth and on rural employment and social welfare. Improved
agricultural technology was articulated through the objectives enabling a more focused project design. The
project description shows a generally good reflection of the project objectives in the project components
and grouping of actions, and the Theory of Change chart at page 5 of the ICR provides a logical
progression from objectives to components.



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A (P129565)



               What is missing, however, is a connection between the objectives (and their expression through the
               activities in the project components) to the presumed primary goal of the project which, according to the
               national strategies, was to increase agricultural productivity. The gap here is reflected in other sections of
               the ICR (e.g. Efficacy, Bank Performance, M&E, Monitorable Indicators, Results Framework) where there is
               limited reference to impacts and yields. For instance, the quantity and quality of seed produced says
               nothing about yields and incomes. The exception is in the economic analysis which has a selection of gross
               margins, but there is limited indication that project impacts were a major consideration - a results-
               based approach, with more focus on the outcome end of the logical chain, would have been better.

               However, on balance, taking account of the substantial strategic need for improved technologies in the
               agriculture sector, the focused objectives chosen, and the project’s design to meet these objectives, the
               Relevance of WAAPP -2A was Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To scale-up the generation of improved technologies in the Participating Countries priority agricultural
                             commodity areas.

                             (Note that, in this Section 4, WAAPP-2’s three objectives are reviewed separately as: – to scale up the
                             Generation (Objective 1); Dissemination (Objective 2); and Adoption (Objective 3).

                             Rationale
                             Outputs

                                        National agricultural research centers were upgraded to become Regional Centers of Excellence:
                                          Achieved in Ghana and Senegal but not in Mali.
                                        Linkages were established or significantly strengthened with international research organizations such
                                          as the CGIAR (the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research).
                                        National laboratories were internationally certified by the International Seed Testing Association and
                                         the International Organization for Standardization). Actual - 5 labs certified (target 12).
                                        Action plans for gender inclusion and climate change were prepared for all countries.
                                        A participatory process for transparent approval of research grants coordinated by the Competitive
                                         Agricultural Grant Scheme was established to identify relevant applied research needs and for
                                         approval of grants for applied research proposals.



                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A (P129565)



The technologies promoted covered a wide range of enterprise activities mostly related to crops (80 percent),
with 12 percent of other grants going to livestock and eight percent to fundamental research. Technologies
promoted included grants for developing new crop varieties (the dominant grant activities), cropping
technologies, livestock husbandry, soil management, processing, marketing, weed and pesticide
management, agricultural mechanization, agroforestry, and climate-smart agricultural practices.

      Demand-driven multi-country research proposals were submitted to the national research grants
         scheme: Proposals submitted 218 (target 197).
        75 technologies with International Property Rights were registered (target 78)
        96 new crop varieties were recorded in the Regional Catalogue (target 77)
        1,198 Pesticide products and genetic materials were registered by national committees compared with
         a baseline of 409 and an original target of 810.
        Generated/released technologies with at least 15 percent productivity increase over control sample:
         112 actual. (target 59).

In country comparisons there are some differences in achievement of individual project activities between
Ghana and Senegal but for both countries, performance in nearly all activities was at or above targets. In the
case of Mali, affected by delayed commencement due to country security conditions, performance was better
than might have been expected and for most indicators close to the achievements of Ghana and Senegal:
e.g. The number of beneficiaries was 900,000 in Mali compared with 959,000 beneficiaries in Senegal and
875,000 in Ghana.



Outcomes and Intermediate Outcomes

The main achievement was the creation of institutions and capacity in the countries and across countries
through the establishment or strengthening of an institutional and technical foundation for generation of
improved agricultural technologies (see outputs above). Particular impact on generation of technologies was
through the strengthening of laboratories at national and regional levels, and of other infrastructure for seed
generation. Linkages were also established with international centers of excellence, fostering the
sophisticated processes and technologies required for seed testing, production, and standardization in the
seed production process. The development of a transparent selection and funding process for approval of
technology grants was also a significant achievement. Together, and in coordination with the agricultural
extension system and the web-based agricultural information system (refer actions under objectives 2 and 3)
112 new technologies with at least a 15 percent productivity increase against controls were generated (the
target was 59 technologies). More significant, however, was the upgrading of technical and institutional
capacity, nationally, cross-country and internationally for generating future technologies. In broader terms the
ultimate desired outcome would be to contribute to the governments' rural strategies to increase rural
productivity, for which the project objectives could be considered as intermediate objectives. The Efficacy of
the objective to Scale Up the Generation of New Technologies was Substantial.



Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A (P129565)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To scale-up the dissemination of improved technologies in the participating countries' priority agricultural
commodity areas.

Rationale
Outputs

The primary means to improve dissemination of new technologies was through three thrusts: (i) the extension
service; (ii) a web-based information system; and (iii) use of demonstration plots. These three approaches
were applied on a large scale. At a higher level, exchange visits with other countries, grants for university
degrees and association with scientists from international centers of expertise provided the knowledge base
for establishing and expanding the program. The relative weight of the three dissemination approaches varied
between the countries reflecting different strategies for reaching producers. Ghana developed a web-based-
information system far larger than the other countries, but Mali had 52,000 demonstration plots, nearly the
same as Ghana, with Senegal achieving lower numbers.

      Demonstration plots established: 119,000 plots established; target 80,000 plots.
      Producers in project areas with knowledge of new generated technologies. Actual 83 percent of
       producers; Target 80 percent.
      Beneficiaries using technologies generated in other countries: 297,000 (target: 420,000).
      Project technologies demonstrated in at least 3 ECOWAS countries: actual 30; target 18.
      A Market of Innovations and Agricultural Technologies was set up.
      Scientific exchange visits with other countries) Actual: visits 114; target: 104
      Studies sponsored (university degrees): actual 505; target 213.
      Establishment and expansion of a web-based information system on agricultural technologies.
      The public extensions systems were aligned with the WAPPAA-2A to provide a link between the
       research stations and much of the technology generation activities. Dissemination included substantial
       use of demonstration plots and farmer training, and close linkage of extension with the web, especially
       in Ghana.
      Use of the web-based agricultural information system reached nearly 1 million ‘hits,’ although the
       great bulk of this was Ghana’s program (880,000 hits), Mali and Senegal making limited progress.

Outcomes and Intermediate Outcomes

Although some activities, especially the web-information system, had uneven performance, most other
actions in the three countries (e.g. number of demonstration plots, proportion of farmers with knowledge of
the new technologies) achieved their targets, and the scale of the demonstration and extension programs
could reasonably be expected to improve dissemination of agricultural technologies. The Efficacy of this
objective of scaling up dissemination is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A (P129565)




                            OBJECTIVE 3
                            Objective

                            To scale-up the adoption of improved technologies in the participating countries' priority agricultural
                            commodity areas.

                            Rationale
                            Outputs

                                  Direct project beneficiaries 2,735,000 persons (22 percent above targeted 2,250,000) (targets
                                   achieved in all three countries.)
                                  Female beneficiaries (in percent): actual 42 percent; target 40 percent.
                                  Area under new technologies (ha): 1,850,000; target 1,700,000) (all countries reached target)
                                  Beneficiaries who have adopted at least one new technology 1,619,000 (target 1,240,000)
                                  Producers/processors who have adopted at least one new technology: 1.6 million actual compared
                                   with 1.24 million targeted. (all countries achieved their target).
                                  Certified foundation seeds produced (metric tons): Maize: actual 6,000 (target 3350); rice: actual
                                   3,600 (target: 4,600); sorghum: actual 2,007 (target 300).

                            Outcomes and Intermediate Outcomes

                            The outputs reported above, some of which could arguably be designated intermediate outcomes, indicate
                            that the project’s objective to scale-up the adoption of improved agricultural technologies was mostly
                            successful. Particularly indicative are the number of beneficiaries of new technologies and the farm area
                            using new technologies – both increased beyond targets.

                            A beneficiary satisfaction survey, one measure of outcome, showed that 67 percent of beneficiaries were
                            “satisfied” with the extension services, close to the target of 70 percent.

                            The Efficacy of the objective to Scale-up the Adoption of Improved Agricultural Technologies is rated
                            Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project was generally successful in achieving its objectives. The number of new technologies exceeded
                            targets, and, importantly, the project created or improved an institutional structure and established the
                            processes and institutional support for future development of new technologies (Objective 1). Dissemination

                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A (P129565)



  (Objective 2) targets (such as the number of demonstrations, number of farmers, training, linking the
  extension system to the web to enhance outreach to farmers) was achieved. Adoption rates (Objective 3),
  as assessed by the number of beneficiaries and the size of the area using new technologies, exceeded
  targets. Although there is some variation in achievements, each of the three countries had significant gains in
  institutional capacity for technology development and adoption. The efficacy of all three objectives was
  substantial. The Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Viability

The project’s economic rate of return was estimated in the ICR at 15.0 percent based on farm-models with data
collection supervised by the project’s coordination units. Findings from independent surveys were also used.
The Gross Margin Analysis indicates significant increases in profitability of farmers who adopt new technologies
– most increases being between 50 and 100 percent: e.g. Senegal rice 63 percent increase in profits; Mali
irrigated rice 66 percent increase; Mali sorghum 44 percent increase; and Ghana cassava 57 percent increase.
The ERR estimate is moderately robust to changes in costs and benefits - the ERR falls to 13.5 percent when
benefits decrease by 20 percent; and to 13.75 percent if costs increase by 20 percent: both scenarios are still
viable. (The ICR reports the long term opportunity cost of capital in agricultural production as 12%, although the
source of this is not given.)

However, there is a methodological question on the extent to which project management and overhead
costs were included in the ICR analysis. The ICR is unclear on this, the data and discussion referring primarily to
gross margins of individual technologies. On the other hand, the ICR notes that the analysis did adjust for
spillover effects between countries but applied a range of low and high (more optimistic) scenarios.

Cost Effectiveness

The project was completed with most implementation activities at or above targets. For two key monitoring
indicators of project achievement – the number of beneficiaries (users of the new technologies) and the area
using the new technologies, the project, achievements were 21% and 9% respectively above appraisal targets.
On the cost side, at completion actual cost of the overall project (US$ 186.6 million) was 9 percent lower than
the appraisal estimate of US$ 200 million. So achievements were greater than targeted while costs were lower.

Implementation Efficiency

The original project period of 5 ½ years was extended during project implementation by one year to 6 ½ years.
The extension was primarily to provide sufficient time for the Mali program to complete due to unforeseen
conflict leading the Bank to stop processing new lending. Effectively, Mali lost over a year of the original 5 ½
year project period. During the extra year, a value chain for groundnuts was added to the Senegal program but
without changing project components. The Ghana program was completed and closed on the closure date


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A (P129565)



scheduled at appraisal. Overall, given that the security related impediments for Mali were exogenous to the
project, and that the continued activities in Senegal were additional to the original program, project
implementation is assessed as efficient.

Overall Efficiency

The project is assessed as economically viable, although, as noted above, the treatment of overhead project
costs is not entirely clear. The incomes of beneficiaries increased by over 50 percent. With lower than
anticipated project costs and achievements generally higher than anticipated. The project was cost-effective;
and, while the project implementation period was extended by one year, this was primarily due to the late start of
the Mali program due to circumstances beyond the project’s control. Overall, the Efficiency of WAAPP-2A is
rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              15.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s Relevance was Substantial in that it responded to an important need in all three countries as
expressed in the strategies to increase agricultural productivity, a fundamental need for poverty reduction,
export earnings and economic growth. The use of cross-regional partnership and international linkages in
research and innovations was an effective and efficient way of improving agricultural technologies, the core
need for improving productivity; and both Bank and Government policies encompassed the strategy that the
project was embracing. Efficacy was also Substantial, forged through the development of national and regional
laboratories, links with international centers of expertise, improved dissemination through demonstration plots;
the extension service; and a web-based information system; all contributing to an adoption of technologies
greater than targeted. With significant increases in farm incomes, a viable economic rate of return, and costs
held to below appraisal estimates, Efficiency, on balance, is rated Substantial. With relevance, efficacy and
efficiency Substantial, the overall Outcome of the project was Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A (P129565)



   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Inadequate financing to sustain the developments is the primary risk. During project implementation,
discussion during supervision of the financial provisions needed from each government, stimulated provision
of the the funds required by CORAF and the three participating countries. With the project over, such regular
reviews are not guaranteed and there are no line items exclusive to the WAAPP program in the country
budgets. Donor funding, including a follow-on Bank project will likely alleviate financial constraints in the
short and medium term. But this is not a longer-term solution, and the medium and long-term commitment of
the governments involved cannot be assumed, hence compounding the risk of unreliable funding. A
guaranteed financing mechanism, such as self-generated funds from sale of seeds or other services, would
be better, as recognized by the governments, CORAF and the Bank. See below.

While not significantly covered in the ICR, the task team has advised IEG of a promising development
towards self-sufficiency in all three countries and CORAF. This is the initiation of institutions and procedures
for self-generated funding. Ghana is the most advanced, and is expected to pass a law based on the Ivorian
self-sufficiency model, which will allow for collection of funds from producer organizations to finance
research. Achieving self-sufficiency, however, will likely be a gradual process. Most farmers are poor
smallholders, whereas financial contributions are easier from commercialized producers or producer
organizations. Nevertheless, long term-prospects for self-sufficiency of the research/technology sector
appear promising.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was well designed, conceptually and in its operational features. The Task Team learned from
  the experience of WAAPP-1A, aimed to strengthen CORAF, the operation’s lead player, and developed
  linkages with international centers of excellence such as CGIAR. The necessary close linkages between
  the three countries and CORAF were fostered through integrated partnership between the institutions
  involved. The preparation team also arranged for Integration of the WAAPP program within national
  budgets and development programs. Overall, project design was sufficiently focused and detailed to
  establish an operational base for project implementation.

  However, project formulation needed a more results-based approach, and the limited attention to this
  appears to have affected, in particular, the M&E program (section 9). Implementation achievements (e.g.
  number of varieties generated, number of demonstration plots, number of beneficiaries) provide important
  information but a broad assessment of impacts (e.g. yields, farmer incomes) would have helped focus on
  the ultimate goal - to increase agricultural productivity. Also, consideration of how the program could have
  eventually become financially self-sufficient from self-generated funds was not assessed at appraisal, yet
  such considerations might have affected institutional aspects of how the project was formulated. For
  these reasons, Bank performance in Project Design is rated Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A (P129565)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were regular, benefitting from a largely Africa-based regional staffing, and the
 proximity of staff to the three countries helped in resolving the difficulties of implementing a multi-country
 program requiring complex integration between countries, and national and international centers of
 excellence. Fostering the institutional and operational adjustments under the project required adaptability
 and perseverance. Performance benchmarking was one tool used to instill competition between programs
 and generated healthy competition between the countries. Nearly all operational targets were met or
 exceeded, and Bank supervision played a key role in these achievements. The limited focus on results in
 project design remained largely unchanged throughout project implementation.

 The ICR has limited discussion on prospects for financial self-sufficiency through self-generated funds, but
 IEG discussion with the TTLs found some initial progress towards this which the Task Team has fostered.

 However, there were some significant fiduciary issues towards the end of the project. The ICR reports
 (para 78, Bank Performance, Quality of Supervision) - "Several fiduciary issues have been recorded (in
 Mali) at the end of the project with unpaid balance to suppliers and civil works not complete due to lack of
 resources. The overall Quality of Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

 Overall Performance of the Bank

 The Bank performed well in most aspects of project design, enabling a strategically important and
 innovative program to go forwards, despite the complex, multi-country, nature of the program. But the Bank
 could have placed more focus in design and M&E on true outcomes in terms of production and profitability.

 Project supervision was generally sound despite the challenge of a multi-country operation, but there were
 fiduciary issues towards the final stages of the project. Long-term financial self-sufficiency could have
 received greater attention.

 The overall Performance of the Bank was Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A (P129565)



a. M&E Design
 M&E design built on the earlier WAAPP operation, making some improvements in assessing the theory of
 change, and other aspects. The six monitorable indicators for achievement of WAAPP-2A’s objectives were
 supported by generally well-chosen intermediate results indictors and most of these are quantitative in
 nature (e.g. new crop varieties registered in the regional catalogue), hence measurable. M&E Operational
 Manuals were prepared at regional and country levels describing data collection methods, responsibilities,
 and definitions. One gap was the limited disaggregation of results and background on how results were
 attained. Thus, measurement of the “number of technologies generated” conveys no information of what
 broad technology types were introduced, whether these were mainly new seed varieties and agronomic
 improvements.

 A shortfall in the design of the M&E program and the core monitorable indicators was the limited focus on
 results. For instance, the "number of beneficiaries" of the project conveys achievement of the actions that
 contributed to the number of beneficiaries, but not the results in terms of yields and income. Yet the overall
 goal in the Government's and Bank' rural sector strategy is increasing productivity; Several "results-
 based" indicators could have been chosen to include consideration of benefits as well as the physical
 indicators already included in the Results Framework (ICR Results Framework at Annex 1).



b. M&E Implementation
  Each country had M&E units and the M&E coordinator in CORAF provided backup including workshops
  and support missions. Considerable human and financial resources were applied to the M&E programs.
  A regional web-based platform for data collation at country and regional levels was created.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data was used as an operational management tool by CORAF, by each participating country, and
  during Bank Implementation Support Missions. Results were communicated transparently and formed a
  benchmarking base used for countries to adjust aspects of their programs. CORAF and each country
  M&E specialist investigated weaker performance areas to identify needed operational adjustments. The
  M&E system was also used during Bank missions to gauge project progress and to identify areas for
  improvement.

  Overall Quality of M&E

  The overall quality of the M&E program was good in terms of: the outcome and intermediate project
  implementation indicators used; the creation of an institutional base for the M&E program; and the
  organization of data collection, and overall, could outweigh the gap in results monitoring. The Quality of
  M&E is, thus assessed Satisfactory.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A (P129565)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B, but the safeguards triggered are not specifically listed although
   the text of the ICR (paras 72 and 73) provides some indication of which safeguard issues were addressed.
   The PAD also does not specify the safeguards triggered. The comments below include clarifications
   provided by the task team.

   Environment: A regional strategy and individual strategies for each country; and country action plans were
   implemented according to the strategies. Each country also appointed focal points to coordinate
   implementation using existing institutions to this purpose. Integrated Pest Management was practiced as
   appropriate. A Climate Change Adaptation program was carried out by CORAF, but was limited to
   assessing yield gaps and developing a predictive model for yields, planting and harvesting dates.

   Social: The primary social activity described in the ICR is a gender program. In particular, the project
   promoted technologies favored by women (e.g. marketing, small scale livestock). And the ICR advises that
   the project “mainstreamed gender considerations in technology generation and adoption.

   The ICR reports that there was no Involuntary Resettlement.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial: A financial specialist was located in each country and in CORAF. Audit reports were sometimes
   delayed. Reviews of financial management and procurement were conducted by the Bank during project
   preparation and in all three countries fiduciary arrangements were considered adequate to meet the Bank’s
   minimum requirements. The ICR refers to "several fiduciary issues" at the end of the project with unpaid
   balances to suppliers and civil works not complete due to lack of resources (size of balances and actions
   taken not provided).

   Procurement: The ICR advises that Annual Procurement Plans were produced and reviewed during
   Implementation Support missions. No further details are provided, but the timely implementation of the
   project in two countries (Ghana and Senegal), in a relatively short project period, indicates expeditious
   procurement processes (though not necessarily an indication of quality). The Mali, part of the construction
   program was incomplete at project closure.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A (P129565)



                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory             Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                          Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The project's implementation and management experience yield the following lessons, of which
lessons 1 and 4 are adaptations from the ICR:

1. A regional (multi-country) approach for a technology development program enables better access
to international expertise, economies of scale in researching technologies, cross-border exchanges
of new technologies, and potential for constructive competition between participating countries.

WAAPP-2A, supporting a combination of countries, was large enough to get technical support from
international centers of excellence, whereas each country alone would have attracted less support.
Likewise, research and dissemination of some technologies Is too costly for any one of the countries
acting alone. In this case, performance benchmarking encouraged constructive competition between
the countries.

2.   .A technology development program needs to be results-based.

In this case, the ICR reviews the development and adoption of technologies without articulating the
results of such technologies. The focus in the results framework is on numbers of participants, area
under new technologies, number of technologies, etc. The ultimate outcome of a project such as
WAAPP-2A would be increased productivity and incomes. Without reviewing results (yields, net
incomes, and, as relevant, labor savings, soil water retention, etc.) the ultimate outcomes from new
technologies are less evident.

3.    An integrated combination of agricultural research and extension supported by a media
agricultural information system can be an effective way of transmitting knowledge and encouraging
adoption of new technologies.

In this case, WAAPP-2A linked agricultural extension and research. Ghana in particular developed a
web-based agricultural information system with 880,000 “hits” per annum. Ghana used the web as a
core part of farmer outreach. The extension staff used web information in their contact with
farmers, leveraging its impact. Importantly, the research program was applied research focused on
agricultural needs and contained a grant program to finance independent activities to generate
technologies.




                                                                                                      Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A (P129565)



4. A sustainable funding mechanism is essential to assure long-term sustainability of a regional
and cross-country technology development program.

In this case, the overall WAPPAA program relies on the political will of participating countries for
funding of the national and regional programs. This is based on each country’s annual budgeting
process with year by year prioritization between sectors and within sectors influenced by political
considerations which may provide insufficient or unreliable funding. As a promising initiative, the
Ghana WAPPAA -2A program has initiated a mechanism for producer organizations to contribute
funding for the agricultural research and technology development programs. Agricultural
commercialization is expected to make such financing easier.

5. Building the institutions, expertise and processes for development of agricultural technologies is
a long-term process requiring continued financial and technical support.

This project was an Adaptable Program Loan, a more suitable long/medium-term financing vehicle
than a conventional loan, and an instrument that could be increasingly adaptive as experience is
gained.

6. Safeguards need clear articulation in the PAD and clear corresponding assessment in the
ICR, including review during project implementation enabling adaptation as needed.

The ICR’s discussion of environmental and social safeguards, and, to a lesser extent, fiduciary
matters, provided few details on issues and actions, and the safeguards themselves were not
tabulated. The PAD had similar shortcomings.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  Assessment of WAAPP-2A as situated within the overall WAAPP program would provide learning. The
  performance and issues of each participating country would be valuable to draw lessons from the cross-
  country regional experience and the successes and issues encountered as the program developed. Also,
  better understanding of the outcomes of the enhanced adoption is needed and of the financial sustainability
  prospects of the program.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is a thoughtful and forward-looking review and constructively addresses issues. It identifies problems
and shortfalls and offers suggestions on future strategy. The lessons section discusses possible operational
improvements. The section on efficacy reflects this operational focus but it analyzes achievements by
component rather than by Development Objective, which is the guideline approach for ICRs. Analysis by


                                                                                                       Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Africa Agric. Productivity Prog. 2A (P129565)



Development Objective, would have given a greater strategic orientation in this section and elsewhere,
particularly on the broader agricultural sector need to enhance productivity and incomes. And, with productivity
in mind, the effectiveness of the new technologies – e.g. measured impacts of improved seeds technologies
would have added understanding of the farmer adoptions made under the project, and offered directions for the
future.

Other areas of improvement would have been: (i) the section on safeguards (environment, social and fiduciary)
is unstructured, does not clearly state what safeguards were triggered, and provides insufficient information to
assess issues; (ii) information on what the broad categories of technologies were, their relative importance in
project implementation, and typical productive impact of technology types (since provided to IEG by the task
team) and yields; (iii) the promising initial actions towards self-sufficiency from self-generated funding could
have been discussed; (iv) the ERR analysis was not clear on whether overheard costs were included; and (v)
fiduciary issues are referred to but not clearly explained.

Nevertheless, given the ICR’s overall strength in discussing operational improvements, the Quality of the ICR is
rated Substantial overall.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
