      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)



                                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021786


1. Project Data



 Project ID                                        Project Name
 P115351                                           Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc

 Country                                           Practice Area(Lead)
 Samoa                                             Agriculture and Food



  L/C/TF Number(s)                                 Closing Date (Original)                       Total Project Cost (USD)
  IDA-50890,TF-12179                               28-Mar-2017                                                12,097,450.70

  Bank Approval Date                               Closing Date (Actual)
  29-Mar-2012                                      31-Dec-2018

                                                   IBRD/IDA (USD)                                            Grants (USD)

  Original Commitment                                       8,000,000.00                                       5,000,000.00

  Revised Commitment                                       12,889,316.35                                       4,999,584.70

  Actual                                                   12,097,450.70                                       4,999,584.70




 Prepared by                    Reviewed by                       ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Paul Holden                    John R. Eriksson                  Christopher David Nelson          IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives



                                                                                                                 Page 1 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)



   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was to support fruit and vegetable growers and livestock producers to improve their
   productivity and take greater advantage of market opportunities. Financing Agreement (p. 5)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   Yes

   Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
   No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Improved Livestock Production and Marketing (estimated total cost at appraisal, US$4.73 million (PAD p. 7)),
   of which the project would finance US$3.6 million; actual financed cost was US$3.48 million (ICR p. 56).


   This component aimed to improve the quantity and quality of output through:
   • Increasing access to upgraded breeding cattle;
   • Improve locally grown feeding fodder to enhance livestock nutrition;
   • Provide technical advice on cattle raising;
   • Establish mobile and static slaughter facilities to improve meat quality and hygiene.
   It also aimed to finance investment on farms through matching grants, commercial loans from the Development Bank of
   Samoa and equity. If the Small Business Enterprise Center (SBEC) approved farmers’ business plans, they would be eligible
   for SBEC loan guarantees.


   Component 2: Improved Fruit and Vegetable Production and Marketing (estimated cost at appraisal, US$3.02 million, (PAD
   p. 7) of which the project would finance 1.8 million; actual financed cost was US$2.14 million (ICR p. 56)


   This component aimed to improve the quality and quantity of local produced fruit and vegetables through:
   • Providing farmers with improved planting materials;
   • Providing technical advice and promotional materials, including those for developing export markets;
   • Organic certification.




                                                                                                                 Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)




   Component 3: Institutional Strengthening (estimated cost at appraisal, US$6.09 million (PAD p. 7) of which the project
   would finance US$5.7 million. The actual financed cost was US$6.6 million (ICR p. 56)


   This component aimed to strengthen the technical capacity of government and non-government agricultural institutions
   providing extension services and undertaking agricultural research. It also included training Ministry of Agriculture and
   Fisheries (MAF) who monitored project implementation, as well as designing and implementing a monitoring and evaluation
   system (M&E), which would be compatible with the existing M&E systems of the MAF.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The total cost of the project at appraisal was estimated to be US$16.16 million. The project was financed through a grant of
   US$5 million from the Global Food Crisis Response Program and an IDA credit of SDR5.2 million (equivalent to US$8
   million). An additional US$260,000 was provided by the recipient and US$2.9 million from the beneficiaries (ICR p. 13).



   At appraisal, the total cost of the components was US$11.1 million, with an additional US$900,000 being allocated for
   physical contingencies and US$1 million for price contingencies.



   The actual disbursed amount was: IDA credit US$7,097,866; Grant US$4,999,585 for a total of US$12,097,451. The
   differences in amounts disbursed compared with appraisal cost arose from changes in the exchange rate. Special Drawing
   Rights (SDRs) appreciated against the US dollar by more than 10 per cent over the life of the project. In addition, the Samoan
   Tala (SAT) depreciated against the US dollar over the same period. As a result, disbursements in SAT were 107 per cent of
   appraisal estimates.


   Other actual financing amounts disbursed were; borrower US$220,000; Local beneficiaries US$2,200,000. In SAT, the total
   beneficiary contributions were 90 per cent of appraisal estimates because fewer farmers participated in the Matching Grant
   Program.


   The project was approved on March 29, 2012 and became effective on May 4, 2012. The closing date for the trust fund grant
   amount of US$5 million was May 30, 2015, which closed on time and was fully disbursed. The original closing date for the
   IDA credit was March 28, 2017. The IDA credit component of the project was restructured (Level 2) on February 13, 2017
   when the results framework was modified, there was a reallocation between disbursement categories and the closing date was


                                                                                                                    Page 3 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)



   extended to March 31, 2018. The information on the restructuring and the revised targets is contained in the Implementation
   Status and Results Report (ISRR) dated December 22, 2016. There was a further Level 2 restructuring on December 21,
   2017, which included a reallocation between disbursement categories and another extension of the closing date to December
   31, 2018. There was a further Level 2 restructuring on December 21, 2017, which included a reallocation between
   disbursement categories and another extension of the closing date to December 31, 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale

The Samoa Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) 2012-2016 had, as part of its first priority (Rebuilding Economic Resilience
and Encouraging Inclusive Growth) the goal to “improve agricultural productivity and strengthen opportunities for small and
medium scale farmers.” It points out that “about 60% of the population is employed in agriculture, which provides a key safety
net” (CPS p. 20), though it fails to mention that most of the employment is on a subsistence basis which is outside the market
economy.

The CPS points out that “the overarching theme running through the Government’s Samoa Development Strategy and the
proposed Bank Group Program is the importance of building resilience against shocks” (p. i). It notes that the agricultural
sector is dominated by small scale subsistence farming, which provides a safety net, and therefore resilience.

The Regional Partnership Framework for FY 2017-2021 (RPF) (World Bank, 2016, Regional Partnership Framework FY17-
FY21) (also ICR p. 15), which encompasses nine Pacific island countries, including Samoa, does not explicitly focus on
agriculture beyond pointing out that it is important for livelihoods. Active projects in Samoa mentioned by the RPF include
the Agriculture and Competitiveness Enhancement project. The RPF fails to mention that while the agricultural and fishing
sector employs about a third of the workforce, much of the activity is subsistence and agriculture and fishing contributes only
14% to GDP. While 25 per cent of rural households are engaged in formal markets, where produce is sold for cash, (PAD p. 2)
most of this is on a part-time basis. Merely 6 per cent of rural households receive their primary income from selling produce
(Asian Development Bank, Reform Renewed: A Private Sector Assessment for Samoa, 2015, hereafter referred to as ADB
2015).

The importance of the sector is clear, but the relevance of moving to a viable commercial model for the designated sectors is
not clear. The reference in the regional strategy "to fully exploiting the available economic opportunities ... (including)
increasing incomes from agriculture" infers that the priority is in sectors with the best opportunities for commercial returns. It
is not clear, given the sectors chosen for this project, that this is apparent.

The ICR (p. 24) points out that improved nutrition was an important secondary and complementary goal of the project
through encouraging increased consumption of local fruit and vegetables and that the project is likely to have positive long-
term impacts on diets, thereby reducing obesity, particularly among women. On the basis that an aim of the project was to


                                                                                                                         Page 4 of 21
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)



          enhance productivity, with a secondary goal of improving health of the population, the relevance of objectives is rated
          substantial.



          Rating Relevance TBL




          Rating
          Substantial


  4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


EFFICACY_TBL




                           OBJECTIVE 1
                           Objective
                           Improved productivity of fruit and vegetable growers

                           Rationale
                           The causal chain was based on the assumption that enhanced fruit and vegetable planting stock, better use of available
                           technology, greater on-farm investment, training, and increased access to finance would lead to uptake by growers and
                           thus higher productivity of fruit and vegetable growers. Investment was directed at field rock removal, improved drainage of
                           fields during the rainy season, better irrigation during the dry season and the use of new banana stocks imported from South
                           Africa. On the surface, this was a plausible causal chain. However, the underlying hypothesis on which the project was designed
                           was short on important detail that the project does not address. The counterpart Ministry for the project was the Ministry of
                           Agriculture and Fisheries, which had a history of poor advice and weak agricultural extension services, including the supply of
                           unsuitable planting stock. (Samoa: Consolidating Reform for Faster Economic Growth, Asian Development Bank, 2008,
                           hereafter referred to as ADB 2008). A further weak link in the causal chain was a failure to consider the negative incentives
                           arising from communal ownership of customary land. Field rock removal and improved drainage and irrigation requires
                           significant investment. Uncertainty of ownership implies that investors risk losing the fruits of their labor when they do not have
                           long-term control over the land they are working, with a risk that the benefits would not accrue to the investor (see ADB 2008,
                           for examples of this happening.)



                           The inputs for this objective were nursery screening trials for new fruit and vegetable varieties, training provided to farmers and
                           a matching grant program provided through the Development Bank of Samoa and the Small Business Enterprise Center.
                           Outputs under this PDO were enhanced planting materials, new varieties of crops, “climate smart” farming practices and
                           technologies and improved access to finance for farmers. The two original intermediate results indicators for this PDO were (i)
                           the number of subsistence farmers using improved fruit and vegetable varieties (target 600) and (ii), the cumulative number of


                                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)




business plans prepared by fruit and vegetable farmers and approved for grant financing (target 500). The original PDO
indicators were (i) The percentage increase in average fruit and vegetable yields of growers participating in the Matching Grant
Program (MGP), (target 100 per cent against a zero baseline); and (ii) The percentage increase in the average fruit and vegetable
yields of targeted subsistence and farmers (target 50 per cent increase by the end of the project).



Actual achievements for the intermediate indicators was 134 and 230 respectively. Well short of the original targets. The
increase in average yields of fruit and vegetable growers in the MGP was 53 per cent significantly below the 100 per cent target.
The result for subsistence farmers was a 36 per cent increase, well short of the original 50 per cent target.




Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improved productivity of fruit and vegetable growers (unchanged)

Revised Rationale
Outputs and activities remain the same.

Following the February 2017 restructuring, the intermediate indicators for this objective were revised substantially.

The target for the cumulative number of business plans by fruit and vegetable growers was revised downwards from 500 to 150
and the number of farmers using improved fruit and vegetable varieties was revised down from 600 to 200. As outlined above,
the actual achievements were 134 and 230 respectively.

In addition, the outcome indicators were significantly revised down, with the percentage increase in average yields of fruit and
vegetable growers in the MGP reduced to 50 per cent (from 100 per cent), with an actual achievement of 53 per cent, and that
of subsistence farmers being revised down to 30 per cent (from 50 per cent) with an actual achievement of 36 per cent.

It is difficult to ascertain the reason for the dramatic reduction in productivity targets given the adjustment took place close to
the project's completion. By this time, a significant portion of the funds had been disbursed. As of March 31, 2017, the
disbursement percentage was 73.1 (May 2017 ISR, p. 2). In addition, the considerable amount dedicated to this component is
difficult to justify against the marginal progress on the adjusted targets. Only 150 business plans and 200 farmers using
improved varietals is very low in the circumstances. Likewise, the results show that 68 per cent of the productivity improvement
was achieved by farmers that received training alone as opposed to support through the MGP which suggests the matching
grants were a premium priced support mechanism that did not provide as much benefit as was intended. Crudely applied, the

                                                                                                                     Page 6 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)




investment in fruit and vegetable growers was around $USD 14,000 as a proportion of the overall component spend. Given the
small number of improved varietals introduced (7 as indicated on pg.17 ICR), uptake was small. Likewise, with a combination of
mechanized services and fertilizer, the improvement in crop yields at these costs is also marginal.

Given these shortcomings, even with the project targets being met it is difficult to see how progress against the objective is
anything other than modest.




Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improved productivity of livestock producers

Rationale
The causal chain for this objective was that higher productivity breeding stock would be imported and that improved
investments, increased access to finance and training in better husbandry practices would lead to higher productivity of livestock
producers and thus, there would be a larger proportion of locally produced beef and pork making its' way to market. Training
needs would be identified by skill gap analysis. The training would be provided to the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries,
which in turn would run training sessions for farmers. An anomaly, given the emphasis on private sector development in the
government’s strategy, was that the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries ran the pig breeding unit and “sales of livestock from
the MAF’s breeding farms would be made on a cost recovery basis.” (PAD p. 20). The construction of mobile and static
slaughter facilities was also proposed to improve the quality and the hygiene of meat that in turn would increase the demand for
locally produced beef and pork.

There were no outcome indicators for this objective in the PAD. The ICR therefore used the intermediate results indicators as
outcome indicators. For cattle, the indicator was the calving rate, with a target of a 60 per cent increase, with an actual rate of 68
per cent being achieved (results table ICR). However, the ICR points (p. 18) that MGP farmers "were able to increase their
calving rate from 48 to 68 percent". Thus, it is unclear whether the average increase amongst all farmers was 68 per cent or if
this was the maximum achieved percentage increase. For pigs, the average litter size increased, with the target being an average
litter size of 7 compared with a baseline of 5 pigs per litter. The actual litter size achieved was 8. However, this figure only
covers 90 farmers and there is no explanation of whether the increase was uniform or if some farmers performed better than
others. This is particularly important when the benchmarks for each litter is small, well short of global benchmarks of 10 pigs per
litter. Likewise, no indicators were developed that measured the number of animals produced annually, so that the per-litter
number does not provide a full picture of actual improvements when the benchmark expectation for sows is two litters per year.
This limitation in the data inhibits conclusions on the progress of the livestock sector improvements. There was no meaningful



                                                                                                                       Page 7 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)




additional material covering the other livestock farmers (ICR pg.18) given the small sample. The speculative reference to
improvements in chicken producers does not sufficiently hold and the sheep sector is still in its infancy.

An additional intermediate results indicator used in the ICR was the number of matching grant program and subsistence
farmers owning improved livestock or adopting improved animal husbandry practices. The target was 400, though this is
confusing in the ICR as the note explains that the indicator was added in the 2018 restructure and thus the notion of an original
target seems superfluous (results table ICR pg.44) . The actual number at closing was 882 as a result of a surge in participants in
the program, but it remains unclear if this surge was throughout the project or was towards the end. As a standard indicator, this
result is of limited use given it does not sufficiently explain what the 'improved' practices were, nor which farmers were applying
them and to what extent. There is some reference to improved feed, stockyards and new fencing (pg.19 ICR), but no breakdown
of which approach had impact and what was expected of the participating farmers.

While there are clear shortcomings, progress against this objective is rated Substantial.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improved productivity of livestock producers (unchanged)

Revised Rationale
Post-restructuring

Outputs and outcomes remain unchanged and are provided in the overview above.

As part of the February 2017 restructuring, the procurement of one of the two mobile slaughter units was dropped and a smaller
scale static slaughter unit was proposed instead of the construction of the proposed abattoir. Most animal slaughter was
previously undertaken under unhygienic conditions. This was a result of delays in the implementation due to the complexity of
construction and limited MAF capacity.

In spite of these shortcomings, progress was still made in enhancing the productivity of the sector and thus the rating is
Substantial.




Revised Rating


                                                                                                                      Page 8 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)




Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Greater advantage of market opportunities taken by fruit and vegetable growers

Rationale
The causal chain for this PDO was based on certification of locally produced fruit and vegetables, which would lead to
increased demand and a larger percentage of locally produced fruit and vegetables being sold domestically (PAD p. 5). While
both the PAD (pp. 3-4) and the ICR (p. 13) mention exports, the focus of the project was on domestic markets. Furthermore,
export prospects were not encouraging for a number of factors related to Samoa’s agricultural sector. The largest potential export
markets were Australia and New Zealand, both of which have extremely strict phytosanitary standards. In order to export to
these countries, fruit and vegetables must be heat treated, yet the government owned high temperature forced air fruit and
vegetable facility was both too small and inefficient to process significant volumes of fruit and vegetables for export (ADB
2008). While the focus of the project was on domestic consumption (PAD p. 24), failing to realize the export potential of
Samoa’s agricultural output limited the scope for sector expansion.

Furthermore, one the largest exports of agricultural products was coconut oil. Yet the plantations of coconut trees date from the
German colonial period and yields have been declining because of the age of the trees (ADB 2008). Investment in new coconut
plantations is needed urgently, which the project failed to address.

There were two PDO outcome indicators for this objective. The first was the percentage increase in the value of sales of fruit
and vegetables by vegetable growers participating in the Matching Grant Program. The original target was 40 per cent while the
actual achieved at completion was 68 per cent. This indicator was not revised in the restructuring. The second PDO indicator
was the percentage share of locally produced fruit and vegetables sold by domestic retail and food service channels. The original
target was 30 per cent, compared with a baseline of 5 per cent. By March 2017, the increase was 52 per cent (ISR p. 2). This
compares with a 10 per cent increase that had been achieved by end October 2016. No explanation was provided for the very
large change in the 5 months to end March 2017.

While the PDO targets were met, progress against this objective is questionable. The support to fruit and vegetable farmers
reached 134 beneficiaries (pg. 60 ICR). The project was aimed significantly at import substitution (ICR p. 17), but import
statistics suggest that the impact of the project was minimal with respect to the impact on imports of fruit and vegetables. The
baseline proportion of locally produced fruit and vegetables sold domestically was 5 per cent, while the increased output of
producers participating in the program was 68 per cent. This would imply an increase of approximately 8.4 per cent in the
proportion of local purchases of fruit and vegetables in total sales of domestically produced fruit and vegetables. Thus, the
inference that there was a dramatic change in imports as a consequence of the project is not realistic. The changes identified in
the 2018 Market Survey are reassuring, but it remains unclear what proportion of this change is likely to have come from the
small number of project recipients (134 farmers) (pg. 20 ICR) This reasoning is supported by an examination of import data.
According to World Integrated Trade Solution Statistics, imports of vegetables into Samoa in 2012 were US$19.3 million,

                                                                                                                     Page 9 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)




amounting to 5.6 per cent of total imports, while in 2017, vegetable imports were US$19.3 million, amounting to 5.4 per cent of
total imports (see
https://wits.worldbank.org/CountryProfile/en/Country/WSM/Year/2017/TradeFlow/Import/Partner/all/Product/06-
15_Vegetable).

Therefore, the increase in PDO indicators is not consistent with import data results and the increase in the proportion of local
purchases of domestically produced fruit and vegetables has been modest at best, even accounting for the Market Survey data.
As a result, the efficacy rating for this objective is modest.




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Greater advantage of market opportunities taken by fruit and vegetable growers (unchanged)

Revised Rationale
Description of outputs and outcomes outlined above applies.

In the February 2017 restructuring, the outcome indicator for the percentage of locally produced fruits and vegetables sold by
domestic retail and food service channels was revised down to 20 per cent but at completion, the actual percentage was 51 per
cent. These data were obtained from market surveys (ICR p. 41). However, as the overview above suggests, the accuracy of the
market survey data and the very limited number of beneficiaries suggest there were a range of other factors at play in measuring
any import substitution effects.

As above, the rating for this objective remains Modest.




Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Greater advantage of market opportunities taken by livestock producers



                                                                                                                   Page 10 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)




Rationale
The causal chain underlying this objective was that the building of mobile and static slaughter units under a new regulatory
framework governing meat hygiene, in addition to improved animal husbandry ,would lead to better quality meat, which in turn
would increase the demand for locally produced meat and result in greater market opportunities for livestock producers.

There were two outcome indicators for this PDO. The first was the percentage of locally produced beef sold by domestic retail
and food service channels. The baseline was a 40 per cent share and the original target was 55 per cent. The indicator here has
both technical and data issues. The indicator itself is confusing given that it does not explicitly articulate if we are interested in
the proportion of locally 'consumed' beef produced by local producers or if we are interested ni the proportion of local beef that
makes its' way into the supply chain. This is an important difference and the ICR uses these two different indicators
interchangeably which makes assessment difficult. The challenge of the indicator is revealed in the ISR for May 2017 which
reports that this proportion was 29 per cent in October 2016 and 95 per cent at end March 2017. This is not a credible increase
over the 5 month period. Moving then to the ICR (p. 33), it reports that faulty methodology was used to obtain the baseline,
which was inconsistent with the Market Survey data which suggests that 84 per cent of domestic consumption was coming from
local producers, which casts further doubt on the achievement data.

The second outcome indicator was the per cent increase in the value of sales of livestock producers participating in the matching
grant program. The original target was 40 per cent, lowered to 30 per cent (but without explanation of why) and with an actual
number of 46 per cent achievement at project completion.

These indicators are difficult to interpret. Local producers in the matching grant program increased the value of sales by 46 per
cent. At the same time, 94 per cent of locally produced beef was sold domestically, compared with a baseline of 40 per cent at
the start of the project (acknowledged as problematic in the ICR) . The data are difficult to reconcile. In addition, there is no
comparison on the increase in value of sales of livestock by MGP participants with any increase for non-MGP participants. This
makes it impossible to know if a simple improvement in extension services and growing domestic demand encouraged farmers to
prioritize livestock improvements or if the other aspects in the MGP approach were fundamental to the change. We know that
access to hygienic slaughter facilities makes a difference to all farmers given the introduced legislation, so there is some evidence
that the value of sales would equally apply to farmers not in the MGP program.

Thus, the rating for this objective is Modest.




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 4 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Greater advantage of market opportunities taken by livestock producers (unchanged)


                                                                                                                       Page 11 of 21
                                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                  Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)




                              Revised Rationale
                              Outputs and outcomes remain as above.

                              The second outcome indicator, the percentage increase in the value of sales of livestock by participants in the MGP program
                              was revised downward to 30 per cent (no clear explanation as to why), with an actual achievement of 46 per cent at completion
                              (ICR p. 42). Given the measurement issues outlined above and the limited increase in market share by local producers, this
                              objective post-restructuring remains modest.




                              Revised Rating
                              Modest



OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                              OVERALL EFFICACY
                              Rationale
                              The causal chains associated with each of the objectives were plausible, although there were weaknesses in design of both the
                              inputs and the outcome indicators. While productivity indicators showed improved outputs, several issues associated with their
                              design calls into question their accuracy, and they do not hold when compared with other indicators, including import data.


                              Furthermore, overall productivity data based on value added per worker in the sector
                              (https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NV.AGR.TOTL.CN?locations=WS) suggests that productivity improvements were
                              higher in the 2006 – 2012 period than they were during the project period.


                              The cancellation of one of the mobile slaughter units and the static slaughter unit compromised the objective of better hygiene.
                              With three of the four objectives rated modest and one rated substantial, the overall rating is modest.




                              Overall Efficacy Rating                                           Primary Reason
                              Modest                                                            Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                              OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                              Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale

                                                                                                                                                 Page 12 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)




   While there were some minor differences in the level of achievement against the revised targets, the overarching issues
   regarding Efficacy remain the same across both periods and thus the overall rating remains unchanged as Modest.




   Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                                 Primary Reason
   Modest                                                             Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Originally, the project aimed to assist 1,072 livestock farmers and 513 fruit and vegetable farmers through the matching grant
program, as well as 583 subsistence fruit and vegetable farmers through improved technical advisory services. In addition, it had
planned to construct two mobile slaughter units and one static slaughter unit. By closure, 740 farmers had entered the matching
grant program, with 594 having completed their projects, and 882 farmers, some of whom were in the matching grant program, had
undergone training in animal husbandry. At the same time, 200 Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries staff had received training.

However, only one mobile slaughter unit was constructed, and the static slaughter unit was not constructed at all.

Significant delays were a feature of the project. This was in part due to delays at its commencement as a result of cyclone Evan,
which impacted Samoa eight months after the commencement of the project. The ICR (p. 24.) states that this impacted
implementation by at least six months. Overall, the closing date of the project was extended by a cumulative total of 21 months.
The ICR (p. 24) notes that slow procurement resulted in some activities not being completed by project closure.


At appraisal, the financial and economic internal rates of return were estimated to be 13.5 per cent and 15.3 per cent respectively,
based on a discount rate of 12 per cent.


The ICR (p. 59) states that it was not possible to use a standard approach to utilizing economic and financial analysis in order to
calculate the ex post rate of return on the project because of the demand driven nature of the project that resulted in actual
activities being substantially different from those envisaged at appraisal. The ICR (p. 59) states that the ex post ERR was calculated
based on a tracking of ex ante business plans prepared by the beneficiaries of the matching grant program. Benefits to farmers were
calculated from a survey that undertook to capture how the project positively impacted participants. These included:

• Productivity gains through enhanced on-farm investment and access to upgraded livestock;
• Productivity gains through investment and access to high yield crop varieties;
• Increased access to extension services, although this is an input, not an output, and as noted above, extension services supplied
by the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries had not been highly regarded by farmers (ADB 2008).


However, as the M&E section points out, the data collected were unreliable, which casts doubt on any calculations of the ERR.

                                                                                                                       Page 13 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)



Based on the modest rates of return on the project, the project delays, the failure to build a second mobile slaughter unit and the
failure to build a static slaughter unit, efficiency is rated modest.




Efficiency Rating
Modest



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal and the re-
   estimated value at evaluation:
                                     Rate Available?                   Point value (%)              *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                                    100.00
  Appraisal                                                           15.30
                                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                                    100.00
  ICR Estimate                                                        13.30
                                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome

The calculations of the final outcome are based on the split rating shown in Table 1 below. The project was rated Substantial for
Project Relevance, Modest for the overall Efficacy rating and Modest for Efficiency.There were only minor differences in the
ratings for specific objectives in the two periods under Efficacy and thus the outcome rating is unchanged for both periods as
Moderately Unsatisfactory.

                             Table 1: Overall Outcome Ratings
 Rating Dimension              Objectives
 Relevance of Objectives       Substantial
                               Ratings Pre-restructuring      Ratings Post-restructuring
 Efficacy                      Modest                         Modest
 Efficiency                    Modest                         Modest
 Outcome Rating                Moderately Unsatisfactory      Moderately Unsatisfactory
 Outcome Rating Value          3                              3

                                                                                                                        Page 14 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)



Disbursement Percentage      62%                             38%
Weighted Value               1.86                            1.14
Final Outcome Rating         Moderately Unsatisfactory




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory



7. Risk to Development Outcome

There are a number of risks to development outcomes, the most significant being:

• The ICR (p. 36) points out that by April 2019, none of the project staff remained in the Ministry of Agriculture and
Fisheries, with a concomitant loss of institutional memory;
• The lack of skills and capacity in the Ministry, which employed only one veterinarian for the entire country;
• The lack of an adequate maintenance budget for equipment purchased under the project;
• The continued threat of natural disasters, a feature of Pacific island countries, which have the potential to severely impact
the agricultural sector;
• Based on analytical work undertake outside the World Bank Group (ADB 2008, ADB 2015), IEG identifies the lack of
commitment to private sector development by the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries and the continued substantial presence
of the public sector in agriculture, including the failure to privatize the agricultural estates as adding to the risks.

At closure, 20 per cent of the Matching Grants were incomplete and 21 per cent of farmers who had obtained loans from the
Development Bank of Samoa were in arrears (ICR p. 28). This suggests that a significant number of farmers who took out loans
were not generating sufficient income to service their debts, casting doubt on their sustainability.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a.Quality-at-Entry
   At entry, the project did not sufficiently account for a number of critical factors in promoting agricultural production and
   output. The government of Samoa was the largest participant in the agricultural sector, owning two large estates totaling


                                                                                                                       Page 15 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)



  over 12000 hectares, only some of which was leased out to private farmers. However, there was widespread
  acknowledgement (see ADB 2008 & ADB 2015) that the leasing process was non-transparent, and that the estates were
  inefficiently run. Furthermore, while the government sector plans and the PAD (p. 2) acknowledged the export potential
  for organic fruit and vegetables, the communal land tenure system as well as the reluctance of the land estates to seek
  organic certification limited the export potential of the sector, something that the project did not address in detail and was
  insufficiently incorporated into project activities. A parallel land reform project initiated by the ADB experienced
  substantial difficulties over the same period as the agricultural competitiveness project. See for example,
  ((https://www.rnz.co.nz/international/pacific-news/271408/calls-for-more-talks-on-samoan-custom-land-project), yet the
  competitiveness project appears to have ignored a highly complementary initiative


  The two largest agricultural export crops were coconut oil and nonu juice, yet the project did not explain how
  these products were to fit into the export market mix. It is evident that production for both of these products could not keep
  pace with demand (ADB 2008) yet there is limited explanation of why the designated sectoral focus was chosen over other
  more established industries.

  There were also issues with scale. The project design documents do not sufficiently articulate how the improvements in
  the given sectors would grow to scale in the longer term. This is inferred rather than explained and thus there is little
  evidence that foundation aspects of the sector were being established through the design and implementation. An
  additional factor was the inefficiency of the government owned Agricultural Stores Corporation, which was slated for
  privatization in 2012 and as of 2018 had still not been privatized. The project missed an opportunity to include this as part
  of conditions attached to its implementation.

  Quality at entry was therefore compromised by a too narrow focus in the produce sector on fruit and vegetables and a
  failure to take into account the longer-term strategic viability of sectors that were already successful as demonstrated by
  their export performance. In addition, there was insufficient detail and rigor in how to measure the different aspects of the
  project to determine which characteristics are likely to most improve the viability of the sector in the longer term. The
  considerable shortcomings mean the rating for Quality at Entry is Moderately Unsatisfactory.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (p. 35) reports that the “the Bank was well focused on achieving its PDO” (p. 35), undertaking 13 full
 implementation missions. However, the fact that the project was restructured only one month before its original closing date



                                                                                                                      Page 16 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)



 belies the contention that supervision was proactive. The ICR (p. 29) points out that demand for matching grants under the
 fruit and vegetable component was significantly less than anticipated and that this should have been identified sooner.


 The ICR (p. 30) also notes that the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) was not integrated into the Ministry of Agriculture and
 Fisheries, which reduced the effectiveness of coordination. This could have been addressed during supervision and adds to
 the conclusion that the restructuring should have taken place earlier.

 A further issue was the failure to coordinate with other development partners, particularly with the ADB, which in 2014
 provided a grant to Samoa to provide business support services to agricultural businesses focusing on agro-industrial
 production. There is no reference in the ICR, or in the restructuring documents to any attempt by the project to coordinate or
 synergize with this project, nor with an ADB land reform project.

 Given these shortcomings, the rating for Supervision is Moderately Unsatisfactory.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 There were a number of weaknesses in the design of the M&E framework. The measures of productivity of both the growers
 of fruit and vegetables and meat producers were deficient. For the former, aggregate measures did not adequately track
 specific varieties. As the ICR points out (p. 32) the measure “proved too general which… were hard to reconcile into one
 average”. Farmers used non-standard measures, such as “bunches of cabbages” or “bags of tomatoes” which resulted in data
 inconsistency.


 For livestock, indicators for the calving rate and the size of litters for cattle and pigs respectively did not adequately capture
 whether output had actually increased; they did not measure the total output of animals, nor their survival rates. A further
 problem with M&E design in the livestock sector was the inconsistent methodology used to obtain the baseline data,
 compared with that used to obtain the results of the project. In addition, terminology around the indicators is confusing and
 the use of percentage changes and percentage shares did not make sense for many of the indicators. An additional gap in
 M&E design was the failure to track the repayment rates for agricultural producers who had borrowed under the SBEC 100


                                                                                                                         Page 17 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)



 per cent guarantee program. The ICR (p. 39) points out that over 20 per cent of farmers who borrowed from the
 Development Bank of Samoa were in arrears on their repayments.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries were responsible for collecting M&E data with the help of the project staff.


  The design aspects of the M&E framework referred to above hampered M&E implementation, which was further
  compromised by lack of record keeping by farmers. The ICR reports (p. 32) that only 57 per cent of crop farmers and 34
  per cent of livestock farmers kept records, which made data suspect and greatly added to the burden on project staff, who
  had to individually compile records on farms that they visited.


  As a result, M&E implementation was challenging




c. M&E Utilization
  Market surveys were used to inform the evolution of the project. These resulted in the project targets being changed in the
  restructuring. However, there are two key points; first the restructured targets were in a number of cases set unrealistically
  low, and were exceeded at closure by a wide margin, which calls into question the accuracy of the data obtained from the
  surveys. Second, the delay in restructuring to only a month before the original closing date calls into question whether
  M&E data were used proactively.

  The design of the indicators was suspect. Furthermore, the failure, in spite of 13 supervision missions, to identify the poor
  record keeping of farmers, which compromised the indicator data and added to the burden of the PCU reduced the
  effectiveness of the M&E framework. Cross correlating M&E indicators with trade data would also have revealed issues
  with the framework.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


                                                                                                                       Page 18 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)



   Two environmental safeguards were triggered, namely the need for an environment assessment and pest management
   policies. The implementation of these was governed by an Environmental and Social Management Framework. The main risk
   identified was associated with the envisaged static slaughter unit, but since it did not progress, the risk oversight became
   redundant. (ICR p. 33).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Fiduciary compliance was rated as moderately satisfactory based on reports from the World Bank financial management and
   procurement specialists, who also provided implementation support. A 2016 audit report found no fiduciary issues with the
   project. Nevertheless, the ICR (p. 30) reports that for substantial periods, there were no procurement staff on the project
   team, which resulted in significant delays.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
    ---

d. Other
   Staff costs for preparation and supervision amounted to US$1.42 million, more than 10 per cent of the value of the project.




11. Ratings
                                                                                           Reason for
Ratings                             ICR                       IEG
                                                                                           Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                           There were significant performance
                                                                                           problems in the fruit and vegetable
                                    Moderately
Outcome                                                      Moderately Unsatisfactory     sector and substantial measurement
                                    Satisfactory
                                                                                           issues in achievements against the
                                                                                           livestock activities.
                                                                                           Substantial shortcomings with design
                                    Moderately                                             and inconsistent supervision in
Bank Performance                                             Moderately Unsatisfactory
                                    Satisfactory                                           making the required changes to the
                                                                                           project in a timely way.
Quality of M&E                      Modest                   Modest



                                                                                                                   Page 19 of 21
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)



 Quality of ICR                       ---                       Modest


12. Lessons

 The ICR offers the following lessons, with some amendment of language by IEG:


 It is important to ensure that the project team is closely integrated with the teams from the implementing Ministry
 and that it is adequately staffed. In the case of the Samoa project, the team was too small for the amount of
 supervision required (ICR p. 31) and the lack of integration resulted in issues around the ownership for the
 counterpart ministry;


 It is important to consider local capacity and counterpart capacity in project design and if necessary, budget for
 supplemental consultants to assist with implementation. In the case of the Samoa project, the difficulty of attracting
 and retaining project staff affected the efficiency of the project and its implementation (ICR p. 37) and there were
 capacity deficiencies in Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries staff.


 It is important that the design of outcome indicators takes into account data availability and the consistency of data
 used for monitoring and evaluation. In the case of Samoa, inconsistencies and lack of availability of data hampered
 implementation, which was not anticipated in project design and necessitated project staff collecting data from
 farmers.


 IEG adds the following lesson:


 Failure to draw on analytical work by development partners and/or their projects in the same sector can compromise
 project design and the selection of local counterparts. In the case of Samoa, the design of the project needed to better
 employ existing analytical work from all development partners.




13. Assessment Recommended?

   No


14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                                          Page 20 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhanc (P115351)




On the positive side, the ICR is rich in detail regarding aspects of the project and the problems that it encountered.

Nevertheless, there were substantial shortcomings. Much of the interesting narrative gives the project the benefit of the doubt and
we are left wanting more detail on metrics and actual agricultural outcomes. Currently it is too inward looking and sees much of
the success as delivering the committed activities rather than identifying developmental transformations.

In addition, at 37 pages of main text, plus 28 pages of appendices, the ICR is too long. There is a lot of repetition and material that
does not necessarily add to the performance story. The main text is over twice as long as the maximum recommended (15 pp.) by
the Bank’s OPCS Guidelines.

The ICR undertook a split rating on the basis of significantly downgraded indicator values, but it does not explain the drivers for
the substantially lowered targets. Furthermore, while the ICR does capture some of the inconsistencies of the project data, which
led to it being overly generous in its rating of various aspects of the project, it does not explore the issues candidly. Nor does it look
much beyond the indicators as the basis for its reporting.

There are major technical issues related to the agriculture sector in Samoa that deserved greater coverage, particularly with regards
to how activities informed broader agricultural change and very little of the ICR looks at aspects of scope. This is a significant
omission in a country like Samoa which is a small island state. The ICR did not address or acknowledge other analytical work out
there, nor use this information to effectively make a case for its illustration of achievements.



   a. Quality of ICR Rating
        Modest




                                                                                                                            Page 21 of 21
