     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Energy & Mineral Sctr Strengthening (P126537)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0021757

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P126537                                    BR Energy & Mineral Sctr Strengthening

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                     Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80950                                 30-Jun-2016                                        33,442,641.25

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Dec-2011                                31-Dec-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            49,604,127.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                             33,442,641.25                                             0.00

 Actual                                         33,442,641.25                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 6) and the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, page 6) is:

   "To strengthen the capacity of key public sector institutions to improve the contribution of energy and
   mineral resources to accelerated national economic growth and increased environmental
   sustainability in a context of globalization and technological change".


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Energy & Mineral Sctr Strengthening (P126537)



   “Strengthening capacity” corresponds directly to the project’s components and comprise input activities that
   yield specific outputs. The long-term goals of “accelerating national economic growth” and “environmental
   sustainability" are complementary, under the Bank Group’s over-arching mission for
   supporting environmentally sustainable development. Hence this assessment is based on the single PDO.

   "To improve the contribution of energy and mineral resources to accelerated national growth and
   increased environmental sustainability in a context of globalization and technological change”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were four components (PAD, pages 7-9).

   1. Strengthening the capacity of the government to drive the sustainable development of the energy
   and mineral Sectors. (cost at appraisal US$8.94 million; actual cost US$5.42 million). This component
   provided technical assistance for strengthening the government's capacity in the two sectors. There were
   two sub-components: (i) capacity building of the Ministry of Mines and Minerals (MME) to formulate long-
   term policies and improve governance; and (ii) capacity building of the Energy Secretariat of the MME.

   2. Strengthening of Regulatory Institutions. (cost at appraisal US$2.33 million; actual cost US$2.85
   million). This component aimed at improving the regulatory capacity in the sectors. There were two sub-
   components: (i) strengthening the regulatory capacity of the National Electricity Regulatory
   Agency (ANEEL) and the National Department of Mineral Production (DNPM); and (ii) institutional
   strengthening of DNPM and the Company for Mineral Resources Research and Geological Survey (CPRM).

   3. Technology Development (cost at appraisal US$35.69 million; actual cost US$24.23 million). This
   component provided support for improving research in the power sector and enhancing the CPRM's
   capacity to use geophysics equipment for preventing natural disasters. There were two sub-components; (i)
   rehabilitating the technological laboratories of CPRM and the National Center for Research in Electricity
   (CEPEL); and (ii) financing studies in research and development for the sectors.

   4. Support to South-South Cooperation (cost at appraisal US$2.52 million; actual cost US$0.83 million).
   This component provided capacity building support to the MME for developing internal procedures and
   information systems for South-South Cooperation and technical assistance to support South-South
   Cooperation in regulation, developing renewable energy, clean energy, preparing geological surveys
   and developing information systems.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Energy & Mineral Sctr Strengthening (P126537)



   Project cost. The appraisal estimate was US$53.60 million. The revised estimate was US$37.44 million.
   The estimates were revised in view of the significant project savings from the devaluation of the Brazilian
   Real vis-à-vis the US$-denominated loan. The actual cost was US$40.66 million.

   Project financing. The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$49.60 million. US$16.16 million of the
   loan was cancelled due to the 56% devaluation of the Real relative to the US$ during implementation. The
   revised estimate was US$33.44 million. The amount disbursed was US$33.44 million.

   Borrower contribution. At appraisal, the borrower contribution was estimated at US$4.00 million. At
   closing, the actual contribution was higher at US$7.22 million.

   Dates. The project was approved on December 20, 2011, became effective on May 30, 2012 and was
   scheduled to close on June 30, 2016. The project closed on December 31, 2018, with a delay of two and a
   half years.

   Other changes. There were two Level 2 restructurings. These changes were made through the first
   restructuring on June 2016:

         The closing date was extended by a year, to complete the ongoing activities and the new activities,
          that were added during implementation. The savings in US$ terms due to the depreciation of the
          Real relative to the US$, besides enabling cancellation of part of the loan, also allowed for
          expansion of the project scope.

   These changes were made through the second restructuring on April 2017.

         The closing date was extended by 18 months for implementing new activities that were added to
          support the new government's reform agenda. The ICR (paragraph 25) notes that shortly after the
          first restructuring, the President of Brazil was impeached, and a new government was formed.
          Activities that focused on the government's new strategic direction for the gas sector were
          added. These activities were: (i) an analysis on barriers for exploration, storage and diversification of
          the gas market: (ii) fiscal and regulatory incentives for the sector: (iii) integration of renewables into
          the National Interconnected System: (iv) energy efficiency measures; and (v) capacity building
          activities in the mining sector: There was also a reallocation of funding among project components.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Despite a period of economic stability in the years before appraisal, Brazil faced the
challenge of inclusive growth, with variations in service delivery in the different regions of the country. In this
context, the energy and the mining sectors were crucial for Brazil's economic development, given
Brazil's endowments of energy and mineral resources. Addressing the challenges faced by (i) the energy
sector in the areas of financing, planning and regulation and (ii) the mining sector in the areas of
regulation and economic, social and environmental impacts, were important. The regional dimensions of the
project were also important, given that Brazil's Ministry of Mines and Energy had been approached by other


                                                                                                        Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BR Energy & Mineral Sctr Strengthening (P126537)



               countries to share experiences in the energy sector and had provided support for business development
               initiatives aimed at South-South cooperation, in Latin America, Caribbean and Africa.

               Government strategy. Before appraisal, the government had undertaken several steps to encourage
               competition in the oil sector. These included revoking Petrobras' monopoly on key segments of the supply
               chain (exploration and production) in 1997 and creating an independent agency, the National Petroleum
               Authority for granting concessions and monitoring industry performance. The strategic vision of the new
               government in 2016 aimed at increasing the size of the gas market and encouraging private sector
               participation in the market. The National Mining Plan 2030, launched by MME and approved by the
               government in 2011, identified three priorities for the sector: improving governance, value-added processes
               and sustainability.

               Bank strategy. The Bank has had a historical record of contributing to transformation of the energy sector
               in Brazil, including by projects aimed at improving the concessioning of hydropower plants, and helping
               Electrobras strengthen the efficiency of its distribution business through technological and new
               management techniques. The PDOs of this project were well-aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal,
               the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2012-2015 noted the importance of (i) increasing the efficiency
               of public and private investments and (ii) sustainable management of natural resources and climate
               resilience, for achieving inclusive and sustainable growth. The CPS also highlighted the need for: (i)
               strengthening Brazil's policy and regulatory framework for the energy sector for promoting cost-effective
               and sustainable energy: (ii) improving the regulators' capacity for monitoring the sector: (iii) financing
               investments in research and development to transport efficiently large blocks of energy across continent-
               wide distances; and (iv) managing mineral resource endowments in a sustainable manner. At present, the
               PDOs are well-aligned with two of the three focus areas of the Bank's current Country Partnership
               Framework for 2018-2023:

                                       Focus Area two (private sector investment and productivity growth) highlighted the need for
                                        addressing regulatory barriers in the energy and mining sectors for enabling private investment in
                                        the sectors.
                                       Focus Area three (inclusive and sustainable development) highlighted the need for addressing
                                        issues of sustainable delivery of services.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective



                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Energy & Mineral Sctr Strengthening (P126537)



To improve the contribution of energy and mineral resources to accelerated national growth and increased
environmental sustainability in a context of globalization and technological change.

Rationale


Theory of Change. The project activities combined capacity building activities with hard infrastructure
investments, in the energy and mining sectors. The chain between the project activities, their outputs and
outcomes were logical and causally linked as explained below:

Energy Sector. The project activities aimed at capacity building of the Energy Secretariat of Mines and
Minerals for formulating long-term sector policies, developing internal procedures for South-South
Cooperation. The activities for the National Electricity Regulatory Agency for improving regulatory
oversight, were aimed at institutional strengthening. Hard infrastructure investments (rehabilitating the
technological laboratories of the National Center for Research in Electricity), were aimed at improving
research in the energy sector. The outputs of these activities can plausibly be expected to increase the
energy sector's contribution to economic growth.

Mining Sector. Capacity building of the Ministry of Mines and Minerals for formulating long-term sector
policies, and to the National Department of Mineral Production for improving regulatory oversight, were aimed
at institutional strengthening of the mining sector. Infrastructure investments (providing geophysics equipment
to the Company for Mineral Resources Research and Geological Survey), were aimed at preventing natural
disasters. The outputs of these activities can plausibly be expected to contribute to increase the
mining sector's contribution to economic growth.

The relatively small scale of environmental activities supported by the project for both the energy and the
mining sector does not convincingly establish that achievement of "environmental sustainability" - as
envisaged in statement of the project's objectives - can be attributed to those disparate project activities, such
as databases, environmental licensing, etc.

Outputs: Energy Sector (ICR, paragraphs 31 -34).

These outputs were produced as targeted, for preparing the Ministry of Mines and Energy's (MME) Strategic
Plan.

      Six new databases were created for planning and socio-environmental monitoring, as targeted. Two
       databases developed under the project provided the first energy efficiency analysis of the (a) the
       service sector and (b) six industrial segments (aluminum, paper and cellulose, steelworks, ceramic,
       food drinks and chemical). Six new methodologies were created and utilized. Three training programs
       were created.
      Procedures and tools were developed to account for climate change and its impact on the flow of
       rivers for hydroelectric production.
      The ultra-high voltage transmission technology and computer clusters were operational. The
       synchronized real-time phasor measurement system, through which the national grid operator can
       monitor the transmission system and maximize the use of transmission lines, was operational (This
       system was important for connecting the North and Northeast of Brazil to the Southeast and South
       in the national grid). This system was expected to help the operator in monitoring, identify the causes
       of disturbances or failures in minutes, and help in preventing system blackouts by enabling the

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Energy & Mineral Sctr Strengthening (P126537)



         operator to make preemptive and corrective actions. The ICR notes that Brazil was among the 11
         countries in the world using cutting-edge technology for large grid systems.
        Long distance testing center was established at the National Center for Research in Technology, for
         operating the major trunk lines. This center included testing arrangements for the Ultra-High Voltage
         transmission lines.
        Phasor Measurement Unit testing laboratory was installed at the National Center for Research in
         Electricity, to monitor large-scale disturbances in the National Integrated System.
        Software for improving the data structure reports was provided to the National Electricity Regulatory
         Agency. This software provided for savings in data storage.
        A customized postgraduate training course was developed for government staff in the energy sector.
         A management system for environmental licensing for electricity generation and transmission, and a
         socioeconomic cadaster of the populations affected by the dams were developed.
        Three power transmission technologies (ultra-high voltage transmission technology, computer
         cluster and a synchronized real-time phasor measurement technology) were developed and
         operational. Three geophysical technologies were developed.
        Mechanisms were put in place for activities between Brazil and countries in Africa (Ethiopia, Nigeria,
         Mozambique and Mauritius) between 2012-2016, in the areas of transmission, renewables, biofuels,
         gas and power utility reform. A study tour was organized through the World Bank Brazil and Egypt
         teams about the potential for renewable energy and energy-efficient programs in Brazil.

The following activities were not fully completed.

      Ten additional activities envisioned in the project were completed, short of the target of 24 (discussed
         in section 5). The completed studies included: (i) identifying tariff challenges: (ii) recommendations
         regarding the commercialization of the sector in line with international best practices, applicable to
         Brazil, where the state still owns the assets; and (iii) studies for the National Electricity Regulatory
         Agency, analyzing the cost of electricity interruptions.

Outputs: Mining Sector

These outputs were produced as targeted, for preparing the Ministry of Mines and Energy's (MME) Strategic
Plan.

      The inventory of the small-scale mining sector was completed, and the mineral and geological data
         was updated to support the National Mining Plan 2030.
      One of the two expected entities (the National Mining Agency) was restructured, as specified in the
         new Regulatory Framework prepared by MME.
      The new Regulatory Framework for the sector and the National Mining Agency (ANM), for
       modernizing the regulatory capacity, were created.
      A customized postgraduate training course was developed for government staff in the mining sector.
       Information Technology equipment was provided to the ANM for increasing its monitoring capacity.
      Geophysical equipment was provided to the National Company for Mineral Research (CNPM) to
       increase the CNPM’s capacity to create susceptibility maps, used for identifying mineral deposits and
       reducing the risk of natural disasters by mapping regions susceptible to landslides, flooding or seismic
       activity.



                                                                                                       Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Energy & Mineral Sctr Strengthening (P126537)




      The small-scale mining sector inventory was disseminated in seminars with other Latin American
       countries. Information Technology equipment was acquired for increasing ANM's monitoring capacity.

The following activities were not completed when the project closed.

      Activities aimed at regulatory strengthening of the mining sector were not fully developed, given the
       delays in implementing ANM.

Outcomes: Energy Sector

The outputs produced by the technical assistance activities (preparation of databases, methodologies and
training programs), were crucial for achieving better energy forecasts and addressing issues associated with
imbalances between demand and supply for electricity, due to external reasons, as indicated below.

The energy purchasing/dispatch arrangement. The ICR (paragraph 34) notes that Brazil's installed
capacity grew from 78,000 Megawatts (MW) at appraisal to over 164,000 MW in February 2019 and was
expected to increase to 10,000 MW by 2021. Accurate forecast of energy dispatch was required to make
adjustments to the energy purchase plan, given the size of energy dispatch. Given that 25% of the
concession contracts of generation capacity, 82% of the national transmission system and 42% of distribution
companies were to expire between 2015-2017, the government had to decide about the operational
arrangements for the next 20 to 30 years. The government decided to extend the concessions in 2012, using
the energy forecast database provided by the project.

Issues of over contracting of energy. Demand for energy was decreasing in the wake of the political and
economic turmoil in the first four years of the project. The ICR notes that usually generation capacity is over
contracted, to act as a safety net to meet unexpected increase in demand. Over contracting of 5% was
permissible under Brazilian legislation and over 5% and up to 8% of over contracting was allowed; however,
the contracting entity was still expected to pay for the over contracted energy, irrespective of whether there
was demand. The analysis provided by the project aided MME in making adjustments to minimize the impact
of over contracting. Legislation for these adjustment mechanisms were drafted and enacted. A
"Disengagement Mechanism" was developed in 2017 in a competitive manner, whereby generators paid 106
million Brazilian Real (R$) to terminate the contracts of 25 power plants. This initiative led to avoided fines of
183 million R$ charged to generators.

Reducing over contracting of generation through adjustments to future Power Purchase Agreements, and
establishing the Ultra High Voltage Testing Center, were expected to generate savings. Likewise, the phase
synchronization measurement system would entail savings, by reducing the number of major outages (the
ICR notes that preventing just one power outage over the next five years would save US$64 million to the
country's Gross Domestic Product). These cases could be expected to lower energy tariffs to consumers.

This review concludes institutions in the energy sector were strengthened by the activities and that
institutional strengthening plausibly contributed to improving the energy sector's contribution to economic
growth.

Outcomes: Mining Sector

The indicators were output-oriented. According to the ICR (paragraph 39), “key activities in the mining sector
were unable to be fully developed, especially those aimed at regulatory strengthening.” Given that activities

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BR Energy & Mineral Sctr Strengthening (P126537)



                            relating to the regulatory strengthening of the mining sector were not completed, and the delays in ANM
                            implementation, this review concludes that the project activities made a modest contribution to improving the
                            mining sector's contribution to economic growth.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                            On balance, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective is rated as Modest, in view of the limited
                            evidence on achievement of outcomes in the mining sector, which plays a highly critical role in Brazil’s
                            economy and environment. Further, the relatively small scale of environmental activities supported by the
                            project for both the energy and the mining sector does not convincingly establish that the achievements
                            were "environmentally sustainable".



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Low achievement


          5. Efficiency


   Economic analysis. An Economic Rate of Return (ERR) was not calculated at appraisal, as most of the project
   activities (such as better prioritization of activities in the ministry through the strategic plan and greater efficiency
   in providing mining licenses) were qualitative in nature. At closing, the potential economic benefits in the energy
   sector were assumed to come from savings due to: (i) cost reductions due to the Ultra-Voltage lines (UVLs)
   testing laboratory (before the project there were no well-established techniques or maintenance procedures for
   UHV lines); (ii) outage prevention through the synchronized measurement technology (through better
   understanding of how/when/when a blackout took place); and (iii) the Contractual Balance in the Energy Market
   study, which identifies possible imbalances between power supply and demand and their impacts on healthy
   market functioning. On this basis, the ICR calculated the net present value and economic rate of return, using a
   discount rate of 10%, at US$99.20 million and an ERR of 218.5%, respectively.

   Administrative and operational issues. There were delays in the first three years of implementation due to a
   combination of factors, including (i) leadership changes which affected coordination among the implementing
   agencies; (ii) inadequate adjustment of activities to changing circumstances; and (iii) procurement delays. These
   factors, together with external factors, such as a multiyear severe drought, contributed to implementation delays.
   Although the government enacted the mining legislation (with delays), other mining activities were not

                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Energy & Mineral Sctr Strengthening (P126537)



complete when the project closed (such as training women who live around mineral ventures) . There was lack
of commitment by the Government to promote greater South-South Co-operation. Although additional activities
were added following the formation of the new government using the savings due to the depreciation of the
Brazilian Real during implementation, these were not completed due to the budgetary caps at the end of the
project. The ICR (paragraph 88) notes that following the Presidential Impeachment and the formation of the new
government, the Interim Government capped all spending to be line with the national law prohibiting public
spending by any government entity. These caps prevented the execution of the activities as targeted.

In sum, efficiency of the project is rated as modest, in view of the administrative and operational shortcomings
during implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              218.50
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the government and Bank strategy is Substantial. The project’s efficacy in
achieving the project’s objective - "to improve the contribution of energy and mineral resources to accelerated
national growth and increased environmental sustainability in a context of globalization and technological
change” - is Modest, in view of the partial and delayed activities and limited evidence in the mining
sector. Efficiency is Modest, in view of the administrative and operational inefficiencies. Based on these sub-
ratings, the outcome is rated as Moderately Satisfactory. This is in line with IEG guidelines dated July 25, 2017
(Table 9.1, page 42) and the Bank Guidelines for ICR Preparation dated September 27, 2018 (Appendix H,
page 38).


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Energy & Mineral Sctr Strengthening (P126537)



Government commitment. The commitment of the new government was demonstrated by its new gas
sector policy, and new strategic direction to broaden the national gas sector market. It is unclear, however,
whether the government would remain committed to providing the needed investment in the energy sector.

Institutional risk. The non-completion of mining sector activities is an institutional risk that could jeopardize
the sustainability of the outputs achieved.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  This project was prepared based on a prior Bank-financed technical assistance project (Brazil - Energy
  Sector Technical Assistance Project). Lessons incorporated at design included technical assistance
  activities for addressing key sector issues, and a flexible design, which would enable adding activities
  based on the new government's energy sector priorities. This aided in adding new studies in the gas
  sector, in line with the priorities of the new government. The implementation arrangements were
  appropriate, with the Project Management Unit located in the Executive Secretariat of the Ministry of
  Mines and Energy - the agency responsible for project coordination. Several risks were identified at
  appraisal, including substantial risk associated with the weak implementation capacity of the agencies
  to address procurement issues. The mitigation measures adopted at design included
  supplementing procurement expertise through consultants and training program for participating entities
  in procurement issues. With mitigation measures, the project risk was rated as Low at appraisal. The
  arrangements made at appraisal for monitoring and evaluation and safeguards and fiduciary compliance
  were appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  There were moderate shortcomings in design. The project underestimated the government's commitment
  to the mining sector program and the South-South Cooperation initiative. This contributed to the limited
  performance of the mining sector. There were also moderate shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in
  section 10a).

  On balance, the Bank’s quality at entry is satisfactory, since the project’s theory of change and design for
  the major components and activities were sound, with some weaknesses in the relatively small
  component related to promoting South-South cooperation activities.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision



                                                                                                      Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Energy & Mineral Sctr Strengthening (P126537)



 Twelve Implementation Status Results Reports were completed during implementation. Supervision
 missions were conducted to Brasilia about twice a year and the missions included energy and mining
 experts (ICR, paragraph 109). The missions included visits (at least once a year) to the sub-implementing
 agencies (the National Operator of the Transmission System, the National Center for Research in
 Electricity and the Company for Mineral Resources Research and Geological Survey), located in the state
 of Rio de Janeiro. The Task Team Leader was located in Brasilia from July 2013 and this aided in making
 proactive adjustments to accommodate the new government priorities, using the large project savings (due
 to the devaluation of the Brazilian Real), that were reflected in the second project restructuring. The
 supervision team was proactive in adjusting the activities through two restructurings, in the face of adverse
 external shocks during implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 The key outcome targets - number of databases created for planning and socio-environmental monitoring
 and the number of new methodologies created, were appropriate for monitoring the PDO of strengthening
 the capacity of public sector institutions. The key outcome targets - number of power transmission
 technologies and the number of geophysical technologies that were developed - were appropriate for
 monitoring the PDO associated with improving the contribution of energy and mineral resources
 to economic growth.

 There were no indicators for monitoring performance with respect to improving the social and
 environmental sustainability of the mining sector; however, it could be argued that the PDO intended to
 contribute to sustainability as a long-term goal beyond the project's implementation period. It is not clear
 what is meant by "in a context of globalization and technological change". An intermediate indicator
 pertaining to the preparation of geophysical maps was over-ambitious. The ICR (paragraph 93) indicates
 that, given that one full geological map of an area can actually take weeks to produce, creation of 247
 maps during the project lifetime was clearly inappropriate.

 The Project Management Unit staff, with support from the participating entities in the energy and mining
 sectors, were responsible for collecting the data for monitoring project performance (PAD, paragraph 33).




b. M&E Implementation


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Energy & Mineral Sctr Strengthening (P126537)




  Indicators were added in line with the added activities during implementation. One key feature of
  monitoring during implementation was conducting workshops at the completion of key studies (such as
  on energy efficiency, analysis of gas tariffs and small-scale mining and socio-environmental impacts of
  dams), which were discussed with stakeholders. These discussions provided useful in making
  adjustments during implementation. A tool (lista unica) developed by the Bank and updated during
  implementation, was used for tracking all processes (an Excel file that tracks all steps associated with the
  contracting process).



c. M&E Utilization
  The indicators were used for monitoring project performance. The reports produced by the lista unica
  tool were used to inform the relevant government agencies to prepare reports. An example of this was a
  report analyzing bottlenecks in the energy sector, which resulted in contract risk avoidance of over 130
  million Brazilian Real in 2017.



  On balance, although one indicator related to the targeted number of geophysical maps was unrealistic,
  M&E design is rated substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


   The project was classified as a Category B project, under World Bank safeguard policies. Four safeguard
   policies were triggered: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04);
   Forests (OP/BP 4.36); and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11. (PAD, page vi). An Environment and
   Social Management Framework (ESMF) was developed and a specific Environmental Management Plan
   (EMP) was prepared. Both ESMF and EMP were publicly-disclosed at appraisal (PAD, paragraphs 48 and
   49).

   The ICR (paragraph 98) notes that there was compliance with environmental safeguards. There were no
   adverse environmental impacts (given that project activities were mainly conceptual studies), and there
   were no adverse impacts of investments in the National Center for Research in Electricity.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Energy & Mineral Sctr Strengthening (P126537)



b. Fiduciary Compliance


   Financial Management. A financial management assessment conducted at appraisal concluded that the
   financial management arrangements were satisfactory and rated the financial management risk as
   Moderate. (PAD, paragraph 44). The ICR (paragraph 102) notes that there were no financial management
   issues during implementation. The project complied with the relevant requirements of the Loan Agreement.
   There were no instances of ineligible expenditures during implementation. All audit reports (excepting for
   the final audit report combining the 2018 and 2019 report, which was pending when the project closed),
   were unqualified.

   Procurement. An assessment of the procurement management capacity of the participating entities was
   conducted at appraisal. The assessment concluded that procurement risk was moderate, and a
   procurement action plan was prepared (PAD, paragraph 45). The ICR (paragraph 104) reports that there
   were some procurement issues during implementation, due to the insufficient understanding of Bank
   procurement rules and long execution period of some activities. These issues were eventually resolved
   following a revision of the Procurement Plan and reinforcement of the Project Management Unit's
   procurement team. The ICR does not report any case of mis-procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


   The ICR (paragraph 77) notes that there was an unintended outcome from the postgraduate training
   program, provided under the auspices of this project. Under this program, a student prepared a thesis on
   the daylight savings program. The thesis demonstrated that Brazil was not obtaining any gains by adopting
   the program. This thesis was presented at the 24th National Seminar for Production and Transmission of
   Electric Energy and used as the basis for a technical evaluation and ministerial note to the President's
   office on the Ministry of Mines and Energy's position on the subject, which contributed to the decision by
   the Federal Government in 2019, to discontinue the daylight savings program.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial             Substantial


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BR Energy & Mineral Sctr Strengthening (P126537)



Quality of ICR                    ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pages 35-36) draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this
project, with some adaptation of language.

(1) A flexible design for Technical Assistance (TA) activities allows for continuous client
support in the face of shifting priorities. This can be particularly important for a middle-income
country that is willing to borrow for policy TA. The flexible design in this project enabled the Bank to
respond to the new government's priorities in the gas sector.

(2) Specific studies and reports targeting improved regulations can increase efficiency in the
energy sector, while leveraging private investments. The study of Contractual Balance in
Energy Market, with its recommendations, enabled the government to measure and solve
the problem of over contracting in the energy sector, which benefitted both the government and the
contracting parties.

(3) The dissemination of project outcomes through workshops for higher government
management and other stakeholders can aid in continuous government commitment. In this
project, workshops during implementation proved helpful in clarifying to the many sector
stakeholders the importance of the targeted interventions.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



The ICR is clear and provides a good description of the way the project activities aimed at better energy
forecasts, which were used for addressing issues associated with electricity dispatch and over contracting. It is
also candid about discussing issues related to the limited implementation of mining sector activities and those
that arose following the formation of the new government. The ICR is consistent with the IEG and Bank
guidelines and draws good lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

The ICR however is unduly long and contains repetition at several places (the main text of the ICR at 36 pages,
is more than twice the length of the recommended text of 15 pages). It would have been appropriate to put
detailed information in appendices. It would also have been useful to give a condensed English version of the
borrower ICR provided in pages 63- 161.




                                                                                                      Page 14 of 15
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BR Energy & Mineral Sctr Strengthening (P126537)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                  Page 15 of 15
