     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chongqing-Dadukou Fiscal Sustainability(P157404)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0021561

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P157404                                    Chongqing-Dadukou Fiscal Sustainability

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                      Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-86620                                31-Dec-2017                                      200,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Jan-2017                               31-Dec-2017

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       200,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Antonio M. Ollero          Clay Wescott                 Malathi S. Jayawickrama       IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The program development objective of the Chongqing-Dadukou Fiscal Sustainability Development Policy
   Financing (DPF) Program was "to support the Dadukou District Government of Chongqing Municipality
   to achieve fiscal sustainability through a forward-looking, comprehensive, and transparent public finance
   framework that integrates budget, public investment, and debt management" (Program Document, page 6).




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chongqing-Dadukou Fiscal Sustainability(P157404)



b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   The DPF had three pillars:

   Fiscal Sustainability supported the development and use of a medium-term fiscal and debt sustainability
   framework for managing risks and promoting fiscal sustainability of Dadukou's public finance.

   Integrated Capital Investment Plan supported the development of an integrated approach to capital
   budgeting to improve efficiency.

   Transparency aimed to enhance transparency and accountability in the use of budgetary resources.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   Program Cost: The DPF was estimated at appraisal to cost US$200 million.

   Financing: The DPF was financed with an IBRD loan to the People's Republic of China of US$200
   million. The loan was fully disbursed in a single tranche.

   Dates: The DPF was approved on January 10, 2017 and became effective and closed as scheduled on
   December 31, 2017.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  The objective of the DPF was aligned with Bank Group country strategy for China at the national level at the
  time of program appraisal and closing. The "Country Partnership Strategy for the People's Republic of China
  for the Period FY2013-FY2016" (CPS) conveyed support for "reforming subnational inter-governmental fiscal
  relations, building up a medium-term fiscal framework at both the national and subnational levels, improving
  fiscal transparency and debt management, and introducing accrual-based public accounting and performance
  budgeting" (CPS, page 14). A new CPS for China had not been finalized at the time of this ICR Review, but
  according to the ICR (page 22), the DPF objective was aligned with the second objective of the third Bank
  Group engagement area in the draft CPS, "demonstrating approaches to more effective and sustainable fiscal
  management and infrastructure financing".

  The objective of the DPF was aligned, at the national level, with the fiscal reforms advanced by the central
  government in the Third Plenum Decisions of 2013-14 ("Overall Program for Deepening Reform of the Fiscal
  System"), the new China Budget Law of 2014, and the implementing regulations issued by the State Council
  in 2014 ("Decision Deepening Reform of the Budget Management System"). The national budget reform
  program, resulting from the new China Budget Law of 2014, mandated the central and local governments to:
  (a) prepare unified budgets; (b) conduct comprehensive debt sustainability analyses; (c) reorient


                                                                                                 Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chongqing-Dadukou Fiscal Sustainability(P157404)



  annual budgeting and capital investment planning to a multi-year framework; (d) ensure that local debts are
  repayable based on the revenue generating abilities of local governments; (e) prepare and publish detailed
  fiscal and financial reports; and (f) subject all revenues and expenditures to popular oversight. The reform
  program also: (a) allowed provincial governments to directly issue debt for provinces and municipalities, but
  under the strict control of the central government and local legislatures; and (b) created mechanisms to
  restructure accumulated local government debt with the phasing out of local government financing vehicles
  (LGFVs) and their conversion to state-owned enterprises (SOEs) whose strictly commercial (non-government)
  debt would not carry official repayment obligations on the part of the government.

  The objective of the DPF was aligned, at the subnational level, with the development priorities of the Dadukou
  District Government at the time of program appraisal and program closing. Like all subnational governments
  which organized off-budget LGFVs and urban development investment corporations (UDICs) to borrow for
  public projects with implicit government guarantees (effectively collateralized by future expected land lease
  revenues), Dadukou District had accumulated by 2015 direct government debt of 66 percent of local GDP and
  public liabilities (direct government debt plus UDIC commercial liabilities) of 159 percent of local GDP. The
  fiscal adjustment program beginning in 2016, part of the Dadukou District Medium-Term Fiscal
  Strategy, called for the reduction of direct government debt to 22 percent of local GDP and public liabilities to
  91 percent of local GDP by 2025. The DPF would aid with fiscal consolidation and would more broadly aim to
  help take district public finances and debt to more fiscally sustainable paths in the medium term.



  Rating
  Substantial

b. Relevance of Design
  The results chain clearly and credibly links supported actions to intended outputs and outcomes. A medium-
  term framework for budgeting, debt management, and risk management would help enhance the district's
  fiscal and debt sustainability. An integrated approach to capital budgeting would improve investment
  efficiency. Enhanced budgetary and financial reporting including by SOEs, LGFVs, and UDICs
  would promote fiscal accountability and transparency.

  The prior actions addressed constraints to the district government achieving fiscal and debt sustainability in
  the medium-term. Adopting a Medium-Term Fiscal Strategy (MTFS), that was well informed by
  a comprehensive debt sustainability analysis (DSA), and submitting a 2016 Annual Budget consistent with
  the MTFS, would help address deficiencies with the budgeting, financing, and debt management
  framework. Adopting a Three-Year Rolling Capital Investment Plan for 2016-18 and setting the time frame
  and institutional responsibilities for investment planning would begin to address shortcomings with the
  annual capital budgeting framework. Mandating a system of annual disclosures of public sector assets and
  liabilities and the division between government and commercial activities and finances of UDICs would start
  to address weaknesses in fiscal accountability and transparency.

  The macroeconomic framework was adequate at the national level. The International Monetary Fund (IMF)

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Chongqing-Dadukou Fiscal Sustainability(P157404)



       "Staff Report on the China 2016 Article IV Consultation" of August 2016 concluded that China continued to
       transition to a more balanced and sustainable growth path. Although moderating (from 6.9 percent in 2015
       to 6.6 percent in 2016), economic growth was being driven increasingly by consumption and by services
       consistent with the country's economic rebalancing goals. Nonetheless, the government needed to take
       decisive action in several structural reform areas, including reducing the reliance on state-led and credit-
       financed investment; improving resource allocation and governance in SOEs; and, addressing the corporate
       debt problem. On the fiscal front, the IMF urged the government to continue with efforts to "fully implement
       the new budget law, improve fiscal transparency, and modernize the tax system".

       The local economic framework was adequate at the subnational level. The Program Document (pages 13-
       19) reported that the Dadukou District's economic growth rate had exceeded the national average among
       districts in the five years ending in 2015, driven largely by fixed investment and the services sector. The
       economic base had been eroded with the closure of a large steel factory in 2011, for environmental reasons,
       but the district had since rebuilt the local economy, quickly developing the Jianqiao Industrial Park, focused
       on information technology and tourism. The district government targeted economic growth to average 9
       percent in 2016-20. Achievement of the growth forecast assumed that the district government would be able
       to reduce the district's direct debt from 66 percent of district GDP in 2015 to 22 percent by 2025 and
       public liabilities from 159 percent of district GDP in 2015 to 91 percent by 2025, consistent with the objectives
       of fiscal adjustment program and the MTFS. The operation would support these objectives and targets
       through a program of time-bound actions requiring reductions in capital investment spending and the
       financing gap of the district government and reforms in the operations (adherence to commissioned contracts
       with the district government), accounting, and reporting of LGFVs and UDICs as part of their eventual
       conversion to commercial SOEs.



       Rating
       Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To achieve fiscal sustainability through a forward-looking, comprehensive, and transparent public finance
     framework that integrates budget, public investment, and debt management.

    Rationale
    Four of the five program outcome targets were met, including three of which were surpassed. One target
    was nearly met.

    The Dadukou District Government of Chongqing Municipality posted a financing gap (measured to include


                                                                                                          Page 4 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chongqing-Dadukou Fiscal Sustainability(P157404)



 the district public investment program) of 3.4 percent of district GDP in 2016, meeting the target to reduce
 the financing gap from 8.1 percent of district GDP in 2015 (baseline) to under 3.5 percent of district GDP in
 2016. The target had been set following the submission by the district government of the Annual Budget for
 2016 to the District People's Congress in January 2016 (prior action 2) and the adoption by the district
 government of the MTFS in May 2016 (prior action 1). In 2017, the district government posted a financing
 surplus of 4.3 percent of district GDP.

 The district government executed outlays for investment projects worth Renminbi (RMB) 1.27 billion in 2016,
 which came close to meeting the target for the district government to reduce executed outlays for investment
 projects from RMB1.79 billion in 2015 (baseline) to under RMB1.1 billion in 2016. The target had been part
 of the three-year rolling capital investment plan for 2016-18, which the district government adopted in May
 2016 (prior actions 3 and 4).

 The district government achieved a variance of the actual investment program with the capital investment
 plan of 0.3 in 2017, meeting the target to reduce the variance from 0.514 in 2015 (baseline) to under 0.4 in
 2016. The lower target variance had been designed to be an indicator of the credibility of capital investment
 planning in the Dadukou District after the district government adopted an integrated capital investment plan
 consistent with the MTFS.

 The district government prepared a report on public sector assets and liabilities covering the year 2016 and
 published the report on its official website in 2017, meeting the target to publish an annual report on public
 sector assets and liabilities starting in 2016. A report on public sector assets and liabilities covering the year
 2017 was expected to be published in 2018, but accounting changes under preparation by the central
 government reportedly delayed publication of the report. The district government had earlier issued a decree
 mandating the regular annual disclosure of the assets and liabilities of the public sector, including those of
 SOEs, in April 2016 (prior action 5), part of the effort to promote transparency and accountability in public
 finance.

 The district government reported that the share of projects executed by Jianqiao UDIC and Dasheng UDIC
 that are based on explicit commissioned contracts reached 99 percent in 2016 and 100 percent in 2017,
 surpassing the target that the share of projects executed by the two UDICs that are based on commissioned
 contracts be raised from 9 percent in 2015 (baseline) to over 30 percent by 2016. The target had been part
 of a major goal of budget reform --- the conversion of LGFVs into strictly commercial SOEs --- to provide a
 clear division between government and UDIC accounts. In April 2016, the district government issued a
 regulation setting a clear division between the government and commercial activities, incomes, expenses,
 assets and liabilities of the two UDICS (prior action 6), which would be reflected in the UDICs maintaining
 separate accounting records for their government and commercial operations.



 Rating
 Substantial
PHREVDELTBL


                                                                                                       Page 5 of 14
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Chongqing-Dadukou Fiscal Sustainability(P157404)




PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  The outcome of the program is assessed as satisfactory. The program development objective was substantially
  relevant to the Bank Group country partnership strategy in China, to the national budget reform program
  of China's central and local governments, and to the fiscal reform priorities of the Dadukou District Government
  in Chongqing Municipality. The program design was substantially relevant, with the results framework credible,
  the prior actions directed at addressing constraints to the attainment of fiscal and debt sustainability in the
  district's public finances in the medium-term, and the macroeconomic framework adequate at both the national
  and subnational level. The efficacy of the achievement of the objective for the Chongqing District Government
  "to achieve fiscal sustainability through a forward-looking, comprehensive, and transparent public finance
  framework that integrates budget, public investment, and debt management" was substantial with four of the five
  program outcome targets met. The district government conducted debt sustainability analysis, introduced multi-
  year budgeting and three-year rolling capital investment planning, and started the publication of public assets
  and liabilities, with the results that, in 2016: the financing gap (deficit) was kept under the program ceiling;
  capital spending was reduced, although not to the target value; the variance between actual and planned capital
  spending was reduced; the first annual report on public assets and liabilities was published; and, practically all
  projects executed by two UDICs were based on commissioned contracts with the district government.


  a.      Outcome Rating
          Satisfactory


  6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

  The risks to the sustainability of the program development outcomes are rated as modest.

  Policy risk: The ability of the Dadukou District Government to sustain its fiscal reform plan following the
  objectives of the DPF will likely be challenged by any change in economic policy priorities advanced by the
  central government. In 2015-16, fiscal adjustment plans across China were derailed by mandates from
  the central government for subnational governments to increase public investment to boost economic
  growth. Subnational governments, including the Dadukou District Government, would not likely be able to
  countermand national mandates for stimulus measures. However, fiscal reform would not likely be negated but
  only temporarily delayed.

  Political risk: Changes in political leadership always carry the risk of altering the level of political commitment to
  fiscal reform. According to the ICR (page 28), the Bank team had expressed concern that the quality of the
  policy dialogue with the district government would change with the new mayor (mayors are elected by local
  People's Congresses). For Dadukou District and Chongqing Municipality, however, political commitment to the

                                                                                                           Page 6 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chongqing-Dadukou Fiscal Sustainability(P157404)



reform objectives appear to be strong and should survive changes in political leadership as the reforms are
broadened and deepened in the near- to medium-term.

Institutional capacity risk: Subnational governments in China commonly experience turnover of professional
government staff. According to the ICR (page 29), Dadukou saw several personnel changes in
the Finance Bureau since the DPF, raising the chance that the district government would lose the professional
expertise gained from the training and experience with DSA, the MTFF, and the integrated capital investment
planning. The district government, however, has taken measures to sustain its institutional and technical
capacity for conducting debt sustainability analyses, aided in part by training provided under the DPF, including
with the use of the DSA manual and tools developed under the DPF.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
    Modest

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank drew on experience gained from a long engagement with China's government on budget reform
  and inter-governmental budgetary relations to prepare the DPF. According to the Program
  Document (page 9), the Bank had gained experience with budgetary reforms at the subnational level in
  China through a technical assistance project in Shanghai. Recently, the Bank and China's Development
  Research Center of the State Council (DRC) collaborated to draft a comprehensive proposal to reform
  urban finance in China, that was incorporated in the joint Bank-DRC flagship report "Urban China" in 2014,
  covering tax and tax administration, inter-governmental fiscal arrangements, land finance, urban
  infrastructure financing, and local debt management. The reform plan has since served to inform
  operations directed at subnational public finance in China.

  The Bank drew on analytical work to support the design of prior actions for the DPF. Apart from the
  "Urban China" (2014) report and another joint Bank-DRC work, "China 2030" (2013), the other analytical
  work underpinning the prior actions included: (a) for the fiscal sustainability measures --- "Strengthening
  Subnational Debt Financing and Managing Risks" (2010), "Beyond the Annual Budget: Global Experience
  with Medium-Term Expenditure Frameworks" (2013), Policy Note on China Medium Term Expenditure
  Framework (2013), World Bank Cooperation with Dadukou District on Debt Sustainability Analysis (2015);
  World Bank Cooperation with Dadukou District on Medium-Term Fiscal Framework (2015); (b) for the
  integrated capital plan measures --- Technical Note on Municipal Infrastructure Planning and Budgeting
  (2013), and World Bank Cooperation with Dadukou District on Capital Investment Plan (2015); and (c) for
  the transparency measures --- Policy Note on Transparency (2013) and World Bank Cooperation with
  China Treasury Department on Subnational Debt Monitoring and Reporting (2015).

  The Bank extended technical assistance (TA) to the Dadukou District Government for program
  preparation, focused on the prior actions for budgetary reform. According to the Program Document (page
  9), the TA had been necessary in view of the "limited institutional capacity" in Dadukou District. Bank staff

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chongqing-Dadukou Fiscal Sustainability(P157404)



  and other international experts with knowledge of and experience with other subnational public finance
  reforms programs globally (India, Brazil, and Nigeria) delivered the TA to the district government.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The Bank fielded missions to Chongqing Municipality and Dadukou District to provide training to the
  municipal and district government staff on debt sustainability analysis. The Daukou District Government
  also sent staff to the Bank office in Beijing for the same purpose.

  The Bank and the district government prepared a customized DSA manual for the Dadukou District.

  With the project closing on the same date as it became effective (December 31, 2017), no Implementation
  Status and Results Report (ISR) was filed for the project.

  Nonetheless, the "Summary of Borrower's ICR and Comments on the Draft ICR", appended as Annex 2 to
  the ICR (pages 38-45), recognized the strong performance of the Bank, citing the Bank staff and experts
  for guiding the completion of the prior actions, providing valuable opinions, and providing support to the
  district government during program preparation, implementation, and assessment.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  The DPF Loan Agreement was signed between the Bank and the People's Republic of China, which was
  the borrower for the DPF. The DPF Program Agreement was signed between the Bank and Chongqing
  Municipality, which was the program implementing entity for the DPF. The Program Agreement (page 4)
  listed actions taken by Chongqing Municipality under the program as being taken by the municipality
  "through Dadukou District".

  The central government was strongly committed to the objectives of the DPF. The central government
  had engaged the Bank on subnational budget reform and fiscal sustainability through policy dialogue and
  technical assistance projects before the DPF. In 2014, the National People's Congress passed the new
  China Budget Law mandating a comprehensive, rule-based, and transparent budget regime and setting
  new standards for fiscal management by subnational governments including borrowing constrained


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chongqing-Dadukou Fiscal Sustainability(P157404)



  by local budget limits. In 2016, the China Communist Party and the State Council officially endorsed the
  practice of preparing rolling three-year capital investment financing plans anchored to medium-term
  fiscal strategies. In 2017, the central government indicated it was preparing a new national initiative for:
  the comprehensive inventory of public sector assets; the regular monitoring local government liabilities;
  and, the tight regulation of new financing instruments including PPPs and industrial funds.

  The Chongqing Municipal Government and the Dadukou District Government were strongly committed to
  the objectives of the DPF and persevered to implement the reform plan under difficult conditions. The
  municipal and district governments engaged in a complex dialogue over revenue sharing. In
  integrating planning and budgeting, the district government had to persuade district agencies to
  participate and cooperate in the endeavor. The adoption of fiscal sustainability principles required
  reductions in capital investment spending that were larger than originally anticipated and hence
  encountered resistance to the ready implementation of the program. More challenging, the district
  government had to implement the district fiscal reform plan, which called for reductions in investment
  spending to sustainable levels, at a time (2016-17) when the national political priority was to boost
  economic growth through public investment stimulus.


  Government Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  The Finance Bureau of the Dadukou District Government, which manages the district budget, acted as
  implementing agency of the DPF (ICR, page 20), and was responsible for coordinating all activities under
  the reform program as well as executing several of the operation's prior actions.

  According to the ICR (page 32), the Finance Bureau posted a strong performance. The bureau organized
  a dedicated team to: supervise compliance with the DPF commitments, coordinate communication
  between the district government and the Bank, and facilitate Bank missions. For activities that were its
  principal responsibility, the bureau introduced the regulations required to implement the reform plans. The
  continuity in the leadership of the team over the life of the DPF enabled the bureau to deliver a consistent
  program performance.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chongqing-Dadukou Fiscal Sustainability(P157404)



a. M&E Design
  The M&E plan for the DPF called for the use of five indicators to measure the outcomes of the fiscal reform
  program: (a) the district financing gap, in percentage of GDP, to measure the achievement of fiscal
  sustainability; (b) the RMB value of investment projects executed and the difference between the value of
  actual investment spending with the value of planned investment spending to measure the credibility of the
  integrated capital budget; and, (c) the preparation and publication of the annual report on public sector
  assets and liabilities and the percentage of new projects executed by the Jingiao and Dasheng UDICs that
  are based on explicit commissioned contracts to evidence the transparency of budgetary resource use, the
  latter reflecting the division between government and UDIC accounts. The indicators were relevant to the
  program objectives; measurable, with baseline values; and, time-bound, with target dates.

  The plan also called for the Finance Bureau of the district government to implement the M&E for the
  program. The Finance Bureau would track progress with the prior actions and the outcome
  indicators. Reporting on the prior actions and the outcome indicators would require the collection and
  analysis of information and data pertaining the district government's capital investment plan, the capital
  investment projects, the capital investment financing plan, public sector assets and public sector liabilities.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Finance Bureau implemented the program M&E according to plan, working closely with the District
  Development and Reform Commission, which is responsible for investment planning in the district, the
  agencies of the district government, and the LGFVs. According to the ICR (page 20), the bureau organized
  "dedicated groups" that were responsible for monitoring each of the reform pillars, prior actions, and
  outcome indicators.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (page 21): (a) data collected on public sector assets and public sector liabilities in
  Dadukou District were used for the DSA; (b) the DSA, in turn, helped inform the district government's three-
  year capital investment plan --- in particular, moderating more ambitious plans for capital spending; and, (c)
  the Finance Bureau continued to monitor progress with the fiscal reform plans which involve multi-year
  frameworks for budgeting, capital investment planning, and debt management.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chongqing-Dadukou Fiscal Sustainability(P157404)



  Environmental Effects: The program did not trigger any environmental safeguards. According to the
  Program Document (pages 31-32), the DPF, which supported improvements in the public finance framework
  of the district government, was not expected to have any adverse effects on the environment. The ICR has
  no discussion of any environmental effects of the program.

  Social Effects: According to the Program Document (pages 30-31), the fiscal reform program was not
  expected to have any negative welfare effects, and any potential negative social impact from expenditure
  compression would be addressed by mitigation measures built into the program's design: (a) reductions in
  government expenditures that would be necessary to attain fiscal and debt sustainability would fall on capital
  rather than current spending; (b) social spending would be protected; (c) social sector infrastructure would
  be prioritized among capital spending; (d) lower capital spending in Dadukou District (a small district of
  300,000) would not necessarily imply lower employment rates as district workers who would have been
  employed in cancelled investment projects could find possibly employment in the same sectors in
  other locations in Chongqing Municipality (the municipality of 30 million, with 25 other districts apart from
  Dadukou). The ICR has no discussion of any social effects of the program.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
Financial Management: The DPF followed Bank standard disbursement procedures for development policy
loans. According to the Program Document (page 32), the Dadukou District Government's public financial
management (PFM) practices were sound, strengthened by recent PFM reforms driven by the passage of the
new China Budget Law of 2014, the transition to accrual accounting led by the central government Ministry of
Finance, and the use by the district of Chongqing Municipality's financial management information system.

Procurement: The Dadukou District Government follows national procurement laws and regulations stipulated
by: (a) the Tendering and Bidding Law of 2000; (b) the Government Procurement Law of 2003; (c) the
Implementation Regulation to the Tendering and Bidding Law of 2012; and, (d) the Implementation Regulation
to the Government Procurement Law of 2015. In addition, the district government follows the Tendering and
Bidding Regulations of Chongqing Municipality of 2009. Procurement is subject to supervision by the Finance
Bureau, the DRC, and the audit offices. Invitation for bids and awards of contracts are announced in
government websites.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other
   ---


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Chongqing-Dadukou Fiscal Sustainability(P157404)




11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                        IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory               Satisfactory               ---
Risk to Development
                               Modest                     Modest                     ---
Outcome
Bank Performance               Satisfactory               Satisfactory               ---
Borrower Performance           Satisfactory               Satisfactory               ---
Quality of ICR                                            Substantial                ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the ICR (pages 32-34), with some adaptation. Because this DPF was intended
by the central government as a "pilot" for a sub-provincial level fiscal reform program, the lessons drawn here
are relevant to future district-level fiscal reform programs in China.

First, development policy lending --- which aims to support policy and institutional reforms through budget
financing --- can be an effective instrument in advancing subnational fiscal reforms. This DPF provided general
budget support to the Dadukou District Government (the DPF proceeds were on-lent by the central government
to the Chongqing Municipal Government and, in turn, by the Chongqing Municipal Government to the Dadukou
District Government). The reform program objectives were achieved through prior actions and time-bound
outcome targets. Technical assistance, which was the mode for Bank engagement with China on budget
reforms in the past, could deliver knowledge, expertise, and training, but it could not require policy or structural
reform actions like a DPF could. Moreover, the Dadukou District Government has continued to engage the
Bank in policy dialogue about fiscal reform in 2018, after program closing in December 2017.

Second, subnational fiscal reform in China's districts and municipalities will require concurrent fiscal reform at
the central government and provincial government levels, given the complex nature of inter-governmental fiscal
relations in China. The experience with this DPF showed that fostering the sustainability of district finances is
not straightforward because: (a) the central government continues to issue expenditure mandates to
subnational governments, and the mandates are commonly unfunded; (b) district governments have to secure
the approval of the municipal government to allow LGFVs to retain revenues in the district; (c) inter-
governmental transfers are often volatile, complicating medium-term budget planning; and, (d) district
governments are unable to completely separate the commercial from the government assets of LGFVs absent a
central government national policy and guidance on the issue.

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chongqing-Dadukou Fiscal Sustainability(P157404)




Third, a simplified DSA framework would be better suited for future fiscal reform initiatives in other districts
across China. The DPF prepared a customized DSA manual for the Dadukou District Government that was
intended to be comprehensive in its accounting of local government debt. But even with the customization, the
district government struggled to determine: the district government's off-budget liabilities; the LGFV's off-
balance sheet liabilities; and, the district government's contingent liabilities. Hence, the lesson is to use a
simplified DSA framework if subnational fiscal reforms are to be expanded to other districts across China
following the experience in Dadukou District. Toward this end, the Bank is reportedly working with the Fiscal
Academy of the central government's Ministry of Finance to develop a simplified DSA template that could be
used by local governments to support subnational fiscal analysis and planning. The conduct of the DSA by
provincial governments rather than by district governments, where technical capacity is less robust, is also
being considered.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a comprehensive record of the project. The ICR adequately documents the context of the
project (pages 8-11), the results framework (pages 11-12), and the project design (page 12-15).

The assessment of the program's results is evidence-based --- the ICR judges the efficacy of the achievement
of the program objective using the indicators defined in the results framework for the program (pages 17-
18). The ICR also offers detailed narratives supporting these efficacy ratings (pages 22-27). The narratives
are valuable in providing information on the institutional changes associated with the prior actions (e.g., the
constitution of an inter-agency committee consisting of the Finance Bureau, the LGFVs, and the UDICs to
determine annual capital investment caps) and, therefore, on the institutional capacity to sustain the reforms
(e.g., integrated capital investment planning) going forward. However, the narratives also lack details in some
parts (e.g., how district government responded to resistance to reductions in capital investment spending) that
would allow a better understanding of, among others, the political economy of subnational fiscal reform
program.

The analysis of the project outputs and outcomes is candid. The ICR elaborates on both the positive and
negative factors that affected program outcomes (pages 19-20), the Bank's performance (pages 30-31), and
the government's performance (pages 31-32).

Comments by the borrower and the district government on the operation, especially on the complexity of the
DSA and the difficulty of building the institutional and technical capacity for conducting a DSA at the district
level (pages 34-35), will be useful for subnational fiscal reform plans going forward.


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chongqing-Dadukou Fiscal Sustainability(P157404)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                     Page 14 of 14
