     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK:Second Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0021769

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P125952                                   PK:Second Sindh Education Sector Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                  Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52180                                 30-Jun-2017                                        332,555,052.86

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Mar-2013                               31-Dec-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          400,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           361,391,511.03                                              0.00

 Actual                                       332,555,052.86                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz        Salim J. Habayeb              Joy Behrens                   IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 5), the project objectives were as follows: To raise school
   participation by improving sector governance and accountability and strengthening administrative
   systems, and measure student achievement. The statements of objectives in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD) and Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) were identical to that in the
   Financing Agreement.



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK:Second Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952)



   The PDO remained the same throughout the project period. Several key project indicators were revised to
   improve measurability and accuracy, and some targets were also revised upward due to expanded project
   scope; therefore, a split evaluation is not considered applicable for purposes of this ICR Review.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project supported the implementation of the government's Sindh Education Reform Program II (SERP-
   II) over the period 2013-17, through two components. (Note: Component amounts represent Bank Credit
   amounts, not total program costs).

   1. Results based Component (Appraisal: US$ 393.0 million; Actual: US$ 313.2
   million): This component supported ten initiatives that addressed gaps in and/or current poor practices in
   sector management and governance. The release of project disbursements was contingent on the
   satisfactory achievement of Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) in these ten areas:

         Program budget and expenditure management: Preparation of sound budgets for primary and
            secondary education and SERP-II initiatives and ensuring that budgetary releases and expenditures
            are made in full and on a timely basis.
           Annual School Census (ASC): Administration of the ASC for government schools on a regular basis,
            accompanied by strengthened administrative procedures, procedures, and practices, and web-
            based direct reporting by secondary and higher secondary schools.
           Student Achievement Test (SAT): Administration of the SAT on a regular basis, accompanied by
            third-party review to strengthen the reliability and validity of the test results and the responsible use
            and dissemination of test results.
           School budgets: Preparation of school budgets, following transparent, objective, and needs-based
            criteria; and third-party support to the districts for managing and monitoring the flow and use of
            school budgets.
           School Management Committees (SMCs): Stronger due diligence and financial management
            controls; improved communication of expectations, roles, responsibilities, and redressal avenues to
            all key parties.
           School system consolidation: Merging of distinct government schools that share the same building,
            same compound, or are in close proximity and cater to the same local child population into single
            schools.
           School infrastructure development: Investments in (i) the whole school development of schools with
            infrastructure deficiencies, (ii) upgrading of primary schools to elementary schools, and (iii)
            consolidated schools.


                                                                                                        Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PK:Second Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952)



        Incentive- and accountability-based public financing of the private provision of schooling:
          Incremental expansion of the public-private rural schooling program.
        Education management: Appointment of specialized cadres of education managers and school
         headmasters; contracts with performance terms and conditions; induction training, job guidelines,
         management materials and tools.
        Teacher management: Strengthened merit- and needs-based teacher recruitment arrangements,
         procedures, and practices; teacher contracts with performance terms and conditions; induction
         training, job guidelines, teaching materials and tools.

  2. TA Component (Appraisal: $US 7.0 million; Actual: US$ 6.9 million): Funds were to finance important
  technical, advisory, and capacity-building support to strengthen fiduciary, environmental management,
  administrative, and monitoring and evaluation activities. The selected activities aided program
  implementation and performance including the achievement of DLIs.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost

        The entire sector program was appraised at US$ 2,700.0 million, of which the Bank was to provide
         US$400.0 million. The total amount was later revised to US$ 4,821.9 million total, due to increased
         government budget.
        The actual sector program cost during the project period was US$ 4,793.0 million.

  Financing

        The project was financed by an IDA Credit of US$400.0 million, of which US$ 332.6 million
         disbursed.
        US$38.0 million of the IDA Credit was cancelled due to unmet DLI targets and also uncommitted
         amounts for technical assistance.

  Borrower contribution

        The Borrower's sector reform program expenditures were estimated at US$ 2,300.0 million at
          appraisal, with actual expenditures of US$ 4,460.5 million.

  Dates

        March 2013: The project was approved by the Board.
        March 2014: The project became effective.
        June 2017: The project was restructured to adjust the scope of project activities and to revise the
         results framework's indicators and targets. The project closing date was extended from June 2017
         to December 2018 to allow for completion of activities.
        December 2018: The project closed, with US$38.0 million in the IDA Credit cancelled due to three
         unmet DLI targets and also uncommitted amounts for technical assistance.



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PK:Second Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952)




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               As reported in the PAD (page 1), the level of school participation in Pakistan was low in absolute terms,
               compared to the rest of the region and other countries at a similar per capital income level. In 2010/11,
               school participation rates for children in Sindh province ages 6-10 and 11-15 years were 63% and 61%,
               respectively. The percentage of children in these age brackets never attending school (36% and 28%)
               rather than dropping out of school (1% and 11%), despite close proximity to schools and no direct schooling
               costs, strongly suggested that parents from poor households, and parents of girls in rural areas especially,
               were opting not to send their children to school from the outset. Less than average scores on student
               achievement tests also indicate low quality of education, which further contributed to the low demand. The
               low quality of education, provided mostly by the public sector, was attributed to low management capacity,
               limited accountability, and system capture by special interest groups.

               Given the above, the central government adopted a policy of free and compulsory education, with the intent
               to raise levels of school participation. The provincial government of Sindh also launched a medium term
               reform program for primary and secondary education (Sindh Education Sector Reform Program, 2007/08),
               which aimed to maximize gains from current levels of expenditures by improving governance and
               accountability, rather than by increasing inputs. The Bank provided support to this program through two
               Bank operations 2007-2012, including through a results-based approach in which disbursements were
               linked to implementation progress and performance targets. The updated government program - the Sindh
               Education Sector Plan for 2014-18 - continued to highlight improved quality of education service delivery.
               This project continued that approach, while also refining and deepening the areas of reforms. The Bank's
               Country Partnership Strategy for FY2015-19 noted that the Bank would focus on "improving access, quality,
               and learning outcomes at primary and secondary levels," with increased gross enrollment at primary
               schools, conducting of annual student achievement tests, and positive trends in learning outcomes as key
               outcomes to be monitored, although this project did not explicitly focus on improving learning outcomes.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Raise school participation

                             Rationale


                                                                                                                         Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK:Second Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952)



School participation was initially defined by the project as net enrollment rates, according to results from the
Social and Living Standards Measurement household-level surveys; it was later defined by school
participation rate by age, regardless of the grade level of enrollment (to account for prevalence of late-age
entry and inaccuracies in age reporting in surveys) alongside retention rates and transition rates (to account
for incomplete data, drop outs, and the ongoing trend of students shifting from public schools to private
schools).

The theory of change for this objective was built on the understanding that low participation in schooling
stemmed from low household demand due to low quality of service delivery. Therefore, the activities aimed
to improve service delivery, thus addressing demand and increasing participation. The project included a set
of critical governance and management reforms to address the issues of underperformance of service
delivery at the provincial education offices and schools. Activities to improve service delivery included more
timely budgeting and financial flows (from sector level to individual schools); improved sector and teacher
management; improved school management and accountability; more efficient use of and higher quality
school infrastructure; and outreach to underserved communities. It was plausible that improvements in all
these areas would lead to increased demand for and participation in education (with an estimated 8.5 million
students benefitting from project interventions).



Outputs/Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs):

      Program budget and expenditure management: As there were no actual outputs for this DLI, the
         project team provided documentation to confirm that the conditions for disbursement (the government
         approved annual budgets, released funds in timely manner, and made payments against approved
         expenditures) were met.
        Annual School Census (ASC): Five rounds of the ASC were conducted.
        Student Achievement Test (SAT): Six rounds of SATs were conducted for mathematics, science, and
         language subjects in government schools across all districts in Sindh between academic years
         2012/13 to 2017/18, with the last round involving participation of 319,000 students in 6,030 public
         schools.
        School budgets: As there were no actual outputs for this DLI, the project team provided
         documentation to confirm that the conditions for disbursement (districts prepared school-specific
         budgets using needs-based criteria, funds were released per schedule, and there was a review of
         compliance of non-salary expenditures).
        School Management Committees (SMCs): Grants were provided to school management committees
         at 33,493 government schools.
        School system consolidation: Single schools were consolidated into 1,350 campus schools, falling
         short of the target of 1,500, enabling more efficient resource utilization and teacher rationalization.
        School infrastructure development: Needs-based infrastructure was provided to 284 schools, including
         908 classrooms, 1,566 washrooms, and 316 water filters.
        Incentive- and accountability-based public financing of the private provision of schooling: Support
         provided to 804 rural schools through public-private partnerships (of which 565 were newly
         established) in 18 educationally disadvantaged districts; introduction of quality assurance and
         accountability framework.



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK:Second Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952)




      Education management: Filling of 6,299 head teacher positions and recruitment of 957 head teachers
       through a new competitive mechanism, addressing leadership and management gaps in schools;
       development of performance indicators to track head teacher performance.
      Teacher management: Training of 18,032 additional teachers at the primary level, falling short of the
       target of 24,000, in the areas of lesson planning, teaching methodology, and pedagogical content.
      Basic quality standard schools (added at project restructuring): Upgrading of 1,366 schools to meet
       basic quality standards (including adequate teachers, textbooks and learning materials, classrooms,
       and furniture), falling short of the target of 2,500, including the construction and/or rehabilitation of
       1,808 primary classrooms, which fell short of the target of 2,400.



Outcomes

Increased school participation

      The primary level school participation rate (SPR) (ages 6-10 years) increased from 65.1% in 2011/12
         to 68.0% in 2015/16, essentially meeting the target of 69.0%. There were no data available on SPR
         for later years, although the ICR (page 17) suggested that it was plausible that the positive trends in
         SPR exhibited up to 2015/16 continued till the end of the project period, as other data support these
         trends. For instance, administrative data show a substantial increase in student enrollment in the
         public-private rural schools from 55,256 to 303,405 between 2013 and 2017.
        The middle level school participation rate (ages 11-13 years) increased from 65.6% in 2011/12 to
         66.8% in 2015/16, close to the target of 67.7%. There were no data available on SPR for later years.
        The matriculate level school participation rate (ages 14-15 years) increased from 49.8% in 2011/12 to
         55.0% in 2015/16, essentially meeting the target of 55.8%. There were no data available on SPR for
         later years.
        The annual retention rate between Grade 1 and Grade 2 increased from 76.0% in 2011/12 to 87.6% in
         2017/18, surpassing the target of 82.0%.
        The annual transition rate from Grade 5 to Grade 6 increased from 56.5% in 2011/12 to 66.8% in
         2017/18, surpassing the target of 60.0%.
        The survival rate from Grade 1 to Grade 10 increased from 20.2% in 2012/13 to 29.7% in 2016/17.

Improved quality of service delivery

      School accountability improved due to the implementation of biometric teacher attendance monitoring
       systems in 42,383 schools (target: 40,000) and monthly school monitoring, which led to
       reduced teacher absenteeism (and lower prevalence of ‘ghost teachers').
      Schools with the competitively selected head teachers were high performers in the latest SAT round,
       suggesting improved management and quality of learning in these schools.
      The multiple rounds of school census data generated "useful school data for decision making among
       policy makers, school management, and other stakeholders" (ICR, page 20), for example,
       the recruitment of more qualified teachers for science, mathematics, and English was prioritized under
       the new teacher recruitment policy, and a new teacher training module on science and math was
       developed.



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK:Second Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952)




      The number of functioning schools, retention of students in grades 2, 3, and 4, and staffing of schools
       all increased, due to intensified community-led engagement through school-management
       committees (as summarized in ICR, Annex 8; no actual figures reported). The revision of the grant
       funding formula from flat rate to composite rate based school-level indicators (such as enrollment,
       classroom-student ratio, and school level) also helped to improve equity among the schools and
       incentivize the SMCs in taking the lead in increasing enrollment in the schools (no specific details
       provided).
      Also, quality improvements in service delivery have plausibly contributed to increased enrollment in
       underserved communities (rural areas), which increased five-fold from 55,256 in 2012 to 303,405 in
       2017. Accountability was strengthened by incorporating participation in student testing in the
       performance agreements, thus contributing to efforts to improve quality.

However, two DLIs were not met:

      The number of schools upgraded to meet basic quality standards fell short of the target; according to
       the ICR (page 18), the target was not met due to the lack of dedicated project leadership in the last
       year of project life.
      The number of teachers recruited was not met; according to the ICR (page 19), teacher recruitment
       and management policy is a highly political and challenging reform agenda in Pakistan, taking time to
       build consensus among stakeholders. A new teacher recruitment policy was developed and approved
       in March 2018 to institutionalize the system of merit and needs-based recruitment, but only one round
       of teacher recruitment took place before project closing.
      Also, the ICR did not report on the timeliness and reliability of financial flows from sector level to
       schools (though the project team subsequently provided documentation that these disbursement
       conditions were met) nor on whether the funds, once received, were utilized in a timely and productive
       manner by schools.



In conclusion, key outcomes in raising school participation were achieved although moderated by some
shortcomings in school infrastructure and teacher management.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Measure student achievement

Rationale

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               PK:Second Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952)



                            The theory of change for this objective was straightforward, although the objective itself was less outcome-
                            oriented. The key output of capacity building for the student achievement test administration was likely to
                            increase the capacity of the government to assess learning outcomes on a regular basis.



                            Outputs

                                  Six rounds of the student achievement tests (SATs) were administered (target: 6). Tests were
                                   administered on math, science, and language in government schools in all districts between academic
                                   years 2012/13 to 2017/18, with 319,000 students in 6,030 government schools participating in the final
                                   round.

                            Outcomes

                                  The student participation rate in SATs gradually increased over time to 62% and 39% for Grade 5 and
                                   Grade 8, respectively, in government schools in 2018. No baseline data were provided for
                                   comparison. The ICR (page 20) noted that several factors which had affected student participation
                                   (unfavorable timing of assessment during peak harvesting season, lack of interest among students
                                   and parents, and inadequate classroom facilities in many schools creating an uncongenial
                                   environment for assessment) were addressed during the project period.

                                  The findings from each round of SAT were published in annual reports on a dedicated website,
                                   school-specific performance was disseminated through school profiles, and parents received
                                   individual student results.

                                  Based on the SAT results, the provincial government prioritized the recruitment of more qualified
                                   teachers for science, mathematics, and English under the new teacher recruitment policy. Additionally,
                                   a teacher training module was developed based on the SAT findings and training provided to 2,392
                                   science and mathematics teachers.

                                  A test item bank was developed for different grades and hosted on the SAT website,
                                   providing teachers with resources for classroom assessments.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Student participation and measuring student achievement were essentially achieved. The aggregation of two
                            almost fully achieved objectives indicate a Substantial rating for overall efficacy.


                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PK:Second Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
At the appraisal stage, the economic analysis estimated strong returns on investment. Costs were calculated
using public expenditures on education; benefits were estimated based on increases in the number of
secondary school completers and increased wages. The net present value (NPV) of costs and benefits was
estimated to be at US$11 per child, with a benefit-cost ratio of 1.46.

The ICR (Annex 4) presented an updated cost benefit analysis using the same approach. The costs
were calculated using actual education expenditures for the number of students; benefits were estimated based
on education profiles of the working population, lifetime earnings profiles, and actual survival rates from Grade 1
to Grade 10 (the latter included a significant increase in secondary school survival rates for girls). The
annualized growth rates of survival rates (Grades 1 to 10) were 10% for boys and 18% for girls. The net present
value was estimated at US$143 per child, with a benefit-cost ratio of 6.21.

At a project level, the public-private partnership to provide schooling for underserved communities led to
increased enrollments at a cost-effective level (the Government’s per student per month subsidy at US$5.32
under the partnership compared to an average public spending of US$8.67 - US$45.20 per student per month
under the regular government schooling system).

However, there was frequent turnover in project leadership in the Ministry of Education (four different
managers), which slowed the progress of the teacher management and basic quality standard schools activities,
and frequent turnover and absence of capable fiduciary staff, which led to procurement delays.

Based on favorable returns and benefit-cost ratios, but with moderate shortcomings in the efficiency of
implementation, efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK:Second Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952)




* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with the country's education strategy and the Bank's Country
Partnership Strategy for FY2015-19. Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial, as the two objectives were almost
fully achieved. Efficiency is rated Substantial in view of favorable returns and benefit-cost ratios, but with
moderate shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Key reforms areas supported by the project continue to be government priorities and are being continued
under the government's education sector program. Institutional capacity to sustain the reforms through
implementing project activities was strengthened through the DLI approach. However, it is not clear whether
key inputs - teacher recruitment and infrastructure development - will be increased sufficiently to support
increased school participation.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This operation built directly upon the experience of the prior Sindh Education Sector Project (P107300),
  which had substantial achievements in increasing school participation but modest improvements in
  measuring student learning (IEG Review). Initiatives started under the prior operation included sector
  management, school census data, school management committees, school infrastructure, public private
  partnerships, and teacher management. Under the new operation, student achievement tests, school
  budgets, education management, and school rationalization were new initiatives. Lessons learned from
  the previous operation were integrated into the project design, including refinements to the disbursement
  mechanism, continued focus on governance reforms, and increased institutional capacity support. The
  continuity between the previous and new operations also helped to ensure sustainability and political
  commitment. As noted in the ICR (page 6), the Bank had established itself as a credible and reliable
  long-term partner in education and thus continued engagement in the education sector was viewed
  as critical to promoting politically challenging reforms and strengthening the results orientation. The
  overall risk was assessed as Substantial due to external factors but also an unpredictable institutional
  environment - mitigation measures for the latter were effective, including intensive stakeholder
  engagement, communication campaigns, and capacity building. However, there were some shortcomings
  in the M&E design, including in the choice of key project indicators and data sources.



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK:Second Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team was proactive in addressing implementation challenges to ensure that the project remained
 on track with disbursements and achieving results. Supervision inputs were satisfactory, with frequent
 missions and strong mix of expertise. The minimal turnover of task team leaders contributed to continuity of
 dialogue that helped keep the project moving forward. The ICR (page 31) noted that fluctuations in
 Implementation Supervision Report (ISR) ratings were used effectively to draw attention to critical issues
 that required action.

 Key project indicators were revised through a project restructuring to improve measurability and accuracy,
 although the potential problems with the main indicator - net enrollment rate - were documented in project
 supervision reports as early as 2015 but the issue was not corrected until 2017. Fiduciary management
 was effectively supervised, with only minor shortcomings in overall performance.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design monitored multiple aspects of the project, including sector-wide outcomes (school census,
 student achievement tests), verification of DLI achievements. However, there were some shortcomings in
 the results framework. The key project indicators were not fully disaggregated by school level, the net
 enrollment rate (NER) indicator turned out to lack reliability ((a) NER captured only students enrolled in
 age-relevant grades while late entry into the school system was prevalent and the norm; and (b) an
 analysis showed potential inaccuracy of age data in household surveys), Also, as noted in the ICR (page
 28), the M&E design assigned monitoring and data collection responsibilities across subprogram activities
 but there was no mechanism to consolidate findings to monitor project performance as a whole. Lastly,
 there were no evaluative studies in the original M&E design.



b. M&E Implementation
  The shortcomings in the results framework were flagged early in the supervision period (2015) although
  not formally corrected until the project restructuring in 2017. The key project indicator was revised to
  school participation rates (SPR), in order to capture enrollment of the specified age group regardless of

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK:Second Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952)



  the level of education enrolled in. However, the choice of SPR as the key indicator still remained a
  challenge as SPR data would not be available beyond 2017/18, and therefore further indicators on
  retention and transition rates were added to supplement outcome data. Monitoring of sector-wide results
  were carried out effectively through the annual school census, student achievement tests, and biometric
  teacher attendance systems. The use of third party verification of DLI achievements helped ensure
  reliability of data, and evaluative studies were added to the project design under the TA component,
  although not all were completed by project closing. The ICR (page 28-29) noted that lack of
  completed evaluative studies was a missed opportunity for rigorous assessment and knowledge
  generation on the impacts of governance reforms on project objectives, and that M&E arrangements
  could have been better coordinated at the school level as there was some duplication of supervision
  efforts.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (page 28) reported that M&E data were used as follows: (a) findings from six rounds of SAT
  were disseminated to policy makers, schools, parents, and students through online published reports,
  school performance profiles, and student report cards; (b) annual school census data were
  disseminated through published reports and school profiles; (c) school census data were used to identify
  the needs for ‘basic quality schools’ during the restructuring design; (d) SAT results were used to inform
  policy decision on teacher recruitment and teacher training in subject areas of science, mathematics,
  and language; (e) teachers’ biometric attendance monitoring results were used to take official measures
  against high absentee teachers and ‘ghost teachers’; and (f) study findings on viable and nonviable
  schools were used to inform the school consolidation activity.

  In conclusion, in spite of moderate shortcomings, M&E arrangements and implementation were sufficient
  to assess the achievement of objectives and to test the links in the results chain.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project due to minor rehabilitation and civil
   works. The safeguard on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) was triggered. The Environmental and
   Social Management Framework (ESMF) developed under the prior Bank operation was updated
   and included mitigation measures, implementation and institutional arrangements, monitoring requirements,
   and supervision roles and responsibilities. An environmental coordinator was hired to support the
   implementation of the ESMF.

   At project closing, the Bank team conducted an environmental safeguard review and found that the
   upgrading and rehabilitation work completed under the project had contributed to improved environment of




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK:Second Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952)



   schools, although the adequacy of operations and maintenance plans remained a concern. Therefore,
   environmental safeguards compliance was rated Moderately Satisfactory in the last ISR.

   The safeguard policy on Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) was also triggered, due to the possibility
   that school construction activities might interfere with cultural sites. This was reported to IEG by the project
   team (the ICR has no mention of it). The project team indicated that a Chance Find Procedure was defined
   and added to the ESMF, in case a situation arose in which digging led to the discovery of artifacts of cultural
   or archeological significance, but that no such instance arose during the project period.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: Financial management was effectively staffed with an experienced senior manager
   and supporting staff. Accounting records were kept up-to-date and in compliance with reporting
   requirements. There were minor shortcomings noted in delays in budget releases, leading to payment lags
   at various points of the project period. Annual external audits were conducted by the Auditor General of
   Pakistan, with statements submitted to the Bank in a timely manner; however, the ICR does not report on
   whether there were any qualified audits nor on whether financial management was undertaken in full
   accordance with Bank guidelines.

   Procurement: Although procurement arrangements were maintained from the previous operation, there
   was frequent turnover in fiduciary staff, including in the procurement specialist position. This led to delays
   in procurement activities. Measures were taken to strengthen procurement capacity at the project and field
   levels, and while there were no major problems reported in the last post-procurement review, the ICR does
   not report on whether procurement was undertaken in full accordance with Bank guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                 M&E arrangements and
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Substantial
                                                                                 implementation were sufficient to

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK:Second Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952)



                                                                                  assess the achievement of
                                                                                  objectives.
Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 32-34), adapted by IEG:

       A results-based approach using disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) can be effective in
        helping a government move forward with a challenging reform agenda. In the case of this
        project, the disbursement incentive provided strong motivation to the government to follow
        through with difficult policy changes in the areas of school management and consolidation,
        although less so in the highly politically sensitive area of teacher recruitment and
        rationalization. Central stakeholders indicated that focusing on DLIs helped to build
        consensus on shared goals.
       Leveraging the capacity of the private sector can be an effective means to improve access to
        schooling in rural and underserved communities. In the case of this project, an
        established public-private partnership with a performance-based aspect - participating
        in student testing - helped to not only increase access but to address quality of education.
       Country context is an important consideration in selecting key project indicators. In the case
        of this project, the reality that late entry into schooling was common among children was not
        recognized at the time of M&E design, thus the original key indicator of "net enrollment rate"
        was not a sufficiently robust indicator to measure achievement.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  To verify that reforms supported through the disbursement-linked approach are still being continued
  (sustainability), and to explore how these are impacting overall sector efforts to increase school participation.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well organized and results-oriented, with the discussion of achievements strongly focused on
actual results in improving quality of education, rather than simply reporting on whether DLIs were achieved or
not. The theory of change was sound and aligned to development objectives. The quality of evidence had
some shortcomings due to weaknesses in the results framework (as discussed in the ICR Review above);
nevertheless, the ICR drew upon additional sources of data to provide a more thorough picture of project
impact. The ICR's narrative was thorough and supported its conclusions. Lessons were specific and directly
derived from project experience, particularly from the innovative approach of using disbursement-linked

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK:Second Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952)



indicators. The ICR was overall consistent with guidelines, although it did not provide complete information on
safeguard and fiduciary compliance (compliance with the safeguard policy on Physical and Cultural Resources
was subsequently confirmed by the project team) such as whether audits were unqualified and whether all
financial management and procurement was undertaken according to Bank guidelines. Within the larger
context of other favorable criteria, these shortcomings are considered to be relatively moderate.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 15
