     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021776

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P102000                                    GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09)

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Ghana                                      Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-46000,IDA-55490                       30-Jun-2015                                         243,000,033.37

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2009                               31-Dec-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             225,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                              249,995,112.75                                             0.00

 Actual                                          243,000,033.37                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Peter Nigel Freeman        Elisabeth Goller              Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) in the Financial Agreement [FA] (page 5) was to improve the
   mobility of goods and passengers through reductions in travel time and vehicle operating costs, and to
   improve road safety standards.

   The PDO was revised at the time of additional finance (AF) approval of November 4, 2014 to read "to improve
   mobility of goods and passengers on selected roads through reduction in travel time, reduction in vehicle
   operating costs and enhanced road safety awareness." For ease of assessment, the revised objective is

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)



   parsed into the following two parts: (i) to improve mobility of goods and passengers on selected roads through
   reduction in travel time and vehicle operating costs (this is basically identical to the first original objective) and
   (ii) to improve mobility of goods and passengers on selected roads through enhanced road safety awareness.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  04-Nov-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   A – Support to Ministry of Roads & Highways (MRH): a) Integration of geographic information systems
   (GIS) of Road Agencies; b) Organization of development partners’ conference to exchange ideas and
   ensure coordination; c) Preparation of feasibility studies such as improved axle load control and
   strengthening of the Road Fund; d) Capacity building including strengthening management information
   systems and development of a human resource development strategy. Original cost US$ 4.200 million; at
   AF US$ 4.200 million; at project closure US$ 4.127 million.

   B - Support to Road Sector and Educational Entities: Support to the a) Driver and Vehicle Licensing
   Authority (DVLA) to develop improved licencing methods, b) National Road Safety Commission (NRSC) for
   road safety equipment, educational road safety materials, provision of facilities for emergency response
   services and training in road safety audits, c) Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology
   (KNUST) for laboratory equipment, computers, additional classrooms and visits by specialist presenters,
   and d) Government Technical Training Center (GTTC) for classrooms, a hostel and workshop, the setting
   up of a pilot driving academy and the introduction of training in vehicle maintenance standards. Original
   US$ 6.500 million; at AF US$ 6.140 million; at closure US$ 5.238 million.

   C - Improvement of Trunk Roads: a) Rehabilitation of the Ayamfuri-Asawinso Road; b) Supervision
   (including environmental and social safeguards), and c) Capacity building and equipment. Original US$
   64.000 million; at AF US$ 71.640 million; at closure US$ 86.965 million.

   D - Improvement of Urban Roads and Infrastructure: a) Provision of urban transport infrastructure; b)
   Rehabilitation of Burma Camp Road; c) Rehabilitation of Giffard Road; d) Capacity building; e) Supervision
   (including environmental and social safeguards). Original US$ 78.000 million; at AF US$ 95.860 million; at
   closure US$ 79.442 million.

   E - Improvement of Feeder Roads: a) Improvement/rehabilitation of feeder roads; b) Supervision (including
   environmental and social safeguards); c) capacity building. Original US$ 50.500 million; at AF US$ 50.000
   million; at closure US$ 46.763 million.


                                                                                                         Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)



  F - Support to Ministry of Transport (MoT) and other transport entities: Support to a) MoT to make the
  Ghana Railway Development Authority (GRDA) operational; b) Ghana Airports Company Ltd (GACL) to
  carry out studies for the adaptation of Takoradi airport for civilian purposes and to prepare a master plan for
  the development of regional airports; c) Ghana Civil Aviation Authority (GCAA) to develop regulations for
  the aviation industry and carry out studies on aviation sector development; d) Ghana Maritime Authority
  (GMA) for a feasibility study for the improvement of transport on Lake Volta; e) the Volta Lake Transport
  Company (VLTC) concerning the development of landing stages and reception facilities on Lake Volta; f)
  Ghana Ports and and Harbors Authority (GPHA) on the potential to double the carriageway on the Meridian
  road in Tema; and g) the Regional Maritime University (RMU) to improve capacity to provide maritime
  training services for the West Africa region.Original US$ 13.500 million; at AF US$ 13.500 million; at closure
  US$ 12.145 million.

  G - Project Management: Procurement of vehicles and equipment, human resource development. Original
  US$ 8.300 million; at AF US$ 8.660 million; at closure US$ 8.320 million.

  It should be noted that the components were not changed but that there were some changes to project
  activities introduced with the restructurings.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost: The original project cost in 2009 was US$225.00 million. This amount was increased to
  US$250 million in 2014 by adding US$25.00 million AF to fund a financing gap created as a result of cost
  overruns on the rehabilitation of the Ayamfuri-Asawinso road and targeted urban roads in the Accra East
  corridor. The actual final project cost was US$243.00 million or 108 percent of the original amount
  approved. It was 7 percent lower than the total cost at AF because of the devaluation of the SDR against
  the Ghanaian Cedi (the contracts were mostly in the local currency).

  Financing: It comprised a Credit of SDR 150.5 million (US$225.00 million equivalent) [IDA-46000] and a
  further Credit of additional finance of SDR 16.2 million (US$25.00 million equivalent) [IDA-55490]. The
  Credits were fully disbursed.

  Borrower contribution: No contribution was provided.

  Dates: The project was approved on June 30, 2009 and became effective on November 12, 2009. The
  original closing date was June 30, 2015. At AF the closing date was extended by three years to June 30,
  2018 but later further extended for six months to December 31, 2018 due to delays in the payment of
  resettlement compensation for the Ayamfuri-Asawinso road works.

  Restructuring: Two level 2 restructurings occurred. In April 2010, two thirds of the US$3 million allocated to
  Volta Lake Transport Co (VLTC) was earmarked for studies and to purchase engines for ferries operated by
  VLTC. The June 29, 2018 restructuring extended the loan closing date by six months for the reasons
  mentioned. It included a reallocation between disbursement categories and a change in the implementation
  schedule.

  Additional Financing (AF) and level one restructuring: This was approved by the Board on November 4
  2014. The main purpose was to provide an additional US$25.00 million funding to complete the project in
  accordance with the original scope because of the above-mentioned cost overruns. The PDO was revised

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)



   to clarify that mobility improvements targeted project funded roads and not roads for the country as a whole.
   It also introduced a notable change that road safety interventions supported were aimed at improving
   mobility of goods and passengers through enhanced road safety awareness and not at improving road
   safety standards. The AF and restructuring also included the dropping of two studies under component F,
   changes in the cost by component, and changes to the results framework.

   Note: The ten percent increase in funding during the AF was not because of changes to the scope but due
   to a financing gap as a result of cost overruns. In this case, a split rating should be applied because the
   objective to improve road safety standards was dropped and road safety awareness was added to the
   objective of improving mobility. This downgraded the level of ambition of road safety and the respective
   outcome indicator, the fatality rate, became an intermediate indicator (ICR paragraph 15). Disbursements
   prior to the approval date were 46.4 percent and for the remainder of the project were 53.6 per
   cent. Although the Board approved the indicator changes proposed, they were, however, not activated in
   the operations portal and thus the revisions were not monitored during the remainder of the implementation
   period.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
In 2009, when the project was under preparation, Ghana’s vision of attaining middle income status
was underpinned by strengthening the provision of infrastructure services and improving the
country's business environment to sustain broad-based growth. The importance of transport infrastructure
was highlighted in Ghana’s Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy (GPRS II) as an enabler for economic
growth and poverty reduction (PAD, para 2).

Roads were the predominant mode of transport, but the transport sector issues were multi-modal in nature.
According to the PAD (paras 7 to 10), the roads sector received the highest budget allocations and this led
to concerns that this funding imbalance could cause uncoordinated inter-modal planning and the
predominance of roads over other transport modes. The country faced several institutional and policy
challenges in the transport sector that included the need for (i) policy formulation and planning, (ii) the
clarification of the roles of the sector agencies, (iii) a proper regulatory environment for the rail sector, (iv)
better management and financing of road maintenance, (v) the implementation of axle load control, and (vi)
the promotion of private sector involvement. Road safety was a concern and the country launched its
second five-year national road safety strategy in 2006 (PAD, para 24).

Although the development problem described in the PAD had a strong multi-modal and institutional
dimension, this was not reflected in the original and revised PDOs, which focused on mobility improvements
through reduced travel time and vehicle operating costs in the road sector and road safety. It was, however,
reflected in the project components and, an earlier version of the PAD dated May 15, 2009, actually
included an additional objective of "Strengthen the institutional management of the transport sector."
However, this was dropped in the final version sent to the Board.



                                                                                                        Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)



               The country and Bank strategies at project close continued with a multi-modal focus even though road
               transport and safety were important. The Ghana Shared Growth and Development Agenda II, 2014-
               2017 (according to the Bank task team, this is still the latest articulation of transport strategy) sees transport
               as an enabler to economic growth and poverty reduction. According to this document, the main constraints
               for the sector are the premature deterioration of the road network; poor quality and inadequate road
               transport networks; growing traffic congestion on the roads, especially in the urban areas; increasing road
               traffic accidents; a limited and poor rail network, and the declining rail traffic, both in goods and in
               passengers; inadequate facilities at existing sea ports; and the inability to progressively improve
               air transport infrastructure and facilities to meet appropriate international standards to make Accra a West
               African hub and gateway.

               The Ghana-World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY2013-16 (later extended to FY18)
               recognizes transport as one of the sectors to improve competitiveness and job creation, and cites the
               potential for road, rail, air, maritime and inland water transport to open up access to markets through better
               connectivity. The CPS also recommends the promotion of investments targeted at the decongestion of
               urban roads; modernization of existing main corridors linking major regional centers and the capital as well
               as neighboring countries; rehabilitation of major ports and airports; and improving roads to better serve rural
               communities. The CPS's main transport outcome is improved mobility of goods and passengers with the
               related indicator being the condition of trunk roads in fair and good condition.

               The PDO's focus on mobility in the roads sector and road safety were and are highly relevant for country.
               However, the PAD and the country strategies highlight significant other transport challenges, which this
               project was meant to tackle. In addition, the exclusion of the multi-modal and institutional dimension in the
               last minute did not sit well with the components, which included many outputs related to capacity building in
               other transport modes. The concept of improving the mobility of goods and passengers was also not
               defined and the original and revised objectives were both structured around reducing vehicle operating
               costs and travel times with supporting indicators to measure such reductions in the road sector. Because of
               these shortcomings, the relevance of the project's original and revised objectives is rated substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the mobility of goods and passengers through a reduction in travel time and vehicle operating
                             costs.

                             Rationale
                             The Theory of Change (ToC) was not a requirement at the time of project preparation. Based on the
                             information in the PAD, IEG understands that the ToC for the first objective was that the rehabilitation of

                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)



roads and certain technical assistance activities in the road sector, such as the preparation and
implementation of an axle load control action plan, would lead to better road conditions, reductions in travel
time and vehicle operating costs and enhanced capacity of transport institutions. This, in turn, was expected
to lead to improved mobility for goods and passengers.

Outputs:

      Rural roads rehabilitated. Target 52 km, at the closure of the project 52.2 km had been rehabilitated.
         Target achieved.
        Urban roads rehabilitated. Target 14.8 km, at closure 14.8 km had been rehabilitated. Target
         achieved.
        Feeder roads improved (spot improvements). Target 300 km, at closure 462 km had been
         rehabilitated. Target exceeded.
        Feeder roads rehabilitated. Target 250 km, at closure 309.7 km had been rehabilitated. Target
         exceeded.
        Two upgraded bus terminals.
        Axle load control policy action plan. The ICR (paragraph 36) notes that the study recommendations on
         axle load control have been incorporated into the MRH's decision-making process. However, it is not
         clear if axle load control was enforced by project close.
        Studies undertaken for the Ministry of Roads and Highways. These included a review of Ghana's
         tolling policy, a monitoring and evaluation system for roads and a human resource strategy, and a GIS
         integration pilot for road agencies. There is no discussion in the ICR as to the potential outcomes of
         these studies.
        Under component A, the organization of a development partners' conference was listed but the ICR
         does not indicate whether this took place. The TTL confirmed that this was an omission and that the
         conference was held. However, details of the discussion or decisions made at the conference were
         not provided.
        For the Ministry of Transport a public expenditure and institutional review for the transport sector as a
         whole was undertaken but no information was provided on the findings or whether the review might
         lead to any changes in policy.
        The Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Transport Research Center, was
         provided with laboratory equipment, computers, classrooms, an asphalt laboratory and support for the
         graduate training program. Higher learning links in transport technology were established with
         overseas tertiary institutions in Munich and Lausanne.
        At the Government Technical Training Center a four-story classroom block was completed
         and learning materials were provided on vehicle maintenance including a vehicle maintenance
         simulator. This raised the profile of the institution and fostered collaboration with the private sector firm
         Scania, a truck manufacturer.
        A feasibility study for the dual lanes on the Meridian Road in Tema was not carried out. The study was
         dropped because the GoG decided to transfer the preparation of studies and works to funding from
         the China Development Fund.
        Increase the share of road funds to meet 80 percent of road maintenance needs. Not achieved - the
         baseline was 60 percent and no further progress had been made by the time the project closed. This
         meant that there remained doubts over the sustainability of the road system. The management of the
         Road Fund was to have been evaluated. Very little is said about this in the ICR other than an
         acknowledgement under risk to development outcome that the income to the Road Fund did not

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)



         increase under the project and as a consequence the condition of the roads would suffer eventually
         contributing to less mobility for both goods and passengers.

Note: It should be observed that certain outputs related to marine, rail, and aviation have not been included
above as they have no relevance to the original or the revised PDOs as stated.

Outcomes:

      Road Condition: (Note: The condition reports are based on all roads in the country, ICR pages 11 and
         12).
                o Condition of trunk network in good and fair condition. Baseline 83%. Target 88%; at completion
                93%. Target exceeded.
              o Condition of urban roads in good and fair condition. Baseline 35%. Target 50%; at completion
                54%. Target exceeded.
              o Condition of feeder roads in good and fair condition. Baseline 72%. Target 85%; at completion
                75%. Target not met due to restrictions on available government funds for road maintenance.
        Average travel time for the Ayamfuri-Asawinso Road: Baseline 90 minutes. Target 65 minutes; at
         completion 50 minutes. Target exceeded.
        Average time for the Burma Road: Baseline 60 minutes. Target 45 minutes; at completion 45 minutes.
         Target achieved.
        Average time for the Giffard Road: Baseline 40 minutes. Target 30 minutes; at completion 30 minutes.
         Target achieved.
        Average vehicle operating costs reduced (US$/vehicle km): Baseline 0.20. Target 0.17; at completion
         0.23. Target not achieved. Note: These data according to the project team refer to the project roads.
        Rural Accessibility Index for project roads: Baseline 53%. Target 57%; at completion 66.6%. Target
         exceeded.

For this review, IEG understands mobility of goods and passengers as referring to ease of movement of road
users and ease of conveyance of goods and passengers by road. The limitation to roads is justified by the
fact that the PDO includes a reference to vehicle operating costs and travel time reductions and the outcome
indicators only cover the road sector.

The project partially achieved the first objective. The improvement in the urban and trunk roads condition
caused significant time savings on the urban and rural [trunk] roads rehabilitated under the project, which
enhanced mobility for road users on these roads. However, the ICR does not provide evidence if these
mobility improvements occurred in the same way for goods and passengers. The two upgraded bus terminals
enhanced the mobility of bus users and drivers (ICR, para 30). According to the task team, the accessibility
improvements for individuals and communities living within two km from an all-season roads measured
through the Rural Accessibility Index refer to the country as a whole, and therefore the project's contribution
to mobility improvements was relatively small. Mobility for users of feeder roads decreased because the
gravel feeder roads improved under the project deteriorated again before project end because of lack of
maintenance. This caused an increase in the vehicle operating costs compared to the baseline.



Rating
Modest

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)




OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve mobility of goods and passengers on selected roads through reduction in travel time and vehicle
operating costs.

Revised Rationale
The revision of objective 1 consisted in the limitation of its scope to "specific project roads". This limitation
was already implicit in the original objective because the outcome indicator referred to specific project roads.
Therefore, the revised objective 1 was basically identical to the original objective 1 and the outputs,
outcomes, assessment, and ratings were the same. The attempt made in the ICR to articulate the ToC for the
project was based on the revised PDO after restructuring. In this articulation, it was not clear how certain
multi-modal activities were expected to lead to the reduction in travel time and vehicle operating costs.




Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve road safety standards.

Rationale
For the purpose of this review, IEG interprets "improving road safety standards" in the original PDO as
establishing national traffic rules and road and vehicle specifications from a road safety perspective. With this
interpretation in mind, the ToC was that the road safety related activities under the project would lead, among
others, to improved driver and vehicle licensing methods, standardized licensing procedures, permits and
associated revenue collection, improved enforcement procedures, and improved traffic rules. This, in turn,
would lead to the reduction in road fatalities.

Outputs:

      Road Traffic Regulations were enacted on June 30 2015. The Bank's role in this is unclear from the
       ICR. It is important to have up-to-date traffic regulations but their efficacy depends on a good
       enforcement system. No details were provided on the nature or enforcement aspects of the
       regulations.
      Eight road accident emergency response centers were established. These enabled immediate first aid
       to be given to accident victims prior to transfer to nearby hospitals.
      Vehicle driving test grounds at Tema completed and in use. However, the test ground at Kumasi was
       only 85 per cent complete at closure. These driving testing grounds were important to improve the
       safety of driving teachers, new trainees, and road users.
      Provision of road safety equipment for compliance monitoring. The ICR does not specify if this
       equipment is used and compliance improved.

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)




      Extensive road safety campaigns throughout the country, including the production of pamphlets and
       production and distribution of road safety information materials.
      Training of National Road Safety Commission staff in identifying black spots, and conducting road
       safety audits undertaken. This knowledge is essential for reducing road accidents at high frequency
       accident sites.

Outcomes:

      Fatality rate reduced (per 10,000 vehicles): Baseline 22. Target 19. At the AF, the fatality rate had
       reduced to 14 per 10,000 vehicles. By completion it had reduced further to 9.74.

The ICR does not provide evidence that road safety standards improved. The only project output that might
have contributed to enhance road safety standards are the Road Traffic Regulations, but the ICR does not
explain if and how this occurred. There is also no information in the ICR on the attribution of the reduction in
road fatalities to improved road safety standards. Therefore, this objective is rated modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve mobility of goods and passengers on selected roads through enhanced road safety awareness.

Revised Rationale
IEG understand that the ToC for this revised objective 2 was that the road safety awareness campaign and
related activities would enhance road safety awareness. This would make roads safer and, in turn, improve
the mobility of goods and passengers.

Outputs:

The outputs were the same as listed under the original objective 2.

Outcomes:

The project had no outcome indicators to measure enhanced road safety awareness or improved mobility of
goods and passengers on selected roads through enhanced road safety awareness. The ICR reports that
outputs related to this objective, such as the production of pamphlets and production and distribution of road
safety information materials and the organization of safety awareness campaigns, were achieved. The
enforcement equipment, if used, would have also helped to make the public more aware of safety issues.
However, the ICR does not provide evidence on the achievement of this objective or on the contribution of the
project to reduce road fatalities. Therefore, the efficacy of this objective is rated modest.




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)




                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The original objective 1 of improving the mobility of goods and passengers through a reduction in travel time
                            and vehicle operating costs was only partially achieved, and for the original objective 2 of improving road
                            safety standards the ICR provides no evidence. Therefore, the overall efficacy of the original PDO is rated
                            modest.

                            Similarly, the revised objective 1 of improving mobility of goods and passengers on selected roads through
                            reduction in travel time and vehicle operating costs was only partially achieved, and for the revised objective
                            2 of improving mobility of goods and passengers on selected roads through enhanced road safety awareness
                            the ICR lacks evidence of its achievement. Therefore, the overall efficacy of the revised PDO is rated
                            modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                   Insufficient evidence


    5. Efficiency
   Economic analyses were undertaken for the Ayamfuri-Asawinso trunk road and the Burma Camp and Giffard
   urban roads at appraisal, at AF, and at project close. The costs involved for these three roads represented about
   63 per cent of the project costs at appraisal and 60 per cent of the final project costs at completion. While this
   was adequate it would have been better for analysis purposes if the feeder roads had also been included based
   on their average costs for upgrading. The Highway Development and Management Model (HDM-4) was used
   applying a 12 percent discount rate. The design life of the rural trunk road was deemed to be 15 years and that
   of the urban roads 20 years. In IEG's view these assumptions were reasonable and the analysis was
   satisfactory.

   An overall economic rate of return (ERR) for the three sub-projects would have been fairly meaningless because
   the characteristics of the rural and urban roads were completely different, so it was important to compare the
   rural and urban roads separately.

   The rural trunk road from Ayamfuri to Asawinso was 52.2 km long. At appraisal the ERR was 17.9 percent and
   the Net Present Value (NPV) was US$55 million. At AF the ERR was still 15.0 percent and the NPV was
   US$16.07 million, but by completion the ERR had fallen to 1.9 percent, well below the discount rate of 12
   percent and the NPV was negative (-15.275 US$ million). The main reason was cost overruns associated with
   the rehabilitation. Actual costs in 2018 exceeded the 2008 cost estimate by 36 percent; and they exceeded the
   2015 AF cost estimate by 21 percent. The overruns occurred because of unforeseen ground conditions as well
   as higher than expected growth in traffic after preparation of road designs, resulting in a need for design

                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)



modifications. The annual average daily traffic grew by almost 300 percent between road design completion and
commencement of construction. This change in traffic levels necessitated the strengthening of the pavement
structure with an additional 100 mm of crushed rock base. Drainage requirements were also impacted and
updated with additional provisions for slope stabilization (previously not considered critical) to prevent premature
failure of specific cut sections (ICR par. 46).

The urban roads, on the other hand, performed much better. At appraisal the Giffard Road had an ERR of 20
percent and a NPV of US$2.5 million. The Burma Camp Road had an ERR of 15 percent and a NPV of 2.7
million. At AF the Giffard Road ERR had improved to 48.4 percent and the NPV was US$23.82, while the Burma
Camp Road was divided into two sections of 4.86 km and 3.4 km and presented ERRs of 21.7 percent and
60.8 percent, respectively. The NPVs were US$8.76 million and US$24.88 million, respectively. The ex post
analysis showed the Giffard Road with an ERR of 12.9 percent and a NPV of US$2.80 million. The Burma Camp
for its two sections yielded ERRs of 33.1 percent and 40.0 percent, respectively (NPVs US$84.85 million and
US$45.82 million). Traffic volumes were higher than anticipated on the urban sections leading to further savings
in vehicle operating costs and time savings but without the necessity for major design changes.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency: The project was extended twice for a total of 42 months due to
implementation delays. Procurement of major activities was slow and procurement documents required several
clarifications before contracts could be cleared for signature. Anticipated traffic on the trunk road had increased
due to revival of mining activities in the area, while the alignment of the urban roads had been encroached upon
by the time of contract signature and there were issues associated with the location of utilities. Compensation
payments to project affected persons also caused further delays. Additional resources to cover overruns had to
be obtained through AF in 2015. Cost increases for civil works were largely caused by an absence of due
diligence in infrastructure design (ICR par. 64) and unforeseen technical occurrences. The negative foreign
exchange movements meanwhile reduced the funding envelope.

Given the poor ERR for the rural trunk roads and the issues associated with the operational and administrative
efficiency, the rating for efficiency is modest.

*Note that the efficiency rating and point value below is for the rural trunk road only as it was the most expensive
section. A weighted average figure for all three roads would not be useful because of the greatly differing nature
of the roads in question.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      28.00
 Appraisal                                                  17.90
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      34.78
 ICR Estimate                                               1.90
                                                                                       Not Applicable

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)




* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the original PDO, considering the substantial relevance of the PDO, the partial achievement of the
objectives of improving the mobility of goods and passengers through a reduction in travel time and vehicle
operating costs and of improving road safety standards, and the modest efficiency, the outcome is rated
moderately unsatisfactory (3).

Under the revised PDO, based on the substantial relevance, the modest efficacy of the PDO, and the modest
efficiency, the outcome is rated moderately unsatisfactory (3).

The overall outcome rating is moderately unsatisfactory (3). For a split-rating purpose, the disbursements
before and after the AF on November 4, 2014 were 46.4 percent and 53.6 percent.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There are three main areas where the development outcome is at risk:

Insufficient funding for road maintenance: The indicator to measure an improvement in road maintenance
funding was not met because there was no increase in contributions to the Ghana Road Fund during the
implementation of the project. A negative impact on the project is inevitable because of reduced life of the
funded roads due to lack of maintenance. Country dialogue on the shortfall in the Road Fund took place
between the World Bank and the Government but failed to prevent the over-commitment of the Road Fund
due to the funding of too many new capital investment projects.

Level of political and institutional motivation to put in place inter-agency coordination: The project began the
groundwork for cooperation among the various transport sector agencies. However, this platform needs to be
utilized and extended considerably by the GoG through the key agencies involved to lead to proper
coordination and prevent a reversion to the fragmented decision-making that existed prior to the project's
inception. There remains a small risk that some project activities not directly related to inter agency
coordination will fail to be implemented and hence not lead to the expected mobility improvements.

Risk of rising road accident rate: While there has been success in reducing the road accident fatality rate, the
rapid increase in vehicles on Ghana's roads means that additional resources must be invested in road
safety to prevent a relapse in the progress made.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  Because an underlying goal of improving the capacity of transport institutions was not articulated as part
  of the formally approved objectives, the capacity building aspects were subsumed as outputs in the
  results framework, which in several cases involving non-road modes did not easily fit into a structure
  where outcomes were specifically focused on reduced travel time, vehicle operating savings, and
  improved road safety standards.

  More time and resources could also have been focused on the preparation stage (ICR par 93). In
  particular more attention could have been given to the readiness of the procurement and financial
  management teams to mitigate the shortcomings of cumbersome procurement approval procedures and
  inadequate financial reporting. In addition more effort could have been made in respect of the robustness
  of the designs, which revealed several weaknesses once implementation began. Although arrangements
  were made to ensure coordination between the various entities in the transport sector with a stake in the
  project, an important omission was to not ensure the involvement of the Land Evaluation Division in
  project implementation at an early stage, which led to delays in approving compensation payments for
  project affected persons. The rapidly increasing rate of motorization in Ghana and plans to expand
  mining activities were also given insufficient attention.

  As seen below, the M&E framework had also shortcomings.

  On the positive side, the structure used for inter-agency collaboration as a whole was sound because it
  allowed agencies with experience of Bank-funded projects to guide agencies with no or limited
  experience. The risk mitigation due diligence was adequately performed and a good relationship was
  established with the appropriate government officials enhanced by the presence of in-country staff. The
  Bank also gave support to the selection of the appropriate lending instrument and the compliance with
  safeguards, as required. Overall, the quality at entry is rated moderately unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The weaknesses identified in quality at entry manifested in the form of delays during implementation, which
 in turn led to cost overruns. This required close supervision and frequent missions supported by local office
 staff.

 At AF, recognizing the difficulties of inter-agency coordination, the Bank supported dropping the inter-
 agency procurement and financial management teams in favor of contract management specialists and a
 project accountant. The Bank team, however, failed to notice that some changes made to the indicators at
 AF were not being monitored. Although the project team urged the government to increase the available
 funds for road maintenance, the country's macroeconomic situation gradually deteriorated during
 implementation, and this worked against the project team's advice. The Bank team met with high level
 officials of the LDV and GHA to agree a way forward following significant delays in payments of
 compensation to project affected persons, while at the Country Management Unit level, the Country


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)



 Director engaged with the Minister of Finance to ensure that the funds for compensation would be available
 once the bottlenecks had been resolved.

 Nevertheless, given the number of entities within the transport sector that needed attention, the team did a
 creditable job in assisting smooth coordination and this was undoubtedly aided by having a strong
 presence of in-country Bank staff. The Bank fiduciary and safeguards experts gave regular training on
 Bank policies to project staff when it became clear that there were serious weaknesses in the performance
 of these areas and that this was contributing to the delays.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project had no appropriate indicators to measure road safety standards. There was also no definition
 as to what was meant by road safety standards, road safety awareness, and mobility.

 For the road elements, conventional practice was followed and measurable indicators were provided.

 There were no institutional/regulatory related indicators at the outcome level.

 Each participating agency was responsible for the provision of baseline information. Progress was to be
 monitored annually with extensive consultation among the stakeholders. Coordination was to be
 undertaken by the project implementation team.



b. M&E Implementation
  Implementation proceeded in accordance with the planned results framework and activities such as
  progress with civil works, procurement activities, and progress in achieving the project development
  objectives were included in the quarterly project progress reports. Some changes were made at AF
  including indicators related to the Road Fund and the Axle Load Control Plan. However, because these
  changes were not incorporated in the M&E framework, they were never put into effect - the recipient
  continued to report using the previously agreed parameters.




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E progress shared with the stakeholders enabled decisions to be made during implementation
  and provided information on project progress to the decision-makers. For example, it became clear that
  funding would be insufficient and an AF would be necessary to complete the project. The
  M&E also showed where and why delays were being experienced in the areas of construction,
  procurement and administration.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Transport Sector Project was classified as category A for environmental assessment purposes (full
   assessment). Although rehabilitation is usually classified as category B, in this case there was additional
   building construction and 87 households that were to permanently lose their properties. The following
   safeguards were triggered at appraisal: OP/BP 4.01 Environmental assessment; OP 4.11 Physical Cultural
   Resources; and OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. OP 4.36 Forests was added at AF. In addition to
   environmental impact assessments and resettlement action plans, an Environmental and Social
   Management Framework and a Resettlement Policy Framework were prepared and disclosed.

   Some of the priorities flagged as potential hazards to the environment included: mitigating road construction
   operations resulting in dust, noise, and temporary loss of flora; opening or re-opening of borrow pits and
   solid rock quarries; dumping of construction waste and accidental spillage of machine oil and
   lubricants. Social issues identified included: land acquisition and impacts on social values induced by the
   influx of construction-related migrant workers.

   Physical Cultural Resources were not discussed in the ICR but the interaction with the TTL revealed that
   the safeguard was triggered due to the occurrence of graves and burial sites within the rights of way for the
   Ayamfuri-Asawenso road. Since there is no formal mechanism in Ghana for dealing with this situation, the
   implementing agency negotiated with the local communities to fulfill traditional requirements for relocating
   the remains of the deceased from the rights of way to the satisfaction of the Bank.

   In the AF Project Paper the safeguard OP 4.36 Forests was triggered due to a two km forested section of
   road. However, the ICR is silent on the outcome of any mitigation measures in this regard. The TTL advised
   this was an omission. Impacted trees were recorded and evaluated by the Forestry Commission, and
   replacements were planted.

   Safeguard mitigation measures included: prioritizing the use of road alignments with minimal negative social
   and environmental impacts; inserting social and environmental protection clauses into bidding documents
   for works contracts; extensive and participatory safeguards consultations with various stakeholders and
   affected groups; as well as the training of environmental and social safeguards specialists for effective
   monitoring and supervision.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)



   The main issues in practice were inadequate drainage that led to flooding because of a slow response time
   in addressing the problem, and delays in paying compensation to project affected persons, which led to
   significant delays and cost over-runs. According to the ICR (par.63), there was inadequate coordination
   between the Ghana Highway Authority and the Land Valuation Division, which was the main cause of the
   failure to pay compensation on time. Moreover, there was inadequate reporting on the safeguards aspects
   of progress reports, and a general lack of commitment in addressing safeguard issues affecting safeguards
   ratings. The reason was largely a shortage of government funds that could be allocated for compensation.
   For example, the overall safeguards rating was downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory in June 2013 due
   mainly to the outstanding release of funds by the Ministry of Finance for compensatory payments
   for affected people. By the end of the project the final rating rating was Moderately Satisfactory as
   GoG had resolved most safeguard concerns. Details were not provided in the ICR as to how many people
   were finally relocated and how much they were compensated.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Compliance with fiduciary obligations was rated Moderately Satisfactory during the duration of the project.
   Financial management (FM) arrangements for the project were adequate in that they met the minimum
   requirements as per Bank Policy. Although finance-related stipulations in the Financing Agreement were
   followed, concerns were raised by the Bank about the thoroughness of FM reports. As a consequence, the
   Bank demanded an improvement in the quality, content and detail of those reports. In addition, there
   were occasional delays in the submission of acceptable interim financial statements and annual audited
   financial reports.

   For procurement management, procurement delivery was in compliance with the project's financing
   agreement, and the PAD. No ineligible expenses were recorded. An issue, however, was the cumbersome
   approval procedures for invoices and subsequent payments as this caused delays in project
   implementation. This factor, in addition to poor filing practices of contracts, invoices and
   waybills contributed to procurement’s moderately satisfactory rating. The quality and detail of procurement
   documentation had shortcomings, and procurement processes had delays.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                 Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)



                                                                                 The objectives lacked evidence
                                Moderately           Moderately                  of achievement or were only
Outcome
                                Satisfactory         Unsatisfactory              partially achieved. Efficiency
                                                                                 was modest.
                                                                                 Quality at entry shortcomings
                                                                                 due to lack of reflection of multi-
                                                                                 modal institutional and capacity
                                Moderately           Moderately                  building dimension in PDO and
Bank Performance
                                Satisfactory         Unsatisfactory              design shortcomings in the
                                                                                 results framework, procurement,
                                                                                 financial management and
                                                                                 safeguard aspects.
Quality of M&E                  Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Modest


12. Lessons

The following lessons have mostly been derived and summarized from the ICR:

Agencies familiar with World Bank policies and procedures can help build this capacity in
other agencies by supporting them. A comprehensive approach to inter-agency coordination in
the transport sector in Ghana showed that agencies that have worked with World Bank policies and
procedures can successfully support other agencies with little knowledge of such practices.

Rigorous project preparation can reduce the number of challenges faced during
implementation. The issues that delayed the project (very commonly found throughout the region),
such as cost overruns, faster than expected traffic growth, and non-timely delivery of compensation
to project affected persons, deserved more attention prior to project approval.

The early involvement in the project of all resettlement-related stakeholders is important
when the project requires resettlement. In this project, which required involuntary
resettlement, the Land Valuation Division was not involved at an early stage. This delayed payment
to affected people and project implementation. In addition, to involving the Land Valuation Division
early, compensation funds should be kept in an ESCROW account until needed. A National
Resettlement Law would also bring clarity to the existing legal framework and strengthen protection
of affected persons' rights.

Where there are weaknesses in financial management and procurement systems, additional
training may be required. Under this project, the financial management systems were not used
effectively and the quality and timeliness of financial reporting had shortcomings. In addition to
training, while existing systems and procedures are being improved, there may be
opportunities to reduce delays by paying contractors directly, thus avoiding cumbersome in-house
approval procedures of invoices and certificates.




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

On the whole the ICR is generally well-written and fairly candid. However, the level of analysis is not sufficiently
critical. For instance, for relevance of objectives, the ICR cites transport-related parts of the Bank and country
strategies, which highlight the multi-modal challenges, but there is no discussion as to why the PDO is rated
highly relevant.

For the assessment of the achievement of the objectives, the ICR focuses on compliance with outputs and
outcomes, rather than with the achievement of the objectives themselves. The objectives were not correctly
framed, with the original objective of improving road safety standards, which was dropped at the AF and the
respective outcome indicator, the fatality rate, downgraded to an intermediate indicator, not being
evaluated. The incorrect framing of the objectives was mostly likely also the reason why the ICR did not
consider to apply a split rating.

Because the underlying objective of improving the capacity of transport institutions was not articulated in the
PDO, some capacity building aspects did not easily fit into a structure where outcomes were
specifically focused on road sector reductions in travel time, vehicle operating cost savings, and
enhancements in road safety. Moreover, the capacity building aspects were put forward as a check list (either
done or not done), with little emphasis on what they were designed to do and to what extent they impacted or
were intended to impact the development issues addressed by the project. Some transport sector project
achievements were rather awkwardly discussed under project components. There was relatively little in the ICR
that discussed the safety related challenges in the country and the respective project outcomes. On the positive
side, the evidence captured through the indicators was complemented by additional qualitative feedback from
the field visits.

The economic analysis was good and well articulated. There was, however, a minor typo: paragraph 43 of the
ICR said that the design life of the urban roads was 27 years. However, the correct design life shown in the ICR
Table 5 was 20 years. The factors that affected implementation and outcomes were detailed and frank. The
shortcomings in Bank performance were rather glossed over, but could be gleaned from the lessons and
recommendations into which considerable thought had been given. There was no discussion of triggered
safeguards OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources or OP 4.36 Forests. The ICR could have been improved with
more information about the final numbers of people who were relocated and the amounts of compensation paid.

A minor additional point was that the restructuring of April 2010 and the 2015 AF and restructuring were not
recorded in the data sheet (this, however, was likely a system problem).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09) (P102000)




                                                                         Page 19 of 19
