     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project (P114971)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021787

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P114971                                    PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Paraguay                                   Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-79940                                 31-Dec-2015                                           90,105,042.62

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Nov-2010                                31-Oct-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                         90,105,042.62                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan          Dileep M. Wagle              Ramachandra Jammi                IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both the Loan Agreement (LA, p.5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p.5) the project
   development objectives were "to increase the quantity and quality of the provision of electricity services by the
   Borrower, while improving the Borrower’s performance," where the Borrower was defined as Administración
   Nacional de Electricidad (ANDE), the national power utility of Paraguay.




                                                                                                     Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project (P114971)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components with multiple sub-components.

   1. Modernizing the Borrower’s Distribution Management System and Installing an Advanced
   Metering System for Large Consumers (Appraisal cost: US$25.00 million of which US$20.00 was to be
   financed by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD); Actual cost is not reported.)
   1.1. Installation of a state-of-the-art integrated distribution management system integrating technical and
   commercial operations consisting of Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA), Energy
   Management System (EMS), Demand Management System (DMS), Operations Management System
   (OMS) and Integrated Electrical Distribution Management System (SGIDE- Sistema de Gestión Integral de
   Distribución Eléctrica).
   1.2. Installation of advanced remote metering systems for medium voltage customers.

   2. Improving the Performance of the Transmission Network (Appraisal cost: US$96.25 million of which
   US$77.00 million was to be financed by the IBRD; Actual cost is not reported.)
   2.1. Construction of two new substations below the existing transmission lines in the Guajayvi and Minga
   Porá districts.
   2.2. Extension and transformation capacity expansion of ten existing substations.
   2.3. Installation of reactive compensation at the Guarambaré substation.

   3. Strengthening Paraguay’s Electricity Sector and the Borrower’s Institutional Capacity (Appraisal
   cost: US$3.50 million of which 2.75 million was to be financed by the IBRD; Actual cost is not reported.)
   3.1. Improvement of the performance of the electricity sector through: (i) the carrying out of an independent
   institutional assessment of the legal framework, the organizational structure and operational procedures of
   the electric sector in Paraguay; (ii) the development of an action plan; and (iii) the implementation of the key
   priorities established in the action plan.
   3.2. Institutional strengthening of the Borrower’s capacity in investment and project planning and
   implementation through: (i) strategic advice to the Borrower’s Presidency on managerial decisions; (ii)
   consultancy in the implementation of a distribution management system; (iii) strengthening of the Borrower’s
   environmental and social unit; and (iv) strengthening of the Borrower’s financial and asset management
   practices, its internal auditing unit, and provision of external auditors for the Project.

   Revised Components
   At the first restructuring (Restructuring Paper dated December 10, 2015, p.8-10), subcomponent 1.1 was
   revised to undertake only the SCADA and EMS portion of the original activities with an estimated cost of
   US$4.94 million, because of limited time left—even with an extension of the project closing date by 22
   months—to complete all components of the distribution management system. New activities were added to
   be financed by the balance from the original budget from subcomponent 1.1: supply and installation of fiber
   optic network, active communication equipment, wireless meshed network, and digital carrier equipment.

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project (P114971)



  Furthermore, due to the bids received lower than the estimated budget and the savings incurred accordingly
  in the purchase of transformers, new investments were added to subcomponent 2.2: supply of transformers
  for additional seven substations, supply of a mobile substation, purchase of a truck to transport power
  transformers. Finally, the project team and ANDE agreed to replace the three studies originally planned
  under subcomponent 3.1 by technical assistance to analyze ANDE’s organizational structure and human
  resources, and the first activity under subcomponent 3.2, i.e., strategic advice to the Paraguayan
  Presidency on managerial decisions, was deleted.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$125.00 million including physical and
  price contingencies and a front-end fee of US$0.25 million to be covered by the IBRD loan. In December
  2018, the project closed with a total cost of US$98.89 million*. The actual cost was 79.1 percent of the cost
  estimated at appraisal including physical and price contingencies.

  * Annex 3, Project Cost by Component gives the IBRD loan allocations which were revised in the first
  restructuring (please see the paragraph below about restructurings) rather than the project components’
  actual costs. They are not reported in other parts of the ICR, either. Therefore, the actual project cost is
  taken from the Data Sheet of the ICR (p.2).

  Financing: At appraisal, the IBRD loan was estimated at US$100.00 million. At project closing, the IBRD
  financing stood at US$90.11 million. The refund by ANDE of the unused portion of the loan in the amount of
  US$3.47 million was pending at project closing. ANDE refunded the outstanding amount in June 2019, and
  all funds were accounted for as of June 28,2019.

  Borrower contribution: At appraisal, the borrower contribution was estimated at US$25.00 million, of
  which US$19.25 million was for the project activities to improve the performance of the transmission
  network under component 2. Due to the lower actual cost of the transformers, the borrower contribution at
  project closing stood at US$8.78 million. It should be noted that due to the long delay in project
  implementation start, ANDE used its own funds to finance the upgrading of original ten substations, which
  was not accounted as borrower’s contribution.

  Restructurings and Dates: There were two project restructurings:

        First Restructuring (December 10, 2015): The project became effective in February 2012, more
         than 14 months after the World Bank Board Approval, on account of the lengthy internal process in
         Paraguay, which required approval of a specific law in the congress. After effectiveness, the project
         implementation was slow until national elections in April 2013. As a result, at this restructuring, the
         project closing date was extended by 22 months from December 31,2015 to October 31, 2017.
         Furthermore, as explained in the previous section under Revised Components, subcomponents 1.1,
         2.2, 3.1, and 3.2 were amended. This also led to the reallocation of IBRD funds among components,
         which was possible due to savings accrued in component 2 because of bids received with amounts
         lower than the estimated budget (Revised allocations are given in the table at the end of this
         section). Lastly, in order to better monitor and evaluate the outcomes of the project, some irrelevant
         indicators and indicators that measured the overall system parameters in the country rather than the
         project related investments were deleted, and others were replaced or their methodologies were
         revised. Project development objective (PDO) indicators measuring distribution losses, unscheduled

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project (P114971)



          outages and project direct beneficiaries were deleted. The methodology of one the remaining two
          PDO indicators; i.e., improvement of the voltage quality, was revised to count the number of hours
          during which the voltage was in the acceptable range, rather than the number of days. A new PDO
          indicator was added to measure the increase in energy invoiced to medium voltage customers.
          However, the calculation method for the remaining PDO indicator, i.e., increase in energy supplied
          through the transmission network, was later modified to measure the impact of the transformers
          upgraded by the project funds, excluding the originally listed ten substations which were upgraded
          by ANDE using their own resources during the initial long delay of project start. Hence, the target for
          this indicator was revised down due to the different energy flow in the project-funded new
          substations. These changes in the results framework allowed the project team to better and correctly
          capture the impact of the project and they did not result in lowering the scope or the ambition of the
          project. Since this was in line with the Bank Guidance on Implementation Completion and Results
          Report (ICR) for Investment Project Financing Operations regarding indicator changes (please see
          Paragraph 61 Changes to PDO indicators on page 18 of the Bank Guidance), a split rating will not
          be implemented.
         Second Restructuring (September 19, 2017): The project closing date was extended by 12
          months from October 31, 017 to October 31, 2018, resulting in a total extension of project closing
          date by 34 months. This was required to complete project activities related to the implementation of
          the SCADA system, construction of the fiber optic network, establishment of a wireless network,
          construction of two substations and consultancy works for the revision of energy planning and
          human resources structure of ANDE. At the restructuring, IBRD funds were once more reallocated
          among components due to more savings accrued under components 2 and 3, and higher costs
          under component 1 (Revised allocations are given in the table below).　

   Table 1. Allocation of IBRD Funds (US$ million)

                                      First               Second
                         Original
                                     Restructuring        Restructuring
   Component 1            20.00             25.63                30.15
   Component 2            77.00             71.77                67.83
   Component 3             2.75              2.35                 1.77
   Front-end-fee           0.25              0.25                 0.25
               Tota
                        100.00             100.00                100,00
   l

3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Despite a high electricity access rate of 99.3 percent of the population (Word Bank data 2017),
uninterrupted, reliable and high-quality electricity supply, especially among the most vulnerable segments of
the population, has been one of the obstacles for sustained poverty reduction in Paraguay (Country
Partnership Strategy 2015-2018, p.7). Therefore, the project aimed at addressing this development problem
through increasing the quantity and quality of electricity supply and improving the performance of the
electricity utility ANDE. The project area was the Asuncion Metropolitan Area, where 15 percent of the
population lived under poverty line. Furthermore, although Paraguay is a major electricity generator and

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project (P114971)



               exporter in South America, electricity consumption per capita has been very low compared to the
               consumption levels of Brazil and Chile—one third of the consumption in those countries at the time of
               appraisal (PAD, p.3). Hence, the project objective has been relevant to the country conditions and to
               ANDE’s ten-year Master Plan (2009-2018), which is built on three broad objectives: (i) reducing power
               losses in transmission and distribution; (ii) expanding transmission capacity; and (iii) enhancing ANDE’s
               efficiency and revenues. The project was to also support the emergency plan passed by the Congress in
               2010 as a response to the increased outages and voltage fluctuations in the summer of 2009/10 (ICR, p.6).
               Overall, the project objective was appropriately pitched for development status in the country.

               At the time of project closing, the project objective was broadly aligned with the Country Partnership
               Strategy (CPS) 2015-2018. Although the project objective fell under Pillar 2 Poverty, Results Area 2.
               Boosting Pro-Poor Delivery of Public Goods and Services (CPS, p.27-28) and corresponded to Results 2.2:
               Improved Access to Quality Public Services for the Poor, the strategy’s focus was more on the provision of
               improved access to water and sanitation and improving the quality of services through institution building
               activities. On the other hand, the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2019-2023, which became
               effective after project closing, supports the strengthening of Paraguay’s electricity sector through improved
               governance and performance of ANDE under Focus Area One, Objective 3: Improve governance in the
               water and electricity sectors which aims at reducing ANDE’s total electricity losses.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             “to increase the quantity of the provision of electricity services by the Borrower”

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The project had three objectives: (i) to increase the quantity of power supply;(ii) to increase the quality of
                             power supply; and (iii) to improve ANDE’s performance. The original project activities to install an integrated
                             distribution management system and 1,060 medium voltage meters, and to increase transformation capacity
                             in 12 substations by 426 megawatt ampere (MVA) were to directly lead to an increase in the quantity and
                             quality of power supplied by overcoming the bottleneck in the transmission and distribution infrastructure,
                             lowering commercial electricity losses and decreasing the voltage fluctuations. The outcomes of these
                             activities were to contribute to the improvement of the technical and financial performance of ANDE, too.
                             Furthermore, the technical assistance activities to be implemented under the third component were to help
                             ANDE to increase the capacity of its environmental and social unit, to strengthen the financial and asset
                             management practices, as well as internal audits. These activities were expected to improve the performance
                             of ANDE in related fields. While the causal pathways from inputs to outputs and outcomes appear credible

                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project (P114971)



and robust, the original and the revised theory of change do not evaluate whether the choice of activities was
the most appropriate to achieve the project development objectives, and whether the activities were of
adequate scale to generate a critical mass of change.

Achievement of the First Objective

As a result of project activities, 2,773 advanced energy meters for medium voltage customers were installed
against the original and revised targets of 1,060 and 2,388, respectively. This was supported by the
installation of the SCADA system and related 38,200 tele-supervision points, with which the system can now
be better monitored in real time (It was originally estimated that 53,000 tele-supervision points would be
needed. During implementation, it was found that the actual number of points that were needed to be
integrated in to the system was 38,200). Furthermore, the installation of 3,611 km of fiber optic network
against a target of 2,952 km now allows a better communication among substations. These project outputs
led to an increase in the amount of electricity invoiced by 30.0 GWh from a baseline of 571.9 GWh to 601.9
GWh. The target was an increase of 17.2 GWh to 589,1 GWh. This increase in the electricity invoiced can
also be interpreted as a decrease in commercial losses of ANDE, which, together with technical losses, was
34.5 per cent in 2009 (PAD, p.18). The project indicators did not measure the decrease in commercial or
technical losses.

Moreover, targeted 17 existing substations were upgraded with new transformers; and two new substations
were built as planned, increasing the installed capacity of these transformers form a baseline of 791 MVA to
1,592 MVA, substantially achieving the revised target of 1,755 MVA. This resulted in a directly attributable
increase in energy supplied through the transmission network in a year from a baseline of 3,008 GWh to
4,704 GWh, again substantially achieving the revised target of 5,051 GWh.　

Overall, the achievement of the first objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
“to increase the quality of the provision of electricity services by the Borrower”

Rationale
As explained in the previous section, 17 substations were upgraded, and two new substations were
constructed, as planned. In addition, a reactive compensation was installed at the Guarambaré substation to
improve the voltage quality in the system. These resulted in a substantial increase in the installed capacity at
the upgraded substations and the voltage quality improved: the number of hours during which the voltage is
between 198 kv and 242 kv in a year increased from 6,600 (275 days) to 8,729 (almost 364 days). The target
was 8,040 hours (335 days). As such, the project was highly successful in achieving this objective.



Rating

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project (P114971)



                            High


                            OBJECTIVE 3
                            Objective
                            “to improve the Borrower’s performance"

                            Rationale
                            The results framework did not include any specific output indicator to measure the implementation of
                            technical assistance activities. However, the ICR (p.28) states that following project activities were
                            implemented:

                                    Corporate diagnosis study and plan to improve ANDE’s corporate performance were carried out by
                                     specialized consultants.
                                    Consultants supported ANDE in implementing SCADA
                                    Workshops were organized and survey equipment was purchased to support the Environmental and
                                     Social Unit.
                                    Training was given by consultants in financial and asset management practices and internal audits.

                            The results framework did not include any PDO level indicator to measure the achievement of this objective.
                            However, it can be argued that the increase in the quantity and the improvement in the quality of electricity
                            supplied can be used as proxy to evaluate the improvement in the utility’s performance. The increase in the
                            amount of electricity billed to medium voltage users should have a positive impact on the financial viability of
                            the ANDE. Furthermore, the installation of SCADA is to be expected to allow ANDE to better operate and
                            maintain the system.　

                            Overall, the achievement of this objective is rated modest because while the PDO level indicator (on energy
                            sales invoices) could be taken as proxy for financial performance of the utility, there were no other indicators
                            to capture the utility's performance in distribution management, planning, environmental and safety
                            management, etc.　



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Through the installation of medium voltage meters and the upgrading of substations, including the installation
                            of a reactive compensation, the project was substantially and highly successful in achieving the objectives to
                            increase the quantity and quality of electricity supplied, respectively. However, there was insufficient
                            information to measure the achievement of the third objective to improve the performance of the utility
                            through technical assistance. It was partially measurable through first PDO level indicator, which is used as a


                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project (P114971)



  proxy; therefore, its achievement is rated modest. Overall, the efficacy of the achievement of project
  objectives is rated substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

Neither the PAD nor the ICR contains a "with project" or "without project" discussion. There is no discussion in
the documents, either, whether the project is the least cost alternative to achieve the project objectives. The
discussion in the PAD (p.8) about lessons learned and reflected in the project design does not provide
information about which alternatives, if any, were considered during project design.

At appraisal, an economic analysis was conducted for project activities under components 1 and 2. The
economic analysis was typical and straightforward for such electricity infrastructure investments: costs were
taken as the cost of investments, engineering and administration, and operation and maintenance (O&M),
whereas benefits were restricted to incremental savings from loss reduction and total increased energy sales.
Other long-term benefits of increased electricity consumption by consumers were not included in the economic
analysis. The analysis time frame was 40 years. The economic analysis resulted in an economic rate of return
(ERR) of 37 percent for base case and 21 percent for low case, which combines an increase of 20 percent in
project costs, a decrease of 20 percent in additional electricity to be provided by the investment, and a 20
percent increase in the foregone value of electricity sold to Brazil (PAD, p.12). The net present value (NPV)
calculated at appraisal resulted in US$495 million for base case and US$218 million for the low case at a
discount rate of 10 percent.　

Economic analysis was repeated at project closing. Main differences in assumptions were lower than expected
project costs, a higher opportunity cost of the energy used to meet the growing demand instead of selling it to
Brazil or the regional market, and a lower difference between domestic and export prices of electricity (ICR,
p.13). Furthermore, the quantity of electricity supplied increased less than the estimated amount. At project
closing, domestic tariff levels were at a similar level in real terms when compared to the level at appraisal.
Nevertheless, economic analysis at project closing resulted in an ERR of 15 percent and an NPV of US$48
million at 10 percent discount rate. The longer-than-expected project implementation period adversely affected
the economic benefits of the project, too.

Financial Analysis
Financial analyses were conducted at appraisal and project closing. The only difference between the economic
analysis and financial analysis is that the latter includes financing costs and taxes in the costs (ICR, p.33). The
calculations show that the financial rate of return of 34 percent at project closing was higher than 24 percent
calculated at appraisal, whereas the NPV of US$70 million was at project closing was markedly lower than the
NPV of US$190 million calculated at appraisal.




                                                                                                       Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project (P114971)



Operational and Administrative Efficiency
There were major shortcomings in the operational and administrative efficiency of the project. Because of the
lengthy legal approval process of the loan agreement in Paraguay, the elections held in April 2013 and the time
required to complete the ongoing project activities, the project closing date was extended by 34 months. As
explained under economic analysis above, this had adversely affected the ERR and NPV figures at project
closing. Furthermore, the project components and indicators had to be restructured to improve the project
design and monitoring and evaluation arrangements for better capturing project outcomes and the achievement
of the objectives. Until early 2015, the project implementing unit did not have a dedicated manager and there
were no clear action plans prepared (ICR, p.15). Lack of sufficiently trained personnel in ANDE to carry out
procurement and fiduciary activities according to relevant World Bank guidelines was another factor adversely
affecting project’s efficiency. These shortcomings required the World Bank project team to assume a more
active role in project implementation through direct support to ANDE.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      96.80
 Appraisal                                                  37.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      97.80
 ICR Estimate                                               14.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Although the project objectives are highly relevant to country context in Paraguay since it is directly related to
poverty reduction, especially in rural areas, the Bank strategy at the time of project closing focused on water
and social sectors more than the electricity sector. Therefore, the relevance of project objectives is rated
substantial. The project was substantially successful in achieving its objectives to increase the quantity and to
improve the quality of electricity supplied in the project area. The project partially achieved its objective to
improve the performance of the electricity utility, ANDE. Overall, efficacy is rated substantial. The efficiency of
the project is rated modest, mostly because of the shortcomings in operational and administrative efficiency,
such as long delays, project design and M&E arrangement issues, and lack of capacity on the borrower side to
implement the project. Overall, the project outcome is rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project (P114971)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

A deterioration of the financial viability of ANDE and potential corporate governance issues may
pose a low risk to the development outcome. Currently, ANDE’s financials are sound. Following the tariff
adjustment in March 2017, ANDE had a net profit after tax and interest of US$67.5 million and US$97.8
million in 2017 and 2018, respectively. However, although ANDE is an autonomous and decentralized public
institution, it is a government institution and is subject to tariffs determined by the government. In the future, if
the government follows populist policies and tariffs are not sufficiently increased to cover ANDE’s increasing
operating costs, the financial condition of ANDE might deteriorate and this might have an adverse impact on
the sustainability of the project’s development outcome.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The objectives were strategically relevant to the country context, but they were not clearly stated,
  especially the third objective to improve the performance of ANDE. The theory of change was robust for
  the first two objectives to increase the quantity and improve the quality of electricity supply, whereas a
  direct link could not be established between the project activities and the objective to improve ANDE’s
  performance, nor did exist any indicators to measure the achievement of this objective. Since the original
  indicators were difficult to track and measure, they were revised in the first restructuring (Restructuring
  Paper dated December 10, 2015, p.6). The project was designed to address the priorities of the country.
  However, the project components had to go through a revision because of a long delay after approval
  caused by the lengthy internal approval process in Paraguay, which was a risk not identified at appraisal.
  Lessons learned and reflected in the project design are briefly and generically explained in the PAD;
  therefore, it is not clear how the project benefited from lessons learned in similar projects in other
  countries and recent projects in Paraguay (PAD, p.8).

  An economic analysis conducted at appraisal was adequate for such an investment although project
  benefits were restricted to incremental revenues from increased billing and sale of additional electricity
  but did not include other economic benefits. Technical aspects of the project were sound and the
  equipment and technology to be used in the project were sector standards. The project being ANDE’s
  first project funded by the World Bank, training　was　given to ANDE’s staff on the World Bank’s
  financial management procedures, and fiduciary arrangements were in place to ensure compliance with
  the World Bank financial management guidelines during project implementation (PAD, p.13-14). Despite
  detailed implementation arrangements being in place (PAD, p.23-34), the legal framework under which
  the ANDE would execute this project was not adequately incorporated into the project design; ANDE’s
  cumbersome operational and financial processes, since it operates as a government institution but not
  like a state-owned economic enterprise, caused delays in project implementation (ICR, p.20). Risks
  related to ANDE’s project implementation and procurement capacity, which materialized during project
  implementation, and their mitigation measures were among the risks identified in detail during project
  management (PAD, p.35-39). Relevant safeguards policies were triggered at appraisal.



                                                                                                         Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project (P114971)



  Overall, the quality of entry is rated moderately unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 There were 16 supervision missions during project implementation. Due to lack of institutional capacity of
 ANDE to implement the project and the absence of exclusively dedicated project manager and clear action
 plans, supervision missions assumed a very active role in project implementation (ICR, p.15). Bank
 supervision led to the appointment of a dedicated project implementing unit (PIU) manager and full-time
 qualified personnel in 2015 (ICR, p.15). As a result, PIU’s performance improved and project
 implementation accelerated (ICR, p.18).　

 After a long initial delay in project implementation, the project team restructured the project to better
 capture the impact of the intervention and to monitor the achievement of the outcomes (Please see First
 Restructuring in Section 2.e). Despite an improvement in the project’s monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
 arrangements at this restructuring, the absence of indicators capturing the achievement of the third
 objective to improve ANDE’s performance was not corrected (ICR, p.12).　

 Supervision of fiduciary and safeguard aspects was adequate. Supervision of project’s financial
 management was facilitated by the presence of a Bank fiduciary team in the region. The project team
 closely supervised procurement activities, which were mostly carried out in compliance with the World
 Bank guidelines, and intervened when there were issues in safeguards compliance: the project team was
 actively involved in addressing the non-compliance with the environmental safeguard during the
 construction of the Minga Pora substation, one of the two new project-funded substations.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Project objectives were not clearly defined, especially the third objective to improve ANDE’s performance.
 Theory of change for the first two objectives was robust. Original indicators were specific and mostly
 measurable. However, there were irrelevant indicators, such as reduction in service interruption, which is
 related to reliability of electricity supply, and there was no outcome or intermediate level indicator to capture
 the achievement of the third objective. Some project development level (PDO) indicators were designed to
 measure the system-wide changes, not the impact of the project in the project area. As the borrower,

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project (P114971)



 ANDE was responsible from M&E, and the M&E arrangements were adequately well-embedded
 institutionally.　



b. M&E Implementation
  The weaknesses in the M&E framework were mostly corrected at the first restructuring in December
  2015. Irrelevant indicators were deleted and indicators which did not capture project’s impact were
  revised; however, no indicator was added to the results framework to directly capture the achievement of
  the third objective. This deficiency continued until project closing. ANDE monitored and shared project
  outputs and intermediate results, as planned in the M&E design (ICR, p.16). ANDE’s regional and
  headquarter offices provided project implementation data to project implementing unit to monitor project
  progress and the achievement of project objectives. ANDE has adequate infrastructure, which is
  strengthened with the installation of SCADA and tele-supervision points, to sustain M&E functions and
  processes after project closing.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were adequately communicated to the government and the World Bank project team. They
  were used to restructure project components and indicators to better capture the achievement of project
  outputs, outcomes and objectives. However, absence of relevant indicators hindered the evaluation of
  the achievement of the third objective. M&E data was sufficiently used to provide evidence for the
  achievement of the outcomes related to the first and second objectives to increase the quantity and
  quality of electricity supply.

  The project had moderate shortcomings in design and implementation, but overall M&E arrangements,
  especially after the restructuring in December 2015, were generally sufficient to assess the achievement
  of the objectives and test the links in the results chain.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and triggered
   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11),
   Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): All project investments were expected to pose small-scale
   direct and reversible environmental and social impacts (PAD, p.15). An Environmental and Social
   Management Framework (ESMF) and Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) for the
   existing and new substations were prepared before approval and disclosed in Paraguay and in the World
   Bank’s Infoshop between August and October 2010. Compliance with this safeguard was supervised by

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project (P114971)



  ANDE with the support of two dedicated consultants. Supervision results were reported bimonthly. The
  project was mostly in compliance with this safeguard; however, there were challenges in securing
  compliance with environmental and social safeguards during the construction of the two new substations.
  The reasons were the low environmental management capacity of the contractor, which required the project
  team’s involvement to support ANDE address this issue (ICR, p.40) Under component 3, the project funded
  activities to strengthen ANDE’s environmental social management capacity; however, “[t]he level of
  [environment and social] management required by the World Bank was considered high against the
  prevailing sector standards in Paraguay” (ICR, p.21).

  Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): The Indigenous Peoples Plans were prepared during project
  implementation and disclosed in the country and the World Bank’s Infoshop but were not implemented
  because indigenous people were not affected by project activities (ICR, p.18).

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): Two resettlement action plans (RAPs) were prepared for the
  construction of two new substations. The RAP for one of the new substations was not implemented,
  because the substation was constructed on land owned by ANDE. Other RAP was implemented in
  compliance with the safeguard policy. A grievance redress mechanism was effective in resolving claims
  (ICR, p.40).

  Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11):
  The ICR did not provide information about the implementation and results of these three safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management
  ANDE was the primary borrower of the loan, which was guaranteed by the Government of Paraguay, and
  responsible for the financial management of the project. Interim and annual financial reports were mostly
  submitted on time. Audited financial statements were unqualified and they were acceptable to the World
  Bank. Financial arrangements were in compliance with the World Bank guidelines; however, at project
  closing in October 2018, the final audit report was not received by the World Bank and US$3,473,166 of
  the unused loan amount was not refunded by ANDE. In June 2019, ANDE submitted the final audit report,
  and refunded the unused loan amount. All IBRD funds were accounted for at the time of this review.

  Procurement
  Procurement was implemented in accordance with the Work Bank procurement guidelines. However, lack
  of coordination among different departments of the ANDE, especially during the early stages of project
  implementation, resulted in longer contract processing times. Until 2015, the project implementing unit
  (PIU) did not have trained personnel to carry out procurement (ICR, p.15). The World Bank project team
  had to closely monitor the procurement process to accelerate contracts’ processing and ensure
  compliance with the World Bank guidelines (ICR, p.18). After the appointment of a dedicated manager to
  the PIU in 2015, performance of the PIU, including procurement activities, improved substantially.
  Training on World Bank procurement rules was given to the personnel of the PIU. International bidding
  allowed non-traditional providers, i.e., providers that have not traditionally provided equipment and services
  in this sector or in the region, to participate in the bidding process, which required closer supervision (ICR,
  p.18).


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project (P114971)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The primary purpose of the SCADA system and fiber optic network installed under the project was to
   improve ANDE’s performance in monitor the electricity network. However, the fiber optic network will now
   allow the national communications company, Compañia Paraguaya de Comunicaciones, to improve
   communications in the country, which is expected to have a positive impact on the quality of services in
   health, education and security (ICR, p.14).



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                  Despite some shortcomings in
                                                                                  design and implementation, the
                                                                                  M&E system was generally
Quality of M&E                  Modest                  Substantial               sufficient to assess the
                                                                                  achievement of the objectives
                                                                                  and test the links in the results
                                                                                  chain.
Quality of ICR                  ---                     Modest


12. Lessons

First lesson was selected from the ICR with some adaptation of language. Second lesson was
derived from the ICR.

If internal approval processes necessary for project effectiveness and the legal framework
under which the project implementing agency will execute the project are not fully taken into
consideration and incorporated into project design, project implementation can face serious
delays and require a closer supervision by the World Bank project team. The project became
effective 14 months after it was approved by the World Bank Board, because a law had to be
passed by the parliament in Paraguay. Furthermore, being a government institution, but not a state-
owned economic enterprise, ANDE had complex and cumbersome operational and financial
processes. This manifested itself in slow processing of contracts and inadequate monitoring of

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project (P114971)



project activities, including safeguard policies. As a result, the World Bank project team had to
supervise the project implementation more closely than such a project would require with a more
flexible and agile project implementing agency experienced in executing projects according to the
relevant World Bank guidelines.

Proactivity of the project team in revising the results framework based on the findings during
early stages of project implementation will help better capture the achievement of the project
objectives. In this project, the original results framework included indicators which were not
directly related to the achievement of the project objectives. Furthermore, other indicators were
designed to measure the system wide changes, not the changes caused by project intervention.
Also, baseline figures and targets for some indicators needed to be revised to capture the full impact
of the project. The restructuring resulted in some indicators being dropped, others being revised
and new ones being added, reflecting different and better measures of the project’s achievement.
After the revision, these indicators were better able to encompass outcomes related to the first and
the second objectives (though, unfortunately, for the third objective, no new PDO indicator was
introduced to capture improvements in the performance of ANDE)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise and candid in presenting the shortcomings in project design, results framework and project
implementation. The discussion of theory of change is adequate. The narrative is detailed and internally
consistent and supports the ratings with available evidence. It mostly follows the Bank Guidance.　

On the other hand, although the lessons are useful and supported by evidence in the ICR, they are fairly
general and not all linked to specific events or actions. Secondly, the ICR fails to provide information on three
safeguard policies (out of six) which were triggered at appraisal. It should be mentioned also that the project’s
actual component costs are not reported. Finally, given that key outcome indicators were revised in the first
restructuring, the ICR does not provide an explanation why a split rating was not implemented.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project (P114971)




                                                                                Page 16 of 16
