     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: PAF II (P105860)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021814

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P105860                                  NP: PAF II

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Nepal                                    Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 COFN-C1200,COFN-C1380,IDA-               30-Sep-2012                                        244,355,012.92
 49220,IDA-H3370,IDA-H6720,IDA-
 H8570,TF-99274

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Dec-2007                              31-Dec-2018

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                        246,263,385.11                                            0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally               John R. Eriksson            Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   This project was the second phase of the Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF) which was launched in 2002 as a
   community-driven development (CDD) program for addressing the related problems of rural poverty and
   social exclusion in Nepal.



                                                                                                Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: PAF II (P105860)



   The Project Development Objective (PDO) stated in the Project Appraisal Document (para 15) was identical
   to the one stated in the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 5) and aimed to:

   "improve living conditions, livelihoods and empowerment among the rural poor, with particular
   attention to groups that have traditionally been excluded by reasons of gender, ethnicity, caste and
   location."




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project was supported by the following five components:



   1. Small-Scale Village and Community Infrastructure (appraisal cost: US$34.6 million, first additional
   financing (AF): US$28.5 million, second AF: US$15.7 million, actual cost: US$71.25 million). This
   component aimed to finance small investments in infrastructure and services demanded by community
   organizations (COs) formed by PAF under Component 4.

   2. Income Generating Sub-Projects (appraisal cost: US$40.3 million, first AF: US$21.66 million,
   second AF: US$29.1 million, actual cost: US$100.31 million). Matching grants would be provided to
   self-selected groups of poor and excluded people for income-generation activities, based on objective
   criteria including ethnicity, caste, gender and poverty levels. Beneficiaries would contribute about 10% of
   the sub-project cost in cash.

   3. Innovations and Special Programs (appraisal cost: US$9.6 million, first AF: US$3.07 million,
   second AF: US$9.5 million, actual cost: US$19.78 million). An innovations window would support
   proposals meriting special consideration owing to exceptional needs in a given context, or demonstrating
   innovative ways to improve livelihoods development and reach targeted groups.

   4. Capacity Building and Implementation Support (appraisal cost: US$19 million, first AF: US$8.7
   million, second AF: US$14.5 million, actual cost: US$42.04 million). This component aimed to improve
   capacity to implement PAF projects through partner organizations (POs), and to support implementing
   capacity of PAF. It included the following six sub-components: (i) social mobilization of community groups;
   (ii) capacity building for local bodies; (iii) capacity building for target groups engaged in income generating

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NP: PAF II (P105860)



  activities; (iv) support to rural and community finance; and (v) information, monitoring and evaluation
  (M&E).

  5. Project Management, Planning and M&E (appraisal cost: US$5.04 million, first AF: US$3.07
  million, second AF: US$11.2 million, actual cost: US$42.04 million). To finance PAF staff and agency
  operating expenses, including financial, procurement and environmental management and audits.



  Revised Components.

  1. At the time of the second AF in 2013, the name of Component 3 was changed from “Innovation and
  special programs” to “Product development, market linkages and pilots”, to better describe the innovative
  activities
  proposed under the AF. This component under the revised name aimed to support COs that were more
  advanced through the pocket area approach and to pilot-test the PAF model in a peri-urban setting. The
  name of Component 5 “Administration of PAF II” was changed to “Project management, planning and
  M&E”.

  2. In response to a severe earthquake in 2015, funds were reallocated among the components at the 2016
  restructuring. Under Component 1 and 2, a sub-component was added to each, to specifically target
  earthquake-hit areas. Under Component 4, two sub-components were added for social mobilization of
  affected COs and skills development for earthquake recovery needs. These additional sub-components
  were co-financed by IDA (75%) and IFAD (25%). Under Component 5, a sub-component was added to
  strengthen technical support for after-earthquake related needs. A sub-component on knowledge
  management financed by IFAD was also added.

  3. During the 2017 restructuring, funds were reallocated among components to adjust the outstanding
  needs for the remaining period. Similarly, the proportions of co-financing for the earthquake related sub-
  components were adjusted to address the financing needs of the remaining period (IFAD 75% and IDA
  25%).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The original total project cost was expected to be US$109 million. The actual cost reported
  by the ICR (p. 2) was US$259.59 million. The difference was mainly due to receiving two IDA additional
  financing as well as funding through the Food Crisis Response Trust Fund (more details below).



  Financing. The project was originally financed through an IDA Grant worth US$100 million. Two AFs were
  approved during implementation, the first was for US$65 million and the second was for US$80 million. The
  project also received US$10 million from above-mentioned Trust Fund at the first AF. The International
  Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) contributed a total of US$9.0 million in co-financing funds. The
  total cumulative approval amount was US$264 million. According to the ICR (Annex 3 and p. 2) the total
  cumulative disbursed amount at completion was US$253.09 million, of these US$99.47 were from the
  original Grant, US$63.43 million from the first AF, US$73.37 million from the second AF, US$10 million from


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  NP: PAF II (P105860)



the Trust Fund, and US$6.82 million from IFAD. In a further communication, the project team explained that
"the final amount of total disbursement at the end of the closing of Grace Period was 259.91 million. Only
US$2.89 million of IDA (99 % disbursed) and US$1.2 million of IFAD (87 % disbursed) were undisbursed,
and refunded to the IDA and IFAD."



Borrower Contribution. The Government of Nepal was expected to contribute 1% of the original Grant
amount and beneficiaries were expected to contribute 8% of the original Grant. These contributions were
expected to be in cash for the Government amount and in-kind for beneficiaries. The ICR (p. 2) reported
that that the borrower was expected to contribute US$21 million. At completion the total amount contributed
was US$6.5 million.




Dates. The project was approved on December 6, 2007. It became effective on March 19, 2008 and was
expected to close on September 30, 2012. The actual closing date was six years later on December 30,
2018. The later than expected closing was due to receiving additional financing and scaling up project
activities. The Mid-term Review was conducted on May 13, 2010 compared to a planned date on
September 2010. The project was restructured five times all Level 2 restructuring.

The first restructuring was on June 2, 2011, when the cumulative amount disbursed was US$98.49 million,
in order to approve an Additional Financing (AF) worth US$65 million of IDA grant and additional US$10
million from Food Price Crisis Response Trust Fund. The objective was to expand the project area, scale up
targets, scale up income generation activities under Component 2 to address Food Price Crisis, and revise
the Results Framework (RF).

The second restructuring was on June 5, 2013, when the cumulative amount disbursed was US$138.80
million, in order to approve an Additional Financing worth US$80 million of IDA grant. The objective was
to expand the project area, scale up targets, and change the name of Component 2 to pilot pocket area and
peri-urban activities.

The third restructuring was on June 25, 2014, when the cumulative amount disbursed was US$162.80
million, in order to change in closing date of first AF and reallocate funds between disbursement categories.
The objective of these changes was to fully utilize the balance of the first AF.

The fourth restructuring was on February 12, 2016, when the cumulative amount disbursed was US$208.91
million, in order to revise the RF, change in components and cost, change in closing date of second AF, and
reallocate funds between disbursement categories. The objective of these changes was to add activities to
address the needs of the earthquake impacted areas.

The fifth restructuring was on November 30, 2017, when the cumulative amount disbursed was US$236.26
million, in order to change components and cost reallocation between disbursement categories. The
objective of these changes was to fully utilize the balance of the second AF.




                                                                                                Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: PAF II (P105860)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. With an average GDP per capita of US$270 in 2005, Nepal was the poorest country
in South Asia and the twelfth poorest in the world. The poverty rate in rural areas stood at 35% compared to
10% in urban centers, and evidence suggested that inequality and regional disparities were
increasing. Inequality was partly due to a bias in public expenditures in the past which privileged ruling
elites and urban centers; in addition to longstanding patterns of gender, ethnic and caste-based exclusion.
The country also experienced a decade marked by violent conflict that ended in 2006. Everywhere in the
country, ethnic minorities, lower caste communities and women (especially female headed households) lag
seriously behind in terms of incomes, assets and most human development indicators. In 2002, the Poverty
Alleviation Fund (PAF) was launched as a community-driven development (CDD) instrument for addressing
the related problems of rural poverty and social exclusion. Building on the lessons and success of the first
phase, the second phase was launched with scaled up coverage to reach 75 districts or 30% of the rural
population.

Relevance of Objectives at Appraisal. Objectives were in line with the Bank's November 2003 Country
Assistance Strategy for Nepal (CAS), which was in turn was aligned with Nepal's PRSP and the
Government's Tenth Five-Year Plan (2002-2007). The CAS identified PAF as a promising instrument for
targeted support to achieve rural poverty reduction and social inclusion objectives. Objectives were also in
line with the Bank's January 2007 Interim Strategy Note (ISN) which prioritized the inter-related goals of
inclusion, state building and growth. Objectives were also in line with the development priorities of the
Government of Nepal especially the need to better target interventions towards poor, marginalized and
excluded groups, and to engage these beneficiaries directly both in priority-setting and implementation of
investments intended to serve them.



Relevance of Objectives at Completion. Objectives became less relevant at completion due to a shift in
the Government priorities. The Government became focused on investments in economic, physical and
social infrastructures to promote economic progress and help Nepal become a middle-income country by
2030. The Bank’s Nepal Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (2019–2023) highlighted three focus areas
for engagement: (i) public institutions; (ii) private-sector led jobs and growth; and (iii) inclusion and
resilience. However, PAF and CDD projects were removed from the latest CPF reflecting a decrease in
relevance. Furthermore, towards completion Nepal moved towards a relatively decentralized federal
governing model which was not compatible with the more centralized mode of operation of the project (ICR,
para 19).



The statement of objectives was focused and included a clear connection to higher level objectives,
namely rural poverty reduction and social inclusion.




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      NP: PAF II (P105860)



               While the project remained consistent with the Bank’s strategy throughout implementation, objectives
               became less relevant at completion as Government priorities changed. Objectives also were not compatible
               with the federal governing system adopted by the Government. Therefore, the relevance of Objectives is
               rated as Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             PDO: to improve living conditions, livelihoods and empowerment among the rural poor, with particular
                             attention to groups that have traditionally been excluded by reasons of gender, ethnicity, caste and location.

                             The PDO as stated includes the following four sub-objectives:
                             (i) improve living conditions;
                             (ii) improve livelihoods;
                             (iii) improve levels of empowerment; and
                             (iv) reach the marginalized population.


                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The theory of change is the relationship between activities, outputs from those activities
                             and the final outcome (to improve living conditions, livelihoods and empowerment among the rural poor). In
                             this case change is facilitated by a number of critical elements including: the possibility of providing direct
                             funding to community level institutions under the current political setting, ability and willingness
                             of marginalized population to take advantage of the opportunities created by the project, Budget allocation
                             and staffing of local governments allows for improving rural infrastructure services to compliment project
                             activities; Private companies and service providers recognize economic opportunities aimed at market
                             linkages for income generation activities promoted by the project.

                             To improve living conditions and livelihoods the project would finance small-scale village and community
                             infrastructure, income generating sub-projects, and support development of products and market linkages.
                             These activities were expected to create and improve community infrastructure, support income-generating
                             activities, develop local business and market linkages. This would result in improved access and use of
                             services and improved market linkages. As a result, beneficiaries would have better access to infrastructure
                             and their income would improve.

                             To improve levels of participation and empowerment, the project would support community level institution
                             building, capacity building and participatory decision making, and establish effective targeting to reach out to
                             the marginalized population. These activities were expected to improve local participation in decision making,

                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NP: PAF II (P105860)



local prioritization of demands through participatory decision making at the community level, and participation
of marginalized population. This would result in community and individual empowerment and improved levels
of enhanced institutional capacity for integrated resources management. As a result, beneficiaries would have
better participation and empowerment, and marginalized populations would be reached.

The long-term impact of the project would be alleviation of rural poverty, and sustainable and inclusive
economic growth.

Overall, the stated activities were logical and had clear causal links to the PDO.

Objective 1

To improve living conditions of the targeted beneficiaries in project areas.



Outputs



The following outputs were reported in the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.

      317,404 households benefited from increased access to community infrastructure compared to an
       original target of 15,000 and formally revised target of 164,000 (target significantly exceeded).
      4,449 infrastructure sub-projects completed (target: 4000) with target community participation,
       according to agreed design and quality standards (target exceeded). Sub-projects mostly consisted of
       water supply and sanitation, irrigation, access to rural roads, rural energy and community building.
      69% of infrastructure sub-projects completed with functional O&M system (target 70%, almost fully
       achieved).
      219 PAF supported Infrastructures were rehabilitated in earth quake-impacted areas (target: 256).



Outcome

The PDO Outcome indicator 1, showing that 317,404 households benefited from increased access to
community infrastructure by project closure, almost doubled the revised target of 164,000 households (ICR,
p.34). The RF and the team explain this result by reporting that more COs than anticipated chose to support
small community infrastructure activities and that there was also a tendency to support relatively large
infrastructure sub-projects-that benefited a larger number of households. PDO outcome indicator 1 did not
measure outcome in terms of the extent to which living conditions were improved. This was more adequately
measured by PDO Outcome Indicator 2 (see objective 2). Achievements also included the completion of
4,449 sub-projects (against a target of 4,000 infrastructure sub-projects). According to a 2014 sustainability
study conducted by PAF, about 69% of the infrastructure was sustainable with adequate O&M funds. A
comprehensive impact evaluation found that the improved infrastructure had a positive impact of beneficiaries
as they could spend more time on income generating activities rather than household chores such as water
fetching. Also, improved roads and bridges facilitated easier travel to markets and to seek medical attention.


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NP: PAF II (P105860)



The project also supported irrigation infrastructure. However, the impact of these investments on improving
food security and agricultural productivity were not documented by the project.

Based on the above-mentioned information, it is evident that the project contributed to improving the living
conditions of the targeted beneficiaries in project areas. The project also met or exceeded its outcome
targets. Therefore, efficacy of this outcome is rated Substantial



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve livelihoods among the rural poor.

Rationale
Outputs

The following outputs were reported in the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.

      By project completion 71.43 % of beneficiary households had increased their incomes by at least 15%
         against base year (original target: 70%, target achieved)
        57% of income generating activities community organizations members belonged to targeted
         households (original target: 54%, target exceeded).
        60% of community organizations members accessed funds from the revolving fund; more than one
         time for Income Generating Activities (IGAs) during the lifetime of the project (baseline: none, target
         not specified).
        41.5% of community organizations members showed improved levels of food security in terms of
         months of food sufficiency (original target: 68%, no baseline, target not achieved).
        30 pocket area development pilots were established (original target: 60, revised target: 30, target
         achieved). These benefited 363 community organizations and 8,759 CO members (ICR, para
         29). Due to the shortage of the remaining funds and also to spend adequate time to monitor the
         results of the first 30 PA pilots, the target was revised to 30 at 2nd restructuring (CR, p.40)
        40 peri-urban development pilots were established (original target: 90). The ICR (para 30) explained
         that the costs of peri-urban pilots were high, and the target was reduced to 40 to ensure adequate
         funding. These pilots covered 1,014 households involved in 174 sub-projects (111 for income
         generation activities and 63 for skill enhancement training). Project data showed that there was
         a 27.3% income increase in real terms among the participating beneficiaries (ICR. para 31).
        Earthquake relief. 11,578 community organizations members benefited from asset/cash transfer for
         revolving fund revitalization (original target: 40,000, revised target: 14,000, baseline: none, target not
         achieved). The ICR (para 32) explained that original target was based on a preliminary assessment of
         Households impacted by the earthquake. A detailed analysis found those to be around 14,000
         Households.



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NP: PAF II (P105860)




Outcome

The extent to which living conditions improved was captured by PDO Outcome Indicator 2 "Percentage of
beneficiary households who have increased their incomes by at least 15% against base year (2007)". The
ICR reported that that 71.4% of households met this threshold, compared to an original target of 70.0% (ICR,
p.35). The comprehensive impact evaluation (CIE) found that food security in terms of months of food
sufficiency reached 41.5% among beneficiaries, which was below the target of 68%. The CIE also reported
that households that benefited from the project's revolving fund increased their total expenditure by
22% compared to control households, and spent 43–53% more on health and education compared to the
control group.

While the project achieved only 60% of its intermediate target on food security, the main outcome (increasing
income by 15%) was achieved. It is also plausible to assume that beneficiary households who experienced an
increase in their income would be in a better position to improve their food security-since they have more
money to spend on purchasing food supplies.

Based on the above-mentioned information, it is evident that the project contributed to improving livelihoods
of the rural poor in project areas. Therefore, efficacy of this outcome is rated Substantial despite concerns on
falling short of achieving the food security target.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve empowerment among the rural poor.

Rationale
Outputs

      63% of key positions in project community organizations are from targeted households (target; 60%,
       target exceeded).
      Women represented 78% of key positions (ICR, para 33).

Outcome

The project succeeded in exceeding its target on filling key positions in project community organizations from
targeted households. Attribution of women empowerment solely to project activities is hard because
according to the ICR (para 39) members of community organizations "frequently participated in several
groups and development activities" that might have not been supported by the project.

In a further communication, the project team explained that women empowerment was assessed as part of
the Comprehensive Impact Evaluation (CIE). Empowerment was assessed using indicators such as “the

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NP: PAF II (P105860)



women keep income”, and “women asked when property sold”. According to the ICR (Annex 7, and per the
team’s comments), the CIE found that there was a positive difference when comparing women participating in
COs activities with control groups (those women who did not participate COs).

While most reported results were qualitative in nature, it is plausible to assume that the project positively
contributed to women empowerment. However, more could have been done to strengthen the assessment.
For example, the size and representativeness of focus groups could have been reported and metrics could
have been constructed to measure the degree and extent of responses.



Overall, and based on the above-mentioned assessment, the efficacy of this outcome is rated substantial
despite attribution concerns, and relatively limited criteria used to assess empowerment.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To reach the marginalized population that has traditionally been excluded by reasons of gender, ethnicity,
caste and location.

Rationale
Outputs

      80% of the members of community organizations are women (target: 40%, exceeded).
      57% of the members of income generating activities community organizations belong to targeted
       households (no target provided).

Outcome

The project data revealed that of the direct project beneficiaries 80% were women and 66% were ultra-poor
(defined by lacking sufficient food for more than three months in a year). Evidence points to the success of
the project in reaching women and marginalized groups including Dalit, Janajati, and Muslim, where 32% of
the project-supported community organizations members were Janajati exceeding the target of 20%, 22%
were Dalit exceeding the target of 20% and 3% were Muslim, no target provided for Muslims. The remaining
members (43%) were from other castes/ethnic backgrounds including Brahmin, Chhetri and Thakuri (higher
castes but received project support due to poverty criteria). According to the ICR (para 35), "fieldwork did not
find any evidence of elite capture."

Based on the above-mentioned information, it is evident that the project succeeded in reaching the
marginalized population. Therefore, efficacy of this outcome is rated Substantial.




                                                                                                  Page 10 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                NP: PAF II (P105860)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The first sub-objective (to improve living conditions) is rated Substantial
                            since the evidence provided points improvement in the living conditions of the targeted beneficiaries in project
                            areas. The second sub-objective (to improve livelihoods) is rated Substantial. Project beneficiaries
                            experienced income increases that exceeded the target, Food security for project beneficiaries improved
                            compared to non-beneficiaries, and proxy indicators (health and education expenditure) were significantly
                            higher for beneficiary households compared to control households. The third sub-objective (to improve levels
                            of empowerment) is rated Substantial based on the results of the CIE and evidence in the ICR which pointed
                            to improved participation of women in decision making. The fourth sub-objective (to reach the marginalized
                            populations that have traditionally been excluded is rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency



   ex ante

                               Due to the project's demand-driven character, carrying out a detailed ex-ante cost-benefit analysis,
                                making rate of return calculations was impossible at appraisal.
                               Instead, results from the first phase (PAF I) were used to guide the analysis, where livestock purchases
                                were by far the most common income generation sub-project type selected by communities, representing
                                about one quarter of all PAF I sub-projects.
                               The results showed that an estimated-projected and sustained increase in income to beneficiary
                                households ranged from 10% to 12%, which translates to about a 20% to 25% rate of return.
                               The PAD (p. 17) emphasized that sub-projects chosen by the communities often reflect local priorities
                                compared to nationally designed projects. This represents a dimension of efficiency that is seldom
                                captured in standard analysis.




                                                                                                                                Page 11 of 21
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         NP: PAF II (P105860)



ex post

      The ex-post economic and financial analysis (EFA) at completion found that the financial and economic
         returns to project investments in income generating activities (poultry, cow/buffalo, goat, piggery, retail
         business, vegetable farming, irrigation, micro hydro facility, water supply, and rice mills) and small
         infrastructures were 18% and 17%, respectively. The financial net present value (FNPV) and the
         expected net present value (ENPV) were about US$ 145 million and US$ 117 million, respectively.
        A sensitivity analysis showed that both economic and financial returns declined due to the prolonged
         implementation period, but according to the ICR (Annex 4). the ERR and FRR, at 11% and 10%,
         respectively, remained "economically viable" despite the decline.
        The EFA assessed the economic and financial viability of the project based on economic and financial
         data from a sample of 400 randomly drawn beneficiary households. It was carried out on the basis of
         individual analysis of selected income generating activities and infrastructure schemes for which reliable
         and sufficient data were available to measure project benefits.
        Key assumptions. The project benefits were assessed over a 15 year period at 2018 financial prices,
         using the opportunity cost of capital at 10%. Main source of benefits from the project were returns from
         income generating sub-projects and small-scale village and community infrastructure. Financial prices of
         locally traded outputs and inputs were converted into economic prices by deducting direct subsidies and
         taxes.
        Actual benefits would have been higher if the returns on employment had been considered. Also, the
         returns on investments from capacity development for earthquake rehabilitation and program
         management were excluded from the analysis due to lack of reliable data (ICR, para 38).



Administrative and Institutional Efficiency



The project closed on December 30, 2018, six years beyond the expected closing date on September 30, 2012.
In total the project was implemented in about eleven years. This delay was to accommodate scaling up the
project and to allow enough time to disburse funds from additional financing. The project management
arrangements did not rectify an overlap in administrative power between the Vice Chair and Executive Director
of PAF. According to the ICR (para 66) "this overlap of responsibilities became a serious constraint to efficient
implementation and decision-making." Also, weak financial management capacity resulted in delays and quality
issues related to implementation progress reports, including interim unaudited financial reports, and delays in
settlement of advances, and a lack of proper registration of expenses (ICR, para 92). Hiring skilled technical
staff was difficult because the project lacked a strong human resources system. this hindered the project's
fiduciary and M&E systems (ICR, para 127).

Overall, efficiency is rated substantial because at 17% the ex post ERR exceeded the opportunity cost of capital
at 10%. The ex post EFA included logical assumptions and was robust enough to support the assigned rating.
That said, the project suffered from weaknesses at the administrative and institutional levels as noted above.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NP: PAF II (P105860)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      68.00
ICR Estimate                                                17.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The efficacy of the first and
second sub-objectives are rated Substantial based on evidence the provided. The efficacy of the third sub-
objective, to improve levels of empowerment, is rated Substantial based on the evidence provided in the
Comprehensive Impact Evaluation (CIE) and the ICR which pointed to increased participation of women in
decision making. Evidence justifies a Substantial rating for efficacy of the fourth sub-objective, to reach
marginalized populations. Efficiency is rated Substantial, owing to a relatively strong EFA, despite institutional
and administrative weaknesses.

A split evaluation of outcome was not carried out in this review because the PDO remained the same, and only
the outcome targets were expanded after the project received two AFs.

Based on a Substantial rating for all three criteria (Relevance of Objectives, Overall Efficacy, and Efficiency),
Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (para 117) identifies two main risks that could potentially impact the development outcome of the
project:

      First, there are concerns related to the sustainability of the community organizations established by
       the project. By project completion the future of the whole PAF program was uncertain. PAF staff who
       were funded by the project had their contracts terminated and the PAF Secretariat remained with a
       small number of core staff under the Ministry of Land Management, Cooperatives and Poverty
       Alleviation. According to the ICR (para 120) the community organizations might be federated into
       cooperatives. Also, community organizations that were established later under the project might not


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: PAF II (P105860)



      be sustainable as they only received support from the project for a short period of time (two to three
      years).
     Second, transfer to new local level governments under the coordination of the Ministry of Land
      Management, Cooperatives and Poverty Alleviation. Local Governments became responsible for
      poverty related programs and were expected to continue to support the selected community
      organizations under the overall coordination of the Ministry of Land Management, Cooperatives and
      Poverty Alleviation. It is yet to be seen how Local Governments will support the established
      community organizations. This transition is risky due to the low capacity in some Local Governments.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was the second phase of the Poverty Alleviation Program (PAF) which was initially launched
  in 2002. The project was a scale up of the first phase and expected to cover 75 districts compared to 25
  districts under the first phase. The project objectives were in line with the Bank and Country priorities at
  appraisal. Design featured a community driven development (CDD) approach and promoted the
  involvement and participation of ethnic and caste minorities. The project used the same targeting
  mechanisms and beneficiary profiles under phase I, but with extending scope nationally in a phased
  manner, increasing by 15 districts each year. Notable lessons from phase I and other CDD projects in
  South East Asia included: streamlined and transparent procurement and financial management rules,
  user-friendly operational manuals, and clear service standards for partners and project staff were all
  found to be essential for effective implementation, Community control of funds and investment decisions
  supported efficiency and ownership, and ensured accountability and sustainability. To encourage
  community contributions, there needs to be a measurable improvement in service delivery (PAD,
  9). Three risks were identified at appraisal. However, the ICR did not discuss whether these materialized
  during implementation. The risk that the governing model of the country might change was not foreseen
  at appraisal. This had a negative effect on the project because the project's design and approach was not
  compatible with the federal governing model adopted by the Government. A notable design shortcoming
  was the lack of a clear consolidation/graduation strategy for community organizations (COs) as the
  project was designed that it would continue to expand and create new community organizations (ICR,
  para 103), without leaving enough time for these COs to mature and independently operate. Finally, M&E
  design was adequate, but some indicators were redundant (see section 9 for more details).

  Overall, there were moderate shortcomings in ensuring Quality at Entry, therefore Quality at Entry is
  rated Moderately Satisfactory.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: PAF II (P105860)




b. Quality of supervision
 The project was implemented under a challenging political environment with changes at the political
 leadership and uncertainty around the project (ICR, para 108). The project benefited from a stable task
 team leadership which helped establishing confidence and enabled timely identification of the critical needs
 of the project. The ICR (para 172) stated that "missions were regularly conducted", but did not report on the
 number of missions conducted. The Bank team attempted to modernize the project based on the results of
 the Mid-Term Review. The team also raised the need to reform the PAF By-law (which regulates the PAF
 institutional and management framework) to improve its institutional efficiency. The project benefited
 from the Bank's technical support to enhance M&E capacity and strengthen impact evaluation analysis
 (ICR, para 105).

 The Bank team could have used the two additional financings (AFs) to reformulate the project, adapt its
 components and modality to post-conflict country needs and priorities(ICR, para 107), and to reform the
 PAF By-law. However, the Bank missed the opportunity to align the project design so that it would remain
 relevant in the post-conflict context. The project also could have benefited from stronger Bank support to
 strengthen fiduciary capacity. The weak fiduciary capacity contributed to an investigation by the
 Commission for Investigation of Abuse and Authority (CIAA – an apex constitutional body of the
 Government of Nepal (GoN) to investigate and probe cases against persons holding any public office, see
 section 10-b for more detail). A notable design shortcoming that should have been addressed by the team
 during AFs was the lack of a graduation/consolidation strategy for community organizations. According to
 the ICR (para 110) "the project kept expanding and creating new community organizations even towards
 the end without adequate resources for consolidation of results."

 The project team wrongly assumed that PAF as an institution of the government would continue beyond
 the project closure. However, the core function of PAF was transferred to the Ministry of Land
 Management, Cooperatives and Poverty Alleviation and the respective local governments. This new
 institutional arrangement disrupted the transition plans put in place by the Bank team and raised concern
 regarding the sustainability of some community organizations, particularly those established later in the
 project.



 Quality of supervision suffered from moderate shortcomings. Notably, the Bank could have used the AFs to
 better align the project to the shifting government priorities. Therefore, Quality of Supervision is rated
 Moderately Satisfactory.



 Overall, Bank performance is rated moderately satisfactory due to moderate shortcoming for both Quality
 at Entry and Quality of Supervision.




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: PAF II (P105860)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD did not include an explicit theory of change (ToC) as it was not required at the time of appraisal.
 Nevertheless, the ICR included a ToC that reflected the intended activities, expected outputs/intermediate
 outcomes, outcomes and long-term outcomes. The monitoring and evaluation of the project builds on the
 existing M&E system established under phase I. The existing system would further be optimized through a
 two-way integration of financial and operational data and incorporation of intermediate project performance
 indicators under the MIS.

 The PDO was to be assessed through four outcome indicators: (1) number of households to benefit from
 increased access to community infrastructure, (2) by project completion 25% of beneficiary households
 were to have increased their incomes by at least 15% against the base year, (3) 30% of beneficiary groups
 members were to have come from target groups, and (4) 30% of decision-making positions in community
 groups were to be occupied by target groups. These indicators were directly linked the PDO and
 measurable, but the RF lacked baseline data for any of them.

 The RF included twenty intermediate outcome indicators to assess the different activities supported by the
 project. Most of these indicators were measurable and linked to the project activities. However, some were
 mis-classified. For example: the following are properly output or at most intermediate outcome indicators:
 population benefiting from new rural infrastructure and 30% of beneficiary group members coming from
 targeted female-headed, hard core poor, Dalit or Janajati households. On the other hand, the indicator
 measuring the percentage increase in household income over baseline value" is an outcome level indicator
 rather than an intermediate level one.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was challenging due to the expansion of project activities, but with limited M&E staff
  capacity. According to the ICR (para 77) inadequate human resources hindered the proper
  implementation of the M&E system, particularly after the CIAA investigation caused a high level of M&E
  staff turnover." M&E data suffered from lack of accuracy and consistency throughout implementation
  (ICR, para 77). There were also challenges at the field level as community organizations were required to
  monitor their revolving funds, but at times to struggled to track certain indicators such as repayment rate
  (ICR, para 78). At a later stage of implementation community organizations received training to
  strengthen their bookkeeping capacity.

  Revisions to RF. The project had two AFs in 2011 and 2013, and three restructurings, where five
  indicator targets were revised upwards to reflect expansion of project coverage. Only one indicator saw a
  downward revision "project beneficiaries-nonmember households" was revised from 180,000 to 55,000.

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: PAF II (P105860)



  The project team explained that non-member households declined because these households became
  members of COs. The ICR did not explain the reason this downward revision of 44%. The PDO indicators
  were unchanged throughout the project. PDO Indicator 3 (percentage of beneficiary group members
  coming from targeted groups) was dropped at the first AF and was integrated with the indicator for the
  representation of targeted groups for decision making. These changes were logical and necessary to
  accommodate the expansion in the project coverage.

  Overall, implementation was challenging due to limited capacity, and data suffered from accuracy and
  consistency issues.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para 79) "the data on relevant indicators were collected systematically and the
  results framework was populated and reported to the Government of Nepal and the World Bank
  team." At the Mid-term Review, the decision to scale-up the project was based on the project's M&E
  data. The ICR (para 79) also reported that data was used "effectively" for the ICR itself and for the
  comprehensive impact evaluation. While the M&E system generated a sizable amount of data, it was not
  effectively processed and analyzed due to weak M&E capacity and high staff turnover. This limited the
  project management capacity to effectively engage the Government on policy and decision-making (ICR,
  para 79).

  Overall, the Quality of M&E is rated Modest. While design was adequate, implementation was
  challenging due to limited capacity, and data had accuracy and consistency issues. Utilization was
  limited due to limited processing and analysis of data.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a category B. It triggered three safeguard policies at appraisal: Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), and Natural Habitat (OP/BP 4.04).The
   project was expected to deliver environmental benefits through enhanced capacity for environmental
   management, community investment in natural resources management, and investments that protect the
   health of the poor from environmental health risks. An Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
   prepared under phase I was revised to simplify the screening of community projects, provide more directly
   relevant advice for the mitigation of environmental impacts, and allow the project to expand operations into
   protected areas (PAD, para 52). The environmental screening procedure and guidelines were also revised
   during implementation to institutionalize environmental and social concerns in the 30 most common types of
   sub-projects. Also, a Vulnerable Community Development Plan (VCDP) and an Operational Manual were
   developed to improve targeting of vulnerable groups so as to increase their participation in decision-making
   processes (ICR, para 85).



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NP: PAF II (P105860)



  OP/BP 4.36 on Forests was triggered at the second AF because there was a possibility of some
  infrastructure sub-projects being in or near community forests; similarly, some livestock sub-projects were
  expected to increase pressure on community or government forests. The EMF was revised again in 2017 to
  help community groups identify environmental and social risks, and link mitigation measures during the
  selection and preparation of plans, and construction of sub-projects (ICR, para 86). Also, a grievance
  redressal mechanism (GRM) was institutionalized and GRM committees were established in 43 of the 55
  project districts. Safeguard compliance improved when the project hired an environmental and
  social/gender specialist to oversee safeguard management and mainstream gender. However,
  documentation of land donations to the project remained weak despite establishing a database for land
  acquisition records by the project.

  Finally, the ICR (para 83) reported that "compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards was rated
  as “Moderately Satisfactory” in most implementation and supervision reports (ISRs)." However, details on
  specific mitigation activities were not reported in the ICR.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). FM suffered from internal control weaknesses, delays in settlement of
  advances, and a lack of proper registration of expenses, among others (ICR, para 92). The weak capacity
  of the financing department staff and their frequent turnover resulted in quality issues and delayed
  submission of periodic trimester implementation progress reports, including interim unaudited financial
  reports. The appointment of an internal auditor was delayed. This delay contributed to systematic internal
  control weaknesses and lack of timely corrective measures (ICR, para 92). The Bank provided intense
  support and regular follow up to address FM weaknesses. According to the ICR (para 94) FM weaknesses
  improved over time. In a further communication the team explained that "all the projects in Nepal should go
  through annual audit by Independent audit through the Auditor General’s office."

  Investigation by the Commission for Investigation of Abuse and Authority (CIAA). According to the
  ICR (para 68 and 69) the project's weak fiduciary capacity triggered an investigation by CIAA-an apex
  constitutional body of the Government to investigate and probe cases against persons holding any public
  office. In late August 2014, CIAA started investigating field visit advances for PAF portfolio managers
  during the 2010, 2011 and 2012 financial years. CIAA alleged that some of the field expense receipts were
  forged, while others did not comply with government standards. PAF responded by explaining that in
  remote areas official receipts were non-existent and thus in the field several receipts had to be produced in
  the locally available format. In total, CIAA charged 33 PAF staff including the former Executive Director, the
  former Chief of Finance and Administrative Division, account officers and several portfolio managers with
  misuse of field travel funds in 2010, 2011 and 2012. In 2018, a special court convicted nine former PAF
  staff including the former Executive Director. Each former staff was charged for irregularities in field trips
  ranging from US$ 700 to US$ 3500. The Bank was informed that many of invoices and receipts associated
  with the field trips had been verified during the court process and the original charged amount was
  significantly reduced. New PAF management came in August 2015 and started working with the Bank on
  an action plan to improve fiduciary capacity. The ICR (para 67) reported that neither the Bank team nor
  the ICR team had access to the files and information of the CIAA investigation.




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: PAF II (P105860)



   Procurement. Procurement management benefited from a dedicated procurement officer among the PAF
   staff. According to the ICR (para 98) "PAF performed satisfactorily in the implementation of the
   procurement plan agreed between the Borrower and the Bank." However, community organizations lacked
   capacity to maintain procurement registers and files (ICR, par 99). An ex-post review concluded that some
   contracts at the initial phase of the project were declared mis-procured. According to the ICR (para 100):
   "all these contracts were of small value" and "the Borrower reimbursed the amount that was disbursed by
   the Bank against the mis-procured contracts."




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   According to the ICR (para 59): "The institutional building and empowerment process resulted in higher
   negotiation power. Beyond PAF activities, COs and their members perceived themselves as more capable
   to negotiate with non-government organizations, donors and local level government institutions. Similarly,
   by having access to loans at a reasonable rate, poor households started to use their bargaining power to
   negotiate better conditions with informal moneylenders. Through this economic empowerment process,
   several beneficiaries gained access to formal banking services that offered regulated interest rates and
   thus avoided predatory lending. As a result, according to the CIE report, the annual interest rate that the
   beneficiaries faced had declined significantly compared to that of the baseline and control groups."



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               Overall Efficacy is rated
                                                                               Substantial and with the
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Satisfactory              Substantial rating for Relevance
                               Satisfactory
                                                                               and Efficiency, an overall
                                                                               Satisfactory is deemed justified.
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included 8 lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of language:

      In changing socio-political environments, project design and implementation need to
         adapt over time in order to maintain consistency and relevance to the evolving

                                                                                                 Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: PAF II (P105860)



        development challenges. Projects need to be designed and implemented with more
        flexibility in mind, which will allow the project to better adapt to the evolving environment.
        Having more frequent high-level meetings to discuss the relevance of the design in light of
        socio-political changes could help projects progress in line with the new institutional
        demands.
       The post completion sustainability of community level institutions needs a clear plan
        to be in place at entry. The project experience showed that funding from development
        partners may not continue over the long-term. This calls for a consolidation strategy to be
        built into the design, and a future vision addressing how beneficiaries could graduate from
        the project and maintain sustainability.
       A demand driven approach combined with direct funding is an effective tool in
        keeping target communities at the forefront and reaching out to the intended
        beneficiaries. The project encouraged communities to take initiatives to improve their
        livelihoods, particularly in organizing themselves into community organizations. The project
        also provided resources directly to the poor, thereby bringing in efficiency and transparency
        to the activities and ensuring community ownership. Using local knowledge and expertise
        enhanced the project's targeting strategy- an important issue given Nepal’s diverse ethnicity
        and languages.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  This is the second and last phase of the Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF) program. Assessing achievements on
  the ground would be useful to verify results in light of M&E weaknesses, and would provide an opportunity to
  generate relevant lessons that would be helpful in guiding similar programs in the future.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of evidence. The ICR acknowledged that M&E implementation was weak and that there were concerns
on the accuracy and consistency of data. The ICR alternatively relied on the Comprehensive Impact Evaluation
(CIE) to triangulate evidence.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings.

Extent to which lessons are based on evidence and analysis. Lessons were based on the project
experience although they could be tied more explicitly to project experience.




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NP: PAF II (P105860)



Results Orientation. The ICR included a good discussion on outcomes despite concerns on the accuracy of the
M&E data.

Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were logically linked and integrated.

Consistency with guidelines. The assigned ratings in the ICR were justified and backed by sound arguments.

Conciseness. The ICR provided thorough coverage of the implementation experience and candidly reported on
shortcomings. There was enough clarity in the report’s messaging and the performance story was direct, well
informed and tightly presented. The ICR could have reported on the number of supervision missions and the
risks identified at appraisal whether any materialized and efficacy of mitigation measures.



Overall, the ICR Quality is rated Substantial, despite minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 21 of 21
