     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Energy Sector Support Project (P099626)



                                                                                       Report Number: ICRR0021750

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P099626                                      MW-Energy Sector Support Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Malawi                                       Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-49800,IDA-H7150                          30-Oct-2016                                              72,147,110.28

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Jun-2011                                  15-Oct-2018

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                         Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              84,700,000.00                                                   0.00

 Revised Commitment                               84,700,000.00                                                   0.00

 Actual                                           72,147,110.28                                                   0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator             Group
 Hiroyuki Yokoi               Fernando Manibog              Ramachandra Jammi                  IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the Project is to increase the reliability and quality of electricity supply in the major load
   centers. (Financing Agreement, p 5; Project Appraisal Document, p 8)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   Yes

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Energy Sector Support Project (P099626)




  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  04-Aug-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Electricity Network Strengthening & Expansion (Appraisal cost: US$56.2 million, Actual
   cost: US$49.03 million)

   This component included three activities: (i) Distribution & Transmission Uprating and Expansion; (ii) Low
   Voltage Reticulation Reinforcement and Technical Implementation; (iii) Support, Design, Procurement &
   Supervision.

   Component 2: Generation & Transmission Feasibility Studies (Appraisal cost: US$15.2 million, Actual
   cost: US$10.46 million)

   This component included financing for feasibility studies for an additional 200–380 MW of new hydropower
   generation capacity. The proposed feasibility studies were Lower Fufu on the South Rukuru River
   (estimated generation capacity range of 90 – 180 MW), Mpatamanga on the Middle Shire River (estimated
   capacity of 100 - 150 MW), and Chimgonda site on the Dwambazi River (estimated capacity of 20 - 50
   MW). In addition, a pre-feasibility study on transmission lines was planned in the north from Lilongwe via
   Kasungu to Mzuzu on the western side of Malawi (approximately 350 km).

   Component 3: Demand Side Management and Energy Efficiency Measures (Appraisal cost:
   US$6.8 million, Actual cost: US$1.96 million)

   The component included several demand-side management (DSM) and energy efficiency activities,
   focusing on reducing the peak load and load-shedding. The activities included were (i) de-rating of Hot
   Water Geyser (HWG) heater elements; (ii) installation of HWG insulation blankets; (iii) wireless HWG load
   control; and (iv) DSM Supervision Consultant. Upon the 2016 restructuring, the DSM components were
   cancelled and a new component on Automatic Meter Reading (AMR) supply and installation was added.

   Component 4: Capacity Building & Technical Assistance (Appraisal cost: US$3.5 million, Actual cost:
   US$7.92 million)

   The component included institutional strengthening and technical assistance to both Electricity Supply
   Corporation of Malawi (ESCOM), and Ministry of Natural Resources, Energy, and Mining (MoNREM). The
   activities to ESCOM were to provide technical and operational support and build the capacity of the Project
   Management Unit, while those of MoNREM included (i) technical assistance on the exploitation of
   renewable energy resources (a wind power resource study, preliminary assessment of geothermal
   prospects, bagasse-fueled cogeneration capacity assessment); (ii) sectoral studies on energy policy and



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MW-Energy Sector Support Project (P099626)



  pricing, renewable energy development and regulatory issues; (iii) support for specialist Independent Power
  Producer (IPP) advisers; and (iv) operational and technical support of MoNREM.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The estimated project cost was US$84.70 million. The actual cost was US$72.15 million
  (ICR, p. 2).

  Financing: The appraisal estimated that IDA would finance US$84.70 million, composed of
  US$65.40 million of grant and US$19.30 million of credit. The actual disbursement was US$72.15 million,
  out of which US$57.07 million was IDA grant and US$15.07 million was IDA credit. (ICR, p 2).

  Borrower Contribution: No recipient contribution was planned, and none materialized.

  Dates: The project was approved on June 28, 2011 and became effective on January 30, 2012. The project
  had three restructurings (ICR p 14). The first restructuring was in May 2015 to transfer the responsibility of
  component 2 to ESCOM. The second and largest restructuring was in April 2016, which included the
  following seven changes:

      1.   a 21-month extension of the project closing date
      2.   the cancellation of DSM activities and the inclusion of AMR supply and installation in Component 3
      3.   Reallocation of funds
      4.   Revision of the results framework
      5.   Inclusion of the force account procurement to allow ESCOM to conduct feasibility studies
      6.   Change in the disbursement arrangements
      7.   Change in the implementation schedule

  The third restructuring (May 2018) was to further extend the closing date from July 31, 2018 to October 15,
  2018.

  Although the project restructurings involved the revision of the PDO indicators, a split rating will not be
  applied for the following reasons:

        The unit of measurement of the two PDO indicators – reduction in electricity losses and Total
         Interruption Time per KVA Installed (TITK) – were revised to be consistent with the generally
         accepted standards (ICR p 16), which did not influence material changes in the outcome indicators.
        Although the DSM activities were dropped, the new activity on AMR was added with “revised and/or
         actual improvements [that] were greater than the improvement targets at approval" (ICR p 17);
         moreover, the Theory of Change and associated outcome level indicators did not change.

  Given the above reasons, this assessment follows the results framework of the revised indicators and
  targets (IEG ICRR guidelines, p.49).

  The project closed on October 15, 2018.

  Partner: Although not a formal cofinancier, the project closely coordinated with the Millennium Challenge
  Corporation(MCC) Compact. A US$350 million MCC Compact was to finance a program of grid

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         MW-Energy Sector Support Project (P099626)



                       rehabilitation and upgrade, focused on the generation and transmission sub-sectors, as well as investments
                       in natural resource (PAD, p 7). The MCC Compact was also to provide support on a program of policy
                       reforms, operational management, and ESCOM’s corporate governance, as well as the regulatory
                       framework for private sector participation. The project was envisaged to closely coordinate with the MCC
                       project.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context and Government Strategy: The objective of the project was and continues to be fully
aligned with the development challenge of the electricity sector in Malawi. The country’s peak demand was
estimated at about 330 MW and generation capacity was frequently exceeded by about 35 MW. This was
caused by both the lack of generation capacity and a reliable transmission and distribution (T&D) network.
ESCOM, a vertically integrated and government-owned electric utility, owned and operated 283 MW of the
generation capacity, which solely relied on run-of-river hydropower. It needed to add 140 MW generation
capacity by 2015 to meet the expected power demand. T&D network losses were 22%, and ESCOM’s
limited resources had hindered sufficient maintenance of the network as well as upgrades and expansion.
Given the projected demand growth of five percent per annum, it was an urgent issue for the country to
address the reliability and quality of the electricity supply. The government’s national development strategy
and its five-year Growth and Development Strategy (MGDS) (2006-2011) prioritized the energy sector as
one of the five priority areas focused on increased access to reliable and affordable electricity.



Bank strategy: The objective of the project is also aligned with the latest Bank’s strategy. The Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) (FY13-16) indicated that improved ease of doing business through better
economic infrastructure was critical to promoting sustainable, diversified, and inclusive growth. It specifically
mentioned that more reliable energy would make manufacturing and mining more competitive, which was
closely aligned with the objective of the project.



Realism of the objective: The Bank recognized the constraining factors to achieve the objective. The Bank
understood the limited capacity of ESCOM and MoNREM, the Implementing Agencies (ICR p 1), and
designed the relevant capacity building activities to enhance the achievability of the objective. In retrospect,
as later described in the efficiency section, the capacity building could have been more intensified from the
beginning of the project, which could have enabled the early service delivery. In addition, the Bank
recognized overall inefficiencies in the electricity sector including the financial sustainability of ESCOM. The
Bank made a twinning arrangement with the MCC to pursue the sectoral reform, which partly contributed to
achieving the objective.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating


                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 14
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   MW-Energy Sector Support Project (P099626)



               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To increase the reliability and quality of electricity supply in the major load centers.

                Rationale
                Theory of Change

                The reliability and quality of electricity supply was logically linked to and measured by the frequency and
                duration of interruptions as well a fluctuations in voltage, frequency, and power factor (ICR, para 48). As
                measured quantitatively by these improvements, the achievement of the PDO was directly and causally
                attributable to the upgrades and expansion of the T&D network, DSM (initially), and energy efficiency
                measures. DSM activities were dropped since the capacity increase from the substations, upgrades in the
                T&D network, and the introduction of AMR activities diluted the immediate needs for DSM (ICR, page 22).



                Outputs:

                      Five new substations were constructed. Achieved.
                      Five substations were upgraded. Achieved.
                      A total of 628.98 kilometers of distribution lines were either constructed or rehabilitated against the
                         revised target of 336.20 kilometers. Exceeded. The ICR noted that two distribution lines – between
                         the Chileka airport and Blantyre and within Blantyre – were not completed at closing because ESCOM
                         had not been able to acquire outage maintenance for the lines to secure electricity supply during the
                         election season (May 2019), but the task team informed IEG that most of the lines were already
                         constructed and only a few segments remained to be constructed for outage maintenance. ESCOM is
                         now in discussion with the consumer enterprises to enable outage maintenance. Hence, the two
                         distribution lines are likely to be constructed.
                        145 centers were serviced by LV reticulation, not meeting the target of 172. Almost achieved.
                        Three feasibility studies for hydroelectric power generation were completed. Achieved.
                        A transmission backbone feasibility study was completed. Achieved.
                        925 meters in the ESCOM system were covered by the AMR system against the target of 750.
                         Exceeded.
                        A preliminary assessment of geothermal prospects was conducted. Achieved.
                        A wind-mapping study was conducted. Achieved.

                Outcome:



                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                MW-Energy Sector Support Project (P099626)




                                    Electricity losses per year were reduced from 25 percent to 17 percent against the revised target of 20
                                       percent (ICR Table 6). Exceeded. Note that the baseline and end-line targets were revised during the
                                       second restructuring because the original baseline values no longer reflected the actual baseline
                                       before project activities started (ICR p 21, 2016 restructuring paper).
                                      Total Interruption Time per KVA Installed (TITK) per year in the project areas was reduced from 32.1
                                       hours to 19.71 hours against the target of 25.8 hours (ICR Table 6). Exceeded. The task team
                                       confirmed to IEG that the baseline and end-line targets were revised during the second restructuring
                                       to reflect accurate TITK through aggregating interruption time in the beneficiary communities.
                                      Average interruption frequency per year in the project area was reduced from 11.00 to 6.55 against
                                       the target of 9.40. Exceeded.
                                      The number of customers served in the project area was increased from 47 thousand to 1,728
                                       thousand against the target of 295 thousand. Exceeded.
                                      Direct project beneficiaries reached 398 thousand against the target of 295 thousand. Exceeded. Out
                                       of which, female beneficiaries accounted for 51.49 percent against the target of 50.00 percent.
                                       Achieved.
                                      Although not stated as an outcome in the Results Framework, several feasibility studies were picked
                                       up for future improvement in the reliability and quality of electricity supply. The project and task team
                                       supported market sounding throughout the project period to enable the investors to enter the market.
                                             o Hydropower: Out of the two hydropower studies (Lower Fufu and Mpatamanga), the
                                               Mpatamanga Hydropower study was picked up by the Government of Malawi and IFC for PPP-
                                               based project preparation including the potential IDA financing. The Government considers the
                                               Mpatamanga Hydropower project (309MW) as one of the highest priorities for the country to
                                               construct, as documented in the country’s Integrated Resources Plan.
                                             o Geothermal: The project supported a series of geothermal studies, resulting in identifying two
                                               potential sites with pre-feasibility studies. One of the sites at 15 MW capacity was taken up by
                                               the Embassy of Iceland for prospective investments.
                                             o Cogeneration: The project supported the pre-feasibility study for Bagasse-fueled cogeneration.
                                               A private company, Illovo Sugar, picked up the study and will establish 54 MW of capacity by
                                               end-2020.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall, all the outcome and output targets were exceeded or achieved except for the output indicator of the
                            LV reticulation services. The PDO and outcomes were largely achieved which can be attributed to the
                            successful completion of the T&D network, feasibility studies, and AMR, though there was a shortfall in the LV
                            reticulation. The potential contribution of the MCC project through energy policy reform was limited and did




                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MW-Energy Sector Support Project (P099626)



  not significantly influence the achievement of the project’s outcome and outputs, which were primarily
  influenced by the physical investments by the project.



  In addition, in the absence of the project, outages would have increased due to transformer overloads
  supplying major load centers. Besides, voltage quality would have been poor due to the T&N network
  constraints. It is therefore likely that the reliability and quality of electricity supply might have deteriorated with
  maintenance conducted at a lower standard.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  High



5. Efficiency
Economic and financial analysis:

On the basis of the ICR, the project was assessed economically and financially efficient. At appraisal, the
project’s economic analysis estimated an NPV of US$142.9 million and an Economic Internal Rate of Return
(EIRR) of 26.0 percent, while the Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) was at 16.9% and NPV was US$62.1
million. While the details of economic and financial benefits of the projects were not enumerated in the PAD, the
ICR argued that there was no reason to expect the economic benefit and the revenue streams of the project
would be any different than that which were calculated at appraisal, except for two issues that have affected
implementation and the operational start point of the project (p 27 and 56). The ICR reported the EIRR at 36.0%
and economic NPV at US$128.63 million, while the FIRR at 25.0% and financial NPV at US$61.84 million. The
ICR and the team’s additional explanation concluded that the reduction in the cost and timing of investments led
to the increase in EIRR and FIRR and the decrease in NPV.



Aspects of design and implementation:

The design of the project might have seemed slightly complicated due to the coordination with the MCC project,
yet it turned out to be the close coordination hence the greater convening power that leveraged the influence of
the two institutions to promote policy reform such as the tariff revision (ICR p 33).

The project was delayed for two years due to the capacity constraint and several external matters.

The MoNREM and ESCOM had systematic weaknesses in decision-making and executing the Bank’s
procedures. The Bank had identified their capacity constraints before the project started (ICR p 33) and provided
two interventions, namely, the capacity-building component and the provision of implementation consultancy
services. These interventions did not work at the beginning, requiring 2 years and 4 months from the loan
effectiveness to award the consultancy services. However, as the implementing agencies learned the
procedures and internal mechanisms, the situation became improved as evidenced by the exponential


                                                                                                           Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MW-Energy Sector Support Project (P099626)



improvements in disbursements (ICR p 35). In retrospect, the project could have intensified capacity building
instruments from the very early stage of the project.

Though not attributed to the project, there were several external factors to impede the project implementation.
First, the debarment of the supervision consultant negatively influenced the project progress. The consulting firm
supervised three construction packages, which were delayed by about one year. The consulting firm requested
a contract extension, but immediately before the request, the firm was debarred from the Bank for 12 months
from 27th September 2017 due to issues in another country. As a result, the contract extension was not
permitted by the Bank, hence the consultant suspended their services in December 2017, when the original
contract was terminated. For a year, due to the unavailability of the consulting firm, ESCOM, the Owner of the
project, took over the Engineer’s role. Second, the project implementation was impeded by the corporate
restructuring of the ESCOM (ICR p 35). As envisaged under the Power Sector Reform Strategy approved in
2003, ESCOM was unbundled in 2016. This caused organizational disruption and many of the administrative
staff were gone afterward.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 26.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              36.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objective is substantial given the criticality of the development challenge and alignment to
the country and bank strategies. Efficacy is high given the achievements in improving the reliability and quality
of electricity supply that met or exceeded targets. Efficiency is substantial. Economic and financial efficiency
appear satisfactory but are not comparable due to (missing) appraisal baselines. On the basis of these sub-
ratings, the project’s overall development outcome is rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MW-Energy Sector Support Project (P099626)




Technical and Operational Risks: The project successfully completed several capacity building and
technical assistance activities to sustain technical and operational outcomes. For instance, the project
conducted training in generation system planning, procurement, financial management, project and contract
management, hydropower project preparation, and PPPs. The ICR confirmed that these technical capacities
were improved as evidenced by the panel of experts (ICR p 30). Nevertheless, institutional risks remain. The
ICR (p 35) noted that many of the PIU positions became vacant due to the restructuring of ESCOM.
Technically trained staff may not return to their former business area, which would be a significant risk for
project sustainability. In addition, the projects for which feasibility studies were implemented entail
completion risks such as safeguards on the Mpatamanga Hydropower project although the concerned
parties including the Bank and IFC have been mitigating risks by allocating a new reservoir to avoid the
potential flash flood at downstream neighborhoods.



Financial Risks: Financial risks were moderate. ESCOM has been in financial constraints for the past
decade. A 2011 tariff increase by 61 percent did not substantially improve the ESCOM’s fiscal condition due
to the limited revenue allocation to ESCOM (ICR p 7); however, the task team informed IEG that the
government approved the tariff revenue allocation to ESCOM in October 2018, and the allocated revenue will
be used for O&M. It is not yet known whether the budget was actually spent for the intended purpose given
the limited period from the policy change but the financial risks are perceived to be lower than in the past.



Institutional Risks: Institutional risks were substantial. MoNREM and ESCOM’s complex and lengthy
decision-making process had hindered project implementation, which may affect the sustainability of the
project. For example, the project completed several feasibility studies and some necessary future IPP/PPP-
based financial transactions. Given their limited IPP/PPP experience, it is likely that the transactions may be
influenced by institutional inefficiencies and lack of advisory support by the government (ICR p 42). In
addition, the ICR (p 35) noted that a corporate restructuring of ESCOM has not been completed and many of
the PIU positions were not filled.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Quality at entry was moderately satisfactory. The Bank identified the critical problem of the electricity
  sector in the country and formulated the project with short-term measures on improvements in the T&D
  network and long-term measures on identifying potential power sources. The project also recognized the
  risks and constraints including lack of WB-financed projects experience; project delays; insufficient
  progress with the reform of energy sector policy and legal framework; ESCOM’s financial constraints. In
  hindsight, the Bank could have strengthened mitigation measures on ESCOM and MoNREE’s capacity
  development, which found to be a crucial factor for project initiation and implementation.

  There were two shortcomings observed. The outcome of the feasibility studies was not measured despite
  its relative larger amount against the total cost of the project (17.95% of the total cost at appraisal). Also,

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Energy Sector Support Project (P099626)



  the PAD did not provide a detailed assessment of the economic and financial analysis, which did not
  allow the ICR to analyze the pre- and post-comparison of the economic and financial analysis.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Quality of supervision is moderately satisfactory. The task team addressed the implementation delay by
 training O&M personnel for ensuring effective supervision mechanism. A few shortcomings were
 continuous changes in the task team leaders which distanced the inexperienced MoNREM and ESCOM
 (ICR p 34) from the Bank and led to a brief period of safeguard incompliance which was addressed
 immediately by the Bank’s safeguards team (ICR p 41).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Theory of Change and results framework were closely linked to allow monitoring and supervision. The
 indicators were clear and measurable. A project report was to be prepared twice a year. Management
 Information System (MIS) was supported by the MCC project and considered for M&E use although not a
 prerequisite (ICR p 36). A shortcoming of the M&E design was the lack of an outcome indicator on
 attracting private sector investors, which was supposed to be derived from feasibility study components
 and capacity building activities (ICR p 11).



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was satisfactory. M&E officers were assigned from the two implementing agencies
  and were responsible for data collection and report preparation on monitoring and procurement. It should
  be noted that they were also tasked to the M&E of the MCC Compact. Recognizing the implementation
  delay, the frequency of M&E report submission was shortened from semiannual to quarterly (ICR p 37).
  The project updated some baseline indicators to consistently measure the results.




                                                                                                Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Energy Sector Support Project (P099626)



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E was utilized at several points. As noted earlier, the M&E reports were used for closer performance
  assessments. The M&E data and reports were also used during the 2016 restructuring through revision
  of baseline indicators and the assessment of the efficacy of the project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental Category B (partial assessment) and triggered the Bank’s
   safeguard policies on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP
   4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.10), and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50).

   An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
   were prepared and Project Affected Persons (PAPs) were identified before project implementation (ICR p
   38). During implementation, the project was not in compliance with the safeguard policy related to the
   compensation of PAPs. Due to the absence of consultancy services for nine months prior to the original
   project completion, the Contractor began construction works before or simultaneously with the anticipated
   PAP disbursements. This compliance issue was flagged to the Bank management and the Bank team, and
   the corrective actions were taken such as reviewing the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) steps,
   disbursements to all the PAPs except for the PAPs who were not traced or have left the territory and not
   reachable, and improvements in a grievance redress mechanism (GRM). (ICR p 39)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management

   Project financial management was satisfactory, as reported in the ICR. All the eight legal covenants were
   complied with during the project period; submission of acceptable financial reports including audits was
   compliant with the Bank’s standards; record-keeping was well managed for the entire project life. There
   was a case in June 2016 when the audited accounts for the ESCOM component had received a disclaimer
   from the auditors regarding the validity of the financial statements as well as control and accountability
   issues in accounting. The case was resolved in June 2017 with unmodified audit opinions. Since then the
   audited accounts have been satisfactory, and the supervision missions periodically reviewed the financial
   reports, validating the adequacy of the financial reports.

   Procurement

   Procurement was overall satisfactory except the case in July 2017, when the project experienced the
   unavailability of the consultancy firms as stated in the efficiency section. The incident was largely informed


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 14
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        MW-Energy Sector Support Project (P099626)



   by the exogenous factor from the project (debarment occurred in another country, which was coincidentally
   the same timing of the contract termination of the project). The project was in compliance with the Bank
   guidelines and no issues were observed other than that specific incident.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   --



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                 IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory        Satisfactory
                                                                                Lack of measuring the outcome
                                                                                of the studies and insufficient
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory        Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                baseline data for the economic
                                                                                and financial analysis
                                                                                A shortcoming was observed in
                                                                                the results framework, which
Quality of M&E                    High                Substantial               missed the important outcome
                                                                                indicator on attracting private
                                                                                sector investors.
Quality of ICR                    ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

1. Contract management without the Engineer

The project encountered a unique situation where the Engineer was unable to provide their services
due to the debarment in another country. Given the remaining time for the project and unrealistic
situation to procure another supervision consultant, the project decided to allocate the supervision
role to the Owner for the last year of the project. The project was closed successfully largely due to
the better relationship between the Owner and the Contractor because the Contractor had worked
with the ESCOM and known the working environment. However, the fundamental basis of the
contract document is the tripartite relationship among the Owner, the Engineer, and the Contractor.
The absence of the Engineer might have introduced unfairness to the Contractor given the General
Conditions of Contract unless the Special Conditions of Contract amended it. For instance, when


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MW-Energy Sector Support Project (P099626)



conflict occurs between the two parties, the Engineer’s judgment is not mobilized and automatically
lead to higher dispute resolution mechanisms. When such a situation occurs in the future, a careful
review of the contract document is essential to allow a level playing field for the parties involved in
the contract.

2. Improving the sustainability of the project through partnership

The project demonstrated an exemplary partnership engagement with MCC. Given the independent
nature of achieving the PDO and expected results, the project chose a stand-alone project.
Nevertheless, the project closely worked with MCC partly because the reform of financial and
operational management policies and procedures were executed by the MCC project. The Bank
closely coordinated with the MCC from the design of the MCC project to the reform of the program of
policy reforms. The project benefited from the two tariff reforms, which were not in the conditions or
requirements of the project and were recognized as one of the binding factors in the electricity sector
in Malawi. The outlook for financial risks was consequently mitigated with the tariff reforms.
Leveraging other players in the sector is crucial when the project entails a critical factor that the
project cannot address.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was carefully written particularly in assessing attribution and implementation issues. The ICR
successfully clarified the attribution of the project in light of the influence of the MCC project. The ICR made an
extensive explanation of the reasoning for the restructurings as well as critical implementation problems such
as the unavailability of the consulting firms.

However, it had several shortcomings. For example, the theory of change was only illustrated as a figure, with
no explanation or relation to the implementation logic being provided. It was also necessary to illustrate the
sphere of influence of the project to clarify the relationship with the MCC project. The theory of change
described that there was no contribution to the feasibility study component to the PDO. The ICR could have
assessed the causal path of the feasibility studies to the PDO. The efficiency section should have clarified the
deficiency of the information in the PAD (i.e., no detailed economic analysis) and should have shown the
limitation of the analysis since the economic and financial benefits were considered as the same condition for
both appraisal and ICR. The tariff revenue allocation was wrongly written (ICR p 42) since the revenue
allocation was already decided in 2018 according to the interview with the TTL.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
MW-Energy Sector Support Project (P099626)




                                                                          Page 14 of 14
