     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09) (P111545)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021746

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P111545                                  KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09)

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Kenya                                    Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-45530,IDA-53120,TF-97272             31-Dec-2013                                        133,591,676.82

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Mar-2009                              31-Dec-2018

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                79,284,446.00

 Revised Commitment                           133,449,909.40                                  74,979,310.35

 Actual                                       133,591,676.82                                  74,979,310.35




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Katharina Ferl             Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Behrens                   IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p.ii) and the Financing Agreement of May 8, 2009 (p. 6),
   the objective of the project was “to increase social safety net access for extremely poor orphans and
   vulnerable children (OVC) households, through an effective and efficient expansion of the Program."




                                                                                                Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09) (P111545)



   When the project received Additional Financing (AF) in October 2013, the PDO was revised: "to increase
   social safety net access for extremely poor OVC households and to build the capacity of the government to
   more effectively deliver the National Safety Net Program (NSNP).”

   Since the AF scaled up capacity building support to cover the entire NSNP, beyond the CT-OVC, and the
   objectives were revised accordingly, a split rating will be conducted.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  31-Oct-2013

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Policy Development and Institutional Strengthening (appraisal estimate US$10.0
   million, AF US$10.0 million, actual US$16.5 million). This component consisted of several sub-
   components.

   Sub-component 1.1: Strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of Gender, Children, and Social
   Development to coordinate social protection (SP) interventions. This sub-component was to finance
   the development of a policy framework to better coordinate existing SP programs and support the overall
   planning and coordination of SP interventions, mainly through technical assistance (TA) and training of key
   staff.

   Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening the capacity of the Department of Children Services to more
   efficiently manage the program. This sub-component was to finance support for operational activities, TA
   for procurement, financial management, an update of the operational manual, training materials, and
   hardware. It was also to provide support for strengthening linkages with complementary programs to: (i)
   strengthen the supply side of the program, such as links with schools and health centers, and also
   coordination with other human development promotion programs (for example, school bursary schemes,
   HIV/AIDS awareness programs, and health fee waiver programs); (ii) promote income generating activities
   and skills development of OVC caregivers, by linking with programs such as the Kenya Women’s Finance
   Trust; and (iii) promote skills development among youth, by linking with youth polytechnics and programs
   such as the Youth Enterprise Development Fund.

   Sub-component 1.3: Governance and accountability. This sub-component was to finance: (i) provision
   of information to beneficiary households and the population as a whole regarding the program and its
   benefits; (ii) implementation of a communication strategy, including the design of the program website; (iii)
   information, communication, and education campaigns; (iv) program leaflets, posters, and other promotional
   information and materials; (v) raising awareness of the importance of immunization, nutrition, and infectious

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09) (P111545)



  diseases including HIV/AIDS, and other knowledge to improve the lives of OVC households; and (vi)
  enhanced oversight and accountability systems to improve program implementation to ensure that
  beneficiaries as well as non-beneficiaries had access to the appeals and complaints mechanism. This sub-
  component also was to finance spot checks and citizens' report cards to ensure and measure beneficiary
  satisfaction.

  Sub-component 1.4: Management information, monitoring and evaluation. This sub-component was to
  finance: (i) refinements to the Management Information System (MIS); (ii) a Financial Management Module
  linking with payment providers; (iii) technical support for operational and impact evaluations to assess
  impact and operational efficiency of the management of the program; (iv) financial strengthening processes;
  and (v) studies and a pilot to test alternative payment mechanisms.



  Through the AF, the scope of component 1 was expanded to strengthen the government’s capacity to
  support the entire NSNP. The NSNP, supported by the Bank through a US$ 300 million Program for Results
  (PforR) Credit (2013-2020), aimed to establish effective support for poor and vulnerable households through
  the four main CT programs in the country: the CT-OVC program, the Older Persons Cash Transfer, the
  Persons with Severe Disability Cash Transfer, and the Hunger and Safety Net Program. The NSNP needed
  further investment in institutional and system strengthening to ensure quality of the results achieved under
  the program.



  Component 2: Program implementation in selected sub-counties (appraisal estimate US$40.0
  million, actual US$37.9 million): This component consisted of two sub-components.

  Sub-component 2.1: Cash benefits for OVC households in selected districts: This sub-component was
  to finance cash transfers of KSh 1,500 per month per household in 25 of the 40 government-funded districts
  and up to 56,000 households. Districts were targeted for inclusion in the program according to the number
  of extreme poor OVC households (PAD, p. 35). The program was to reach seven districts in the first
  year, covering approximately 20,000 households. The program was to expand to an additional six districts
  each year, reaching 12,000 additional households in each of the second, third, and fourth years, totaling
  56,000 households by the end of FY12.

  At the AF, the cash transfer to beneficiary households was increased from KSh 1,500 per month per
  household to KSh 2,000.

  Sub-component 2.2: Transaction costs for CTs: This sub-component was to finance transaction costs
  related to cash transfers.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$50 million. Actual total cost was US$541.5 million.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09) (P111545)



   Financing: The project was financed by a US$50 million credit from the Bank, of which US$44.9 million
   was disbursed, and AF of US$10 million, of which US$9.4 million was disbursed. UNICEF contributed
   US$26.4 million of a planned US$12 million, and the British Department for International Development
   (DfID) contributed US$75 million of a planned US$34 million, through a Multi-Donor Trust Fund toward TA
   and direct support for the CT-OVC and, after the AF, toward scaling up support for the entire NSNP.



   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower contributed US$381.46 million, significantly more than the planned
   US$30 million, reflecting sharply increased government support for the CT-OVC.



   Dates: The project was restructured three times:

         On October 31, 2013, the project received AF as well as funding from DfID to allow for the
          expansion of support to the entire NSNP. The project's objectives, first component (as described
          above), and results framework were revised accordingly, and the closing date was extended from
          December 31, 2013 to December 31, 2015.
         On November 7, 2016, the project was restructured to: (i) extend the closing date to October 31,
          2018; (ii) modify some of the indicators linked to the Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) under
          the parallel PforR to ensure alignment, better measure key indicators, and revise some targets; and
          (iii) amend institutional arrangements based on organizational changes in the Ministry of Labor and
          Social Protection.
         On October 30, 2018, the project was restructured to extend the closing date to December 31, 2018,
          to allow for sufficient time for the government to complete outstanding procurement activities and
          conclude the analysis of beneficiary surveys and impact evaluations.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
In 2009, almost half of Kenya’s population lived in poverty, and nearly 20 percent lived in extreme poverty.
Reasons for households falling into poverty included shocks such as food price inflation, droughts, floods,
and illness and death caused by HIV/AIDS. A rapid assessment conducted in 2004 found that 1.8 million
children were orphans and, of these, nearly two-thirds had lost their parents due to HIV/AIDS. Nearly one-
quarter of OVC lived in extreme poverty, and only 85 percent attended school (compared to 93 percent of
other children). In 2004, the government implemented a pre-pilot CT-OVC program, financed by UNICEF
and the Swedish International Development Agency, that provided cash transfers to 500 poor households
with OVC in three districts. In 2006, this pilot was expanded to 40 additional districts. In 2008, with the
support of the World Bank, the government expanded the program further and aimed to reach about half of
all OVC living in extreme poverty through a nationwide program covering at least 100,000 households by
2012.


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09) (P111545)



               The objective of the project supported the government’s National Social Protection Strategy, under
               development at the time of project preparation but never formally adopted, which aimed to harmonize SP
               interventions while meeting the immediate needs of the poorest and most vulnerable. A new government
               SP strategy was being prepared when the project closed. The objectives of the original project and the AF
               were in line with the Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy at appraisal (2004-2008), which aimed to invest in
               people, reduce vulnerability, and strengthen community; they also reflected the broad outlines of the Bank’s
               most recent Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, FY14-FY18), which prioritizes “promoting protection and
               potential to ensure all groups share in advancing prosperity and helping the vulnerable to develop their
               potential." However, it is noteworthy that the FY14-FY18 CPS explicitly states (p. 37) that "orphans and
               street children" were likely to receive different/less focus moving forward, reflecting "difficult trade-offs" and
               "competing pressures" as the Bank practices selectivity at an operational level. Relevance of the project's
               objectives is therefore rated Substantial, as the objectives were supportive of country conditions
               and government strategy at appraisal, but remained less relevant to Bank strategy at closing.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Increase social safety net access for extremely poor OVC households

                             Rationale
                             The project’s theory of change linked the provision of cash benefits to OVC households with increasing social
                             safety net access for the extremely poor. Furthermore, the project linked support for financial management
                             and procurement, the development of a single registry and a harmonized targeting tool, and conducting of an
                             impact evaluation and beneficiary surveys with strengthened governance and capacity for program
                             management, ultimately enhancing access for beneficiaries.



                             Outputs:

                                        350,000 OVC beneficiary households were covered by the CT-OVC program in 2018, surpassing the
                                         original target of 50,000 and almost meeting the revised target of 365,000. This represents about 17
                                         percent of all OVCs in Kenya.
                                        82,530 children were immunized, surpassing the target of 18,000 children.
                                        The households of 177,507 OVC aged 0-17 received free basic external support in caring for the child.
                                         Regular awareness sessions for beneficiaries on immunization, nutrition, and HIV/AIDS prevention
                                         were conducted.

                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09) (P111545)




      109 officers were trained on various aspects of the program including designing and implementing a
       social transfer program, integrating information systems, M&E, and project management. The
       trainings targeted officers in headquarters and the field.
      55 computers, 10 photocopiers, 25 printers, 13 scanners, and assorted accessories were procured. 20
       motor vehicles and 20 motorcycles were purchased to enhance field operations.
      According to the ICR (p. 24), during implementation an agreement was reached with the government
       to test the introduction of penalties to determine their effect on fulfillment of co-responsibilities. The
       pilot was implemented for approximately 18 months but encountered several challenges related to
       capacity such as data collection, accurate implementation of penalties, and timely payments. It was
       decided to discontinue the pilot and put resources instead into other areas of the program.



Outcomes:

      The percentage of OVC in beneficiary households aged 6–17 years who have completed or are
       enrolled in basic education increased from 78 percent in 2009 to 95 percent in 2018, surpassing the
       original target of 90 percent and meeting the revised target of 95 percent.
      The percentage of OVC living in beneficiary households 0–17 years of age holding birth
       certificates increased from 19 percent in 2009 to 67 percent in 2018, surpassing the original target of
       50 percent and the revised target of 60 percent.
      The percentage of OVC in beneficiary households age 0–5 years who were fully immunized increased
       from 65.5 percent in 2009 to 80 percent in 2018, meeting the original target of 80 percent and the
       revised target of 70 percent.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
The original project did not contain a second objective.

Rationale
The original project did not contain a second objective.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Build the capacity of the government to more effectively deliver the NSNP

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09) (P111545)




Revised Rationale
The capacity of the government to deliver the NSNP was to be enhanced by strengthening program systems
to ensure good governance; harmonizing CT programs to improve sector coherence; and capacity building for
expanding CT programs to promote more comprehensive and equitable coverage.



Outputs:

      A Social Protection Secretariat was established. An SP Policy Framework was adopted in June 2011
         and was being updated as of the time of the ICR, but the target of developing a new SP strategy was
         not achieved.
        TA was provided to develop alternative payment mechanisms for beneficiaries.
        Trainings were implemented related to M&E, MIS, enrollment, targeting, and beneficiary outreach. 100
         percent of NSNP progress reports produced by the MIS met agreed reporting standards, meeting the
         target.
        An electronic payment mechanism with two-factor authentication was introduced to ensure that CTs
         became more secure, accessible, and predictable.
        The project introduced biometric enrollment and identification of beneficiaries, improved targeting
         mechanisms, and consolidated financial management processes. A grievance and case management
         system was established to enable beneficiaries and others to lodge grievances or provide updates on
         household data.



Outcomes:

      The percentage of NSNP beneficiaries who conformed to the program targeting criteria increased
         from 30 percent in 2009 to 82 percent in 2018, exceeding the original target of 50 percent and almost
         achieving the revised target of 85 percent.
        The percentage of NSNP beneficiaries for whom payments were made electronically through payment
         services providers and used two-factor authentication increased from 40 percent in 2013 to 100
         percent in 2018, surpassing the original target of 75 percent and the revised target of 90 percent.
        The percentage of NSNP beneficiaries who were able to name two means of making a complaint
         increased from 15 percent in 2013 to 30 percent in 2018, not achieving the original/revised target of
         47 percent.
        The percentage of NSNP beneficiaries who knew the program's objectives and entitlements increased
         from 37 percent in 2013 to 89 percent in 2018, surpassing the original/revised target of 60 percent.
        13 percent of NSNP payments were disbursed to payment service providers on time in 2018, not
         achieving the target of 70 percent, and marking a decline from the 2009 baseline of 26 percent.
         According to the ICR (p. 17), between 2014 and 2017 NSNP payments were mostly made on time,
         and in 2017 the government achieved a DLI under the PforR related to timeliness of payments. A
         2017 Program Implementation and Beneficiary Satisfaction (PIBS) survey confirmed that 77 percent of
         NSNP beneficiaries reported that they received payments on time. However, in 2018, the NSNP
         experienced payment delays due to the introduction of an Older Person Cash Transfer, which was
         given priority by the government, and the rollout of a new payment mechanism giving beneficiaries

                                                                                                Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09) (P111545)



                                   access to a bank account and a choice of payment provider. The 2018 drop in performance is
                                   therefore likely to be temporary.
                                  The distance traveled by beneficiaries to the nearest pay point declined, with 61 percent of
                                   beneficiaries reporting that they traveled more than 6 kilometers in 2016 compared to 15 percent in
                                   2019.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial, based on achievements in coverage of cash transfers to OVC
                            beneficiary households and fulfillment of co-responsibilities, as well as improvements in delivery of the NSNP.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency

   Neither the PAD nor the project paper for the AF included a traditional economic analysis. Instead, they
   highlighted the strong economic rationale for investing in the CT-OVC program. Kenya has approximately 2
   million OVCs who represent 10.8 percent of all children and 4.4 percent of the total population. 12.5 percent of
   OVC live in extreme poverty, compared to 10.2 percent of all children. The PAD and project paper also cited
   global experience with CTs and their track record of demonstrated success in reducing poverty and boosting
   human capital development.



   Operational Efficiency

   According to the ICR (p. 21), the project was able to reduce the administrative costs for implementing the NSNP
   from 30 percent in FY07-08 (before project implementation) to 2 percent during the last year of
   implementation. This is significantly lower than the average administrative costs for social safety net program
   spending in Africa, which were estimated at 17 percent in 2018.

   The ICR (p. 19) reported that the project achieved significant economies of scale by integrating a systems
   approach across the NSNP, and also by using existing country financial management systems. Effective

                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09) (P111545)



collaboration among development partners facilitated efficient support for all the elements of the NSNP and
timely response to government requests for TA (ICR, p. 34). The project conducted several reviews of the CT-
OVC MIS and payroll systems, identifying irregularities in beneficiary enrollment and payments such as payment
of beneficiaries without names and ID numbers. Facilitating the correction of these errors was a positive marker
of efficient use of project resources.

There were minor implementation inefficiencies. The project experienced several implementation delays due to
procurement and financial management-related issues, resulting in some vehicles not being delivered on time
and cancellation of funds (see Section 10b); however, most of these issues were resolved, with support from the
Bank and other partners, well before project closing.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the original and revised objectives was Substantial, responding effectively to country
conditions and government strategy, but not meeting the selectivity terms of the most recent Bank country
strategy. Overall efficacy is rated Substantial, based on achievements in coverage of cash transfers to OVC
beneficiary households and fulfillment of co-responsibilities, as well as improvements in delivery of the NSNP.
Project efficiency is also rated Substantial. These ratings indicate only minor shortcomings in the project's
preparation and implementation, resulting in an Outcome rating of Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR (p. 31), the government continues to be committed to maintaining and expanding the
NSNP. The project's November 2017 Aide Memoire reported that in September 2017, the government had

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09) (P111545)



taken over the financing of 40,000 CT-OVC households and 11,000 additional households under the HSNP,
all previously financed by DfID. This was seen as a major achievement, with 100 percent of the project-
financed CTs now financed by the government. The project will be followed by a new Bank operation, the
Kenya Social and Economic Inclusion Project (US$250 million, 2018-2023), aiming to strengthen delivery
systems for enhanced access to social and economic inclusion services and shock-responsive safety nets
for poor and vulnerable households. Also, the government’s capacity to formulate and implement policies in
various institutions has been strengthened. For example, a framework to combat error, fraud, and corruption
as well as a detailed financial management action plan were developed. Furthermore, extensive trainings in
M&E, MIS, procurement, financial management, and awareness sessions for beneficiaries in areas such as
immunization, nutrition, and HIV/AIDS were provided, and the capacity and knowledge generated through
these trainings appears likely to be sustained.

While the timeliness of CTs to beneficiaries has improved (assuming the 2018 downturn in timeliness is
temporary, as anticipated) and a new payment system was rolled out, it is still critical that the National
Treasury continues to ensure timely transfers of funds, and that the government continues to allocate
necessary resources toward program administration.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (p. 30), the Bank worked closely with the government and other development
  partners during project preparation. The design of the project was based on analytical and operational
  work conducted by the Bank in Kenya, Asia, and Latin America. The Bank team identified relevant risks
  at appraisal, such as an inadequate governance environment including fiduciary risks, challenging
  technical and design issues, limited implementation capacity, and challenges with development partner
  coordination/harmonization. According to the Bank team (October 10, 2019), the Bank mitigated these
  risks by making substantial investments into systems to strengthen the technical design and fiduciary
  aspects of the project. These included strengthening the MIS of the program and establishing the Single
  Registry; strengthening fiduciary systems, including development, implementation, and monitoring of
  financial management and procurement action plans; introducing the two-factor authentication electronic
  payment mechanism; and strengthening the grievance and case management system. In response to the
  implementation capacity risk, considerable support was provided for training of program officers, and also
  for engagement of temporary staff for certain intense periods of expansion as well as the development of
  a consolidation strategy and its implementation. External reviews, such as a project implementation and
  beneficiary satisfaction survey, were introduced to provide important guidance to program management;
  concrete actions were taken in program implementation as a result. The project’s M&E was designed
  adequately (see Section 9a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09) (P111545)




b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (p. 30) stated that the field-based Bank team had an adequate skill mix and provided regular
 project implementation supervision. Throughout implementation, the Bank team conducted 20 support
 missions and several short technical missions, and according to the ICR (p. 31), aides-memoire were of
 good quality. According to the ICR (p. 25), the Bank closely monitored project implementation jointly with
 other development partners. The project received AF, and the objectives were revised accordingly, in
 response to the evolution of the government's strategy for the NSNP. The ICR (p. 31) stated that even
 though the project had four different Task Team Leaders throughout implementation, continuity of
 supervision was ensured through regular communication with the government.

 The Bank team worked closely with the government and addressed implementation bottlenecks quickly as
 they arose. It addressed procurement and financial management-related implementation delays by
 providing technical assistance to counterparts. For example, the Bank supported the government to
 develop a time-bound financial management action plan, and additional procurement staff were hired in a
 timely manner when procurement-related challenges arose (see Section 10b).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change and the linkages between key activities/outputs and intended outcomes
 were reflected well in the results framework. The objectives of the original project and the AF were clearly
 specified. The outcome indicators encompassed all elements of the objectives statement, and most
 indicators were appropriately specific and measurable. Some of the indicators measured more than one
 aspect, such as the outcome indicator “additional number of beneficiary households receiving timely and
 predictable cash transfers (as defined in the operations manual)." Also, the ICR (p. 24) noted that some of
 the indicators did not have real baseline values, but instead only estimates. These estimates resulted in
 challenges during implementation when the real baseline values turned out to be higher or lower than
 originally expected, and targets had to be modified.

 According to the ICR (p. 26), institutional arrangements for M&E were adequate to collect data on a regular
 basis and allow for analysis to inform program management. Initially, the Central Program Unit and later
 the Social Assistance Unit (SAU) were responsible for the project’s M&E activities. These activities
 included regular operational monitoring reports as well as an impact evaluation and two rounds of the PIBS
 survey, in 2015/2016 and 2017/2018.




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09) (P111545)



b. M&E Implementation
  When the project received AF, the results framework was adapted to reflect the government’s plans for
  the NSNP. According to the ICR (p. 26), M&E implementation was monitored continuously, and the
  government and the Bank provided technical assistance to address any challenges. Due to lengthy
  procurement processes, the impact evaluation and the PIBS surveys were delayed, resulting in the
  baseline for the impact evaluation not being completed until 2015 and the impact evaluation itself, as well
  as the final round of the PIBS survey, only being completed just before project closure. However,
  according to the ICR (p. 26), the PIBS survey provided independent and rigorous data for monitoring the
  performance of the NSNP and the satisfaction of beneficiaries of the CT program.

  According to the Bank team (October 10, 2019), M&E implementation was monitored systematically
  through continuous implementation support, as well as collaboration and dialogue with the government.
  The government brought on board additional M&E staff when necessary, and the Bank provided
  additional support to resolve some of the challenges faced related to M&E design and capacity. This
  support included ensuring adequate attention to M&E activities on all aspects of project implementation,
  continuous engagement with external M&E firms to ensure relevance of activities to program
  implementers, and compliance with respective terms of reference. As an example, project communication
  was found to be lacking in both rounds of the PIBS. The SAU responded to the findings through the
  development and implementation of a thorough beneficiary communication strategy leveraging a range of
  stakeholders and instruments to improve beneficiary outreach.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 27), the project’s M&E data and analysis were used to inform project
  management and decision making. The ICR (p. 27) stated that during the last two years of the project,
  external operational monitoring of the NSNP was conducted on a regular basis. Each report focused on
  pre-identified key areas such as program harmonization, payments, targeting, MIS, and other areas. The
  information obtained through this monitoring allowed for modifications in program implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The original project was classified as category C and did not trigger any of the Bank’s safeguard policies.
   The AF triggered the Bank’s safeguard policy OP/BP 4.10 (indigenous people). According to the ICR (p.
   28), the project conducted an environmental and social assessment which found that CT programs
   sometimes cause tensions among households who can participate in the program and those who cannot.
   The assessment also identified the need to strengthen the participation and voice of poor and vulnerable
   groups in the NSNP. In response, the government prepared a Vulnerable and Marginalized Group
   Framework.



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09) (P111545)



  The ICR (p. 28) stated that in July 2016 the project conducted a Social Safeguards Review for the NSNP
  that found no evidence for minority groups systematically being excluded.

  According to the ICR, the project’s safeguard rating was Moderately Satisfactory or Satisfactory throughout
  project implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  According to the ICR (p. 29), the project used the country’s financial management system, which resulted
  in its strengthening. Planning and budgeting followed the government’s procedures. Budget
  implementation was monitored by the government’s Integrated Financial Management Information System
  on a monthly basis. In addition, bi-monthly beneficiary payment cycle reports and reconciliations and
  quarterly interim financial reports were issued.

  The ICR (p. 29) stated that several project-conducted reviews of the CT-OVC MIS and payroll identified
  irregularities in the beneficiary enrollment and payment system, including payment of beneficiaries without
  names and ID numbers. The Bank and SAU addressed these issues by developing and implementing an
  action plan. Also, a Financial Management Policies and Procedures Manual was developed to introduce
  more comprehensive internal control procedures.

  According to the ICR (p. 30), the Office of the Auditor General expressed a qualified opinion for the year
  ending June 30, 2018. The audit found several shortcomings: (i) non-financial assets procured during the
  year and lack of a complete fixed asset registry on asset management; (ii) funds transferred from a closed
  IDA counterpart project account and some assets procured in its lifetime not disclosed; (iii) failure to
  provide CT reconciliation reports by the Payment Service Providers (PSPs); (iv) continuation of payments
  for some deceased beneficiaries, beneficiaries that were over 18 years, or households that did not have an
  OVC ; (v) delays by PSPs in submitting reports on transfers to beneficiaries; and (vi) overpayment of bank
  commissions to Kenya Commercial Bank. The Bank addressed these shortcomings by developing an
  action plan that was 80 percent implemented by the time the ICR was written.



  Procurement

  According to the ICR (p. 29), the project followed the Bank’s guidelines, and procurement plans were
  updated at least annually. The project’s procurement performance was rated Satisfactory throughout most
  of the implementation period, with only a short period in 2010/2011 when it was rated Moderately
  Satisfactory. The project experienced delays due to insufficient funds included in the government’s budget
  or supplementary budget. The ICR (p. 29) stated that, for example, in September 2018 several
  procurement packages for vehicles were still pending because the National Treasury had not given the
  authority to the State Department for Social Protection (SDSP) to incur expenditures. Once the SDSP
  received this approval, the project's closing date was extended to December 31, 2018 to complete the



                                                                                                 Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09) (P111545)



   procurement of these vehicles; however, since there was limited time left, not all vehicles could be
   delivered, resulting in a refund of the Bank in the amount of US$76,644.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 32-35) included several valuable lessons, adapted here by IEG:

      Adequate targeting mechanisms and regular recertification are critical for a
       conditional cash transfer program in order to ensure that the money goes where it
       should. In this project, there were reports that households continued the program despite
       the OVC turning 18 years, or that households claimed benefits even though there was no
       OVC living in the household. In order to address these issues, the government has rolled out
       a new payment mechanism that requires proof of life and IDs for registration and is updating
       data inputs into the targeting tool as well as the recertification strategy.
      Finding a sustainable, streamlined, and systematic process for ensuring timely
       payments to beneficiaries is critical for the success of a program. In 2016, this project
       conducted an analysis of the steps required to complete a payment cycle, finding that 24
       internal steps had to be taken over a total of 90 days. The government addressed this
       lengthy process through streamlining and was able to decrease the timeline to 54 days,
       resulting in the government meeting the performance standard for timely payments for three
       consecutive payment cycles. However, this performance was not sustainable when the
       National Treasury did not prioritize SDSP disbursements. Therefore, in order to increase the
       likelihood of a timely process, the National Treasury agreed to include all CTs on the
       recurrent budget instead of the development budget.


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       KE-Cash Transfer for OVC (FY09) (P111545)



        Allowing sufficient time in the project’s design for the introduction of new delivery
         systems is important to ensure benefits in the long run. In 2015, the project introduced a
         new two-factor authentication payment mechanism, resulting in the disruption of project
         implementation due to challenges with collecting biometric data. However, evidence from
         field visits also indicated that beneficiaries have benefited from choosing providers in much
         closer proximity than before, reducing the cost and time to access the pay point.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a strong overview of project preparation and implementation and included valuable lessons
learned. The ICR was internally consistent and outcome-driven. Its account of the rationale and processes
underlying the project's Additional Financing and restructuring was straightforward. The M&E framework and
implementation, as well as challenges and solutions in defining baselines for some indicators, were well
explained. However, the contributions of development partners were not outlined clearly, and the downgrading
of support for OVCs in the most recent Country Partnership Strategy was not acknowledged. Overall, the ICR’s
quality is Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 15
