          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          Private Sector Competitiveness DPO1(P149998)



                                                                                    Report Number : ICRR0021863

   1. Project Data



    Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
    Georgia                                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


    Programmatic DPL
    Planned Operations:          2              Approved Operations:         2

    Operation ID                                Operation Name
    P149998                                     Private Sector Competitiveness DPO1


     L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
     IBRD-85040                                31-Dec-2015                                         60,000,000.00

     Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
     28-Apr-2015                               31-Dec-2015

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                           60,000,000.00                                             0.00

     Revised Commitment                            60,000,000.00                                             0.00

     Actual                                        60,000,000.00                                             0.00




     Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
     Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Judyth L. Twigg             Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)


PHPROJECTDATATBL



     Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
     Georgia                                    Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation

     Operation ID                               Operation Name
     P155553                                    Private Sector Competitiveness DPO2 ( P155553 )



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Private Sector Competitiveness DPO1(P149998)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-85040,IBRD-87750                   31-Jul-2018                                           52,685,455.96

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Jul-2017                             31-Jul-2018

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       52,685,455.96                                               0.00




2. Program Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The Private Sector Competitiveness Development Policy Operation (PSC) originally consisted of three DPOs,
   subsequently reduced to two. The program development objective (PDO) of the first PSC (PSC-1) was to
   increase private sector competitiveness through second generation business environment reforms, financial
   sector deepening and diversification, and increasing firms’ capacity to innovate and to export (Program
   Document, PD, page 19).

   The PDO was revised in PSC-2. The phrase “establishing conditions for” was added to the objective “financial
   sector deepening and diversification” to be more in line with the original policy action set out in the PD for
   PSC-1, and a better representation of what could be achieved on the ground within the time frame of the
   series once it had become a two-operation series.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas

    There were three pillars:

    Pillar 1: supporting business environment reforms to stimulate private sector-led growth. This pillar
    was to support measures in key areas: enhancing the public-private dialogue to generate consensus for
    reforms; eliminating market barriers for entrepreneurship and small and medium enterprise (SME) growth;
    and strengthening the public procurement system.




                                                                                                  Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Private Sector Competitiveness DPO1(P149998)



    Pillar 2: supporting financial sector development. This pillar was to strengthen financial safety nets by
    introducing a deposit insurance system; implementing a comprehensive pension reform; and developing
    more effective capital and insurance markets.

    Pillar 3: supporting measures to increase firms’ capacity to innovate and export. This pillar was to
    increase the competitiveness of domestic companies by strengthening their managerial capabilities,
    upgrading the quality of their products, investing in new technologies, and expanding their market
    knowledge.

    Significant changes

    Pillars 1 and 2 were not revised during implementation. Pillar 3 was expanded to introduce an
    environmental measure, i.e. favorable tax treatment of hybrid and electric cars.

   PSC-2 was delayed for a year, due to a temporary weakening of the macroeconomic framework (see
   Section 3b). When activities resumed, PSC-3 was dropped, with key activities being incorporated into PSC-
   2, maintaining the original design and objectives, and updating indicator targets.




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   Program cost and financing. The commitment under PSC-1 was US$60 million, and US$50 million under
   PSC-2. Both DPOs were fully disbursed: US$60 million for PSC-1 and US$52.7 million for PSC-2, the value
   of the latter reflecting SDR/US$ exchange rate fluctuations.

   Dates. PSC-1 was approved on April 28, 2015, became effective on June 12, 2015, and closed on December
   31, 2015. PSC-2 was approved on July 31, 2017, became effective on September 22, 2017, and closed on
   July 31, 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  The series’ objectives were relevant to the country situation, government policy, and the current Bank Country
  Partnership Framework (CPF, FY2019-2022). The focus on “second generation” reforms, referred to in the
  PDO, emphasized the need to further pursue changes to the business environment that had begun during the
  previous decade. A "first generation" of reforms had been put into place over the previous decade, addressing
  business deregulation, corruption, legal, tax, and trade reforms. While these first-generation reforms had a
  significant favorable effect on Georgia’s economic growth and its ranking in global competitiveness tables,
  they had proven insufficient to adequately close the country’s productivity gap, improve wages, or eliminate

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Private Sector Competitiveness DPO1(P149998)



       structural unemployment. The PCS series was to continue that effort: it was aligned with Georgia’s 2020
       development strategy to strengthen the private sector and reduce reliance on the public economy as a source
       of economic growth; and the space it created for private sector development facilitated the thrust towards
       diversity and innovation that was highlighted in the CPF.



       Rating
       High

   b. Relevance of Design
       Program design was relevant to achieving the PDO. The results chain was clear, and prior actions and
       triggers could reasonably be expected to deliver intended outcomes as measured by the results indicators,
       which were monitorable and relevant for measuring progress towards objectives.

       The macroeconomic framework during the preparation of PCS-1 was deemed adequate for the operation,
       albeit with downside risks related to potential external disturbances. The government was following a policy of
       fiscal prudence, low inflation, and limited interventions in the foreign exchange market. A three-year IMF
       Stand-By Arrangement had been approved in 2014.

       The preparation of PCS-2 was postponed by a year, as growth faltered and the macroeconomic situation
       deteriorated when the economies of Georgia’s main trading partners went into recession, adversely affecting
       exports and remittances – the main catalysts of growth. The IMF program was suspended in 2016. By 2017,
       the macro-fiscal framework had improved, the government had reached agreement on an IMF-supported
       program, and the situation was deemed adequate to proceed with a follow-up PCS operation. Key elements
       of PCS-3 were incorporated into a revised PCS-2, maintaining the relevance of the original series design (see
       Significant Changes above)



       Rating
       Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To increase private sector competitiveness through business environment reforms

    Rationale


                                                                                                        Page 4 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Private Sector Competitiveness DPO1(P149998)



    The objective was to be achieved by strengthening public-private dialogue, supporting entrepreneurship and
    SMEs, and modernizing public procurement practices.

    Strengthening public-private dialogue

    In the period between PSC-1 and PSC-2, the government introduced the practice of making major draft laws
    available for public review and comment (a prior action for the original PSC-2).

    An Investors Council was established as a prior action for PSC-2 to serve as a platform for regular dialogue
    with the business community on new policy initiatives. So far, six major reforms have been reviewed by the
    Investors Council, compared to a program target of four.

    Supporting entrepreneurship and SMEs

    An entrepreneurship and development agency (EDA) was established as a prior action for PSC-1 to promote
    the creation and growth of start-up companies and SMEs. An SME development strategy for the EDA was
    implemented under PSC-2, providing access to finance and micro and small business support programs. A
    target of 8000 SMEs and entrepreneurs (of which 37 percent women) using EDA services was
    set. According to EDA's 2016 annual report, the target was exceeded with a client base of 9,740 users (of
    which 40.5 percent were women).

    Enhancing public procurement practices

    To increase participation by private companies in the public procurement market, the state procurement
    agency established a training center to improve the knowledge of contracting authorities and suppliers about
    procurement procedures, as a prior action for PSC-1. Under PSC-2, the government amended the law on
    public procurement to bring about conformity with the basic standards regulating the award of contracts in its
    association agreement with the European Union.

    These measures were accompanied by an increase in: (i) the number of users in the e-procurement system,
    from a baseline of 19,700 in 2013 to 42,700 in 2017, compared to a target of 36,400; and (ii) the number of
    state procurement agency tenders monitored for unlawful practices, which rose to 76,400 compared to a
    baseline of 13,000 and a target of 45,000.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective


                                                                                                       Page 5 of 13
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Private Sector Competitiveness DPO1(P149998)



To increase private sector competitiveness by establishing enabling conditions for financial sector deepening
and diversification

Rationale
The objective was to be achieved by: (i) establishing a deposit insurance system to increase public
confidence in the banking system; (ii) comprehensive pension reform to strengthen social protection and
accelerate financial sector development through longer term savings and financial inclusion; (iii) accounting
and auditing reforms for more accurate understanding of the financial situation of large enterprises; and (iv)
the development of insurance markets. The three latter measures were aimed at promoting capital markets
development.

Deposit insurance

An inter-agency deposit insurance system (DIS) working group to design the DIS and coordinate its
implementation was set up as a prior condition to PSC-1. The law on DIS was adopted by Parliament in
2017 and became effective in January 2018, achieving the results indicator. Since becoming effective, the
DIS has attained a coverage ratio of 1.29 percent (DIS to total insured deposits in member banks), 96
percent of individual depositors are fully covered, and funds are enough to cover insured deposits in any of
the eight smallest banks individually, or in the five smallest banks simultaneously.

Pensions

A proposed comprehensive pension plan, including individual savings accounts, was submitted to the
Economic Council as a prior action for PSC-1. A new pension law was passed and became effective on
January 1, 2019, meeting the indicator for this activity. By mid-2019, the system had registered 830,000
participants, and pension assets were at US$82 million equivalent. Measures under way to expand the
capital market should over time provide investment opportunities for pension assets.

Accounting and auditing

A new law on accounting and auditing together with a service for accounting, reporting, and auditing
supervision (SARAS) were introduced as prior actions for PSC-2. With the law in effect, 700 enterprises so
far have submitted their financial statements to SARAS, including all publicly accountable entities. In
addition, 23 quality reviews have been undertaken by SARAS, and 14 more are under way.

Insurance markets

Insurance reforms were to support a better capitalized insurance industry with a more diversified set of
products and services. Amendments to the law on insurance introduced solvency requirements in
compliance with European Union solvency margin and minimum capital requirements as a prior action for
PSC-2. Mandatory motor vehicle third-party liability insurance (MTPLI), initially a PSC-3 prior action, was
introduced under PSC-2. (MTPLI is important for the development and capitalization of the insurance



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Private Sector Competitiveness DPO1(P149998)



    industry.) As a result of these measures, minimum capital requirements have been gradually increasing from
    US$400,000 equivalent to a current US$1.6 million and are expected to rise to US$2.8 million by end-2020.



    Rating
   High
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective
     To increase private sector competitiveness by increasing firms' capacity to innovate and export

    Rationale
    The objective was to be achieved by: (i) licensing and regulatory actions to enable the upgrading of mobile
    and fixed broadband services; (ii) legal amendments to underpin the innovation support framework and align
    it with European Union practices; (iii) fiscal measures to stimulate the introduction of more fuel efficient cars
    in line with the country’s increasing emphasis on green technologies; and (iv) actions to ensure international
    recognition of state institutions responsible for metrology and accreditation to reduce hidden costs of trade
    linked to compliance testing and certification.

    Information and communication technology reforms

    Amendments to the country’s electronic communications law, including spectrum allocation and a revised
    methodology for spectrum pricing, were introduced as prior actions for PSC-1. To facilitate competition
    among service providers and innovation in technology while connecting more people, existing licenses were
    modified; and a public consultation was held on draft secondary legislation on electronic communications
    market analysis aligned with EU practices, as prior actions for PSC-2.

    Indicators covered incremental private investments in the telecommunications sector and broadband internet
    subscriptions. In the former, investments reached US$237 million compared to a target of US$50 million;
    while in the latter, broadband subscription rates rose from a baseline of 33 percent to 69 percent, with a
    target rate of 45 percent.

    Innovation policies

    A Georgian Innovation and Technology Agency (GITA) and a Research and Innovation Council were
    established as prior actions for PSC-1. The former oversees innovation policy implementation, notably
    addressing supply-side failures and demand-side constraints on research and innovation; while the latter,
    which includes key ministers and stakeholders, is to bring coherence in prioritizing policy actions and
    allocating resources. A policy trigger for PSC-2 included the adoption of a new law on innovation to facilitate
    collaboration between the private sector and academia in innovation.


                                                                                                          Page 7 of 13
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Private Sector Competitiveness DPO1(P149998)




    Results indicators measured the number of firms/individuals that received financing from GITA, and the
    number of technology parks established. GITA provided financing for 307 entrepreneurs, as well as training
    courses for some 1,800 prospective entrepreneurs. Four technology parks were established, compared to a
    target of two technology parks and 8 fabrication laboratories.

    There are no information on actual instances of collaboration between the private sector and academia.

     Promotion of fuel-efficient cars

    As an element in promoting greener technologies, the tax code was amended as a prior action for PSC-2 to
    increase the excise taxes on imported cars with conventional engines and reducing excise taxes on hybrid
    cars, while maintaining the tax exemption on electric cars. While electric cars still have only a tiny share of
    the market in Georgia, between 2015 and mid-2019 (when the ICR was being prepared), hybrid cars had
    increased their share of the car park from 0.2 percent to 4.2 percent.

    Improved quality infrastructure services

    With certification of the Georgian National Agency for Standards and Metrology (GeoSTM) by the Euro-
    Asian Cooperation of National Metrological Institutions, and application for certification to the European
    Cooperation for Accreditation (ECA), as prior actions under PSC-1, and acceptance of the application by
    ECA as a prior action for PSC-2 , the government established internationally recognized accreditation and
    standards for Georgian private sector businesses.

    Since the introduction of the quality infrastructure in 2014, 5,195 certificates have been issued by GeoSTM,
    compared to a target of 2,105, as laboratories have rapidly increased their capacity to calibrate instruments
    and machines for the private sector.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  Relevance of objectives was rated high, as the series aligned with government policy and Bank
  strategy. Relevance of design was substantial, with minor misalignments in limited areas. Efficacy for the first
  objective was rated substantial, with almost full alignment between outcomes and objectives, and high for the
  second objective. The third objective was rated substantial; while three of the activities supported the objective,

                                                                                                         Page 8 of 13
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Private Sector Competitiveness DPO1(P149998)



fuel efficiency in cars was unlikely to do so. Taken together, these ratings indicate only minor shortcomings in
the operation, producing an outcome rating of satisfactory.


a.     Outcome Rating
       Satisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

While the series was concluded with the second operation, the reform agenda remains relevant. It forms part of
the government’s ongoing reform plans, and several development partners are continuing to provide budget
support and technical assistance to help maintain momentum. While the new CPF does not directly address the
features included in the series, the Bank will continue its engagement with improving the space for private
sector growth, and in particular economic reforms begun under the PSC series, notably in pensions, capital
markets, insurance, financial inclusion, accounting and auditing, and facilitating external trade and investment
promotion. Institutional strengthening is likely to be sustained, notably among major institutions such as the
Investors Council to improve public-private partnerships; EDA to support entrepreneurship through business
advisory and information services; the pension agency, through a new contributory pension scheme; the DIS to
protect bank deposits; SARAS to regulate accounting and auditing functions; and GITA to develop an
innovation eco-system.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
       Negligible

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     The series, with its focus on creating space for export-oriented private sector development, was
     strategically relevant, and the use of budget support was appropriate to help address difficult post-
     recession imbalances and for introducing market reforms that opened economic opportunity for the private
     sector. The design also drew on extensive engagement by the Bank in implementing an earlier first
     generation of business reforms, and on extensive field work; the series was preceded by, and partly
     overlapped with, a systematic country diagnostic that allowed adjustments to be made in the hiatus
     between PSC-1 and PSC-2, and it drew on close donor coordination. The results framework was consistent
     in drawing links between activities and outputs and allowed systematic monitoring of progress towards the
     three objectives. However, preparation may have placed more emphasis than necessary on the
     achievement of measurable outcomes, reflected in the change in emphasis in the PDO from “financial
     deepening” to “enabling conditions," with the latter more measurable in the short term.




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Private Sector Competitiveness DPO1(P149998)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The Bank supervision team faced a diverse set of challenges in overseeing a broad set of interventions
  aimed at improving competitiveness of private enterprises in Georgia. In most instances, the team was
  successful, and recognition should be given to the restructuring of the series in mid-stream, and re-
  emphasizing of outputs as a more realistic concept than outcomes over the timeframe of the series. Here,
  the availability of in-country expertise through the local office was particularly helpful in maintaining the
  dialogue.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  The government was committed to reforms introduced under the series, and this is reflected in the timely
  passage of laws and regulations set out as prior actions. The hiatus in the program was mainly due to
  weakening in the economies of Georgia’s main trading partners and, because of that, a deteriorating
  macroeconomic situation.



  Government Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  Not assessed.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
   Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Private Sector Competitiveness DPO1(P149998)



  The policy and results matrix for the series provided a logical sequence of prior actions underpinning the policy
  changes. Key indicators for systematic tracking of outcomes were identified, including specifications of
  baselines and targets where appropriate. Most indicators were output indicators, as the time frame in most
  cases was too short to allow measures of impact to be determined.



b. M&E Implementation
  Implementation was tracked by implementing agencies coordinated by the Ministry of Economy and
  Sustainable Development. Indicator targets were adjusted during implementation to better reflect reality on
  the ground.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E framework tracked program progress and determined the pace of implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  No safeguard policies were noted in the ICR.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  No fiduciary concerns were noted in the ICR.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None noted.



d. Other
  Gender. Some activities explicitly targeted women: access to innovation, where 22 percent of recipients of
  GITA financing were women; and female-run SMEs, where the share of women using EDA services was 40
  percent. The pension reform also benefited women disproportionately due to their higher life expectancy.

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Private Sector Competitiveness DPO1(P149998)




11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                       Satisfactory            Satisfactory                ---
Risk to Development
                              Negligible              Negligible                  ---
Outcome
Bank Performance              Satisfactory            Satisfactory                ---
Borrower Performance          Satisfactory            Satisfactory                ---
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                 ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

  A DPO series that is well supported by the country dialogue and well coordinated with development
 partner programs is likely to be able to correctly gauge the government’s willingness to pursue long-
 range, high-impact reforms. Because the PSC series had the right mix of reforms and was correctly timed
 for government commitment and capacity, it was able to achieve a broad range of high-impact reforms.

 Banking reform is likely to be more successful when the banking sector is relatively sound. In
 Georgia, deposit insurance that requires regular contributions from banks may have been more difficult to
 introduce into a banking system in crisis; in Georgia, banks were solvent and financially solid.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a robust discussion of the environment into which the DPO was introduced, allowing results
and ratings to be assessed. A more focused presentation of the results framework and the connections
between actions, outputs, and, where appropriate, outcomes, would have provided a convenient summary of


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Private Sector Competitiveness DPO1(P149998)



the evolution of an ambitious program that covered a broad area of sometimes not obvious connections. That
said, the material was there to be found.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                               Page 13 of 13
