     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FARA Trust Fund (P112684)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021749

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P112684                                  FARA Trust Fund

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Western Africa                           Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-95129,TF-95130                        31-Dec-2013                                         49,139,542.42

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 04-Dec-2008                              31-Dec-2018

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          49,709,320.00                                   49,709,320.00

 Revised Commitment                           49,298,365.01                                   49,139,542.64

 Actual                                       49,298,364.79                                   49,139,542.42




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally              Fernando Manibog             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA)
   Trust Fund (TF) Program Document (PD, para 7) was to:



   "align African agricultural institutions at the national, regional and continental levels
   with Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) Pillar IV Framework for

                                                                                                Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FARA Trust Fund (P112684)



   African Agricultural Productivity (FAAP) Principles for effective research, extension, and training and
   education."



   The PDO as stated in the Multi Donor Trust Fund Grant Agreement (MDTF, p. 4) was almost identical to the
   one mentioned in the Program Document, except where underlined, and aimed to:



   "align' African agricultural institutions at the national, regional, and continental levels with the
   principles and objectives of the Comprehensive African Agricultural Development Program (CAADP) -
   Pillar IV, for effective agricultural research, extension, technology adoption, and training and
   education."



   The PDO was revised on December 13, 2013 to be as follows:



   "To strengthen Africa’s capacity for agricultural innovation with purposefully determined outcomes,
   creating capacity for innovation and enabling environments for implementation (Restructuring paper,
   p. 8). "



   This Review will assess the outcome of the program based on a split rating as detailed under section 6.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  13-Dec-2013

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project was supported by the following four components:




                                                                                                  Page 2 of 23
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  FARA Trust Fund (P112684)



1. Networking Support Functions (NSFs) (appraisal estimate: US$10.43 million, additional financing:
US$11.66 million, actual cost: US$12.10 million). This component would finance essential continuing
functions (ECFs) related to the five NSFs. The ECFs are the core set of activities that each NSF must
undertake to realize its outputs and subsequently the Medium-Term Operational Plans (MTOPs) results
and CAADP Pillar IV objectives. The ECFs are implemented throughout the MTOP period, and include the
establishment of knowledge hubs for the respective NSF’s areas of concern and support for the functioning
of these hubs. They also include FARA’s core functions of advocacy, information exchange and facilitation
of ARD partnerships. This component would also finance international and local consultancies, goods, and
training and workshops. It included five sub-components:

1.1. Advocacy and Resource Mobilization (NSF 1). The aim of this sub-component is to support forum
members (the Sub-Regional Organization (SROs), National Agricultural Research System (NARS), and
other regional and continental agricultural research and development stakeholders) in establishing
appropriate institutional and organizational arrangements for agricultural research and development. This
responds to calls by CAADP and FAAP for increased and better harmonized investments in agricultural
research and development by national governments and regional and international development
agencies/partners.



1.2. Access to Knowledge and Technologies (NSF 2). The aim of this sub-component would be to
empower researchers and end users through increasing access to information, learning opportunities, and
new technologies in agriculture.



1.3. Regional Policies and Markets (NSF 3). This sub-component aimed to promote and facilitate
agricultural policy analyses and market research and support the application of research outputs in policy
formulation. It would provide Africa’s policy makers with policy options supported by hard facts and figures
and valuable information that will empower the continent’s delegates/representatives involved in
international trade and environmental treaty negotiations.



1.4. Capacity Strengthening (NSF 4). This sub-component aimed to ensure that Africa attains the
relevant and qualitatively and quantitatively sufficient human and institutional capacity for agricultural
innovation to achieve broad-based agricultural productivity, competitiveness and markets. This requires
addressing research capacity needs and strengthening the professional development of agricultural
scientists so that they are better able to identify, generate and deliver research inputs that meet the needs
of their clients, and in particular, poor people.




1.5.Partnerships and Strategic Alliances (NSF 5). This sub-component aimed to facilitate the
establishment of mutually beneficial partnerships that draw on the resources and expertise of all FARA
stakeholders. Such partnerships create a capacity for agricultural innovation that, together with the other
support functions, would bring about the required improvements in the efficacy and impact of African

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 23
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  FARA Trust Fund (P112684)



agricultural research and development. Agricultural innovation involves interaction among multiple actors
along the value chain. Such actors include researchers, extension provider development agents, private
industry (marketers, processors etc.), policymakers, donors, farmer organizations and consumers. FARA
recognizes that advancing innovation and innovation capacity in African agriculture requires mechanisms
that facilitate the organization of these actors into dynamic platforms for innovation.




2. Corporate Governance Reform Stream and Program Management (appraisal estimate: US$ 21.6
million, additional financing: US$29.08 million, actual cost: US$12.70 million). This component
aimed to facilitate the reform and change management of the internal organization and capability of the
FARA Secretariat to effectively implement the MTOP 2008-2012. This included the strengthening of internal
management, governance and accountability of the Secretariat to improve its support to the field
implementers of CAADP Pillar IV, especially the Sub-Regional Organizations and the National Agricultural
Research Systems. This component would finance international and local consultancies, training and
workshops, and operating costs. It included the following four sub-components.



2.1. Identifying FARA Board’s Operations and Responsibility. This sub-component would support
carrying out of a review FARA Board’s formal relationship with AU-NEPAD to recommend appropriate
accountabilities of FARA to AU-NEPAD with regard to its responsibility as lead pillar agency for CAADP
Pillar IV, and adoption of these recommendations; carrying out of a study to define FARA Board’s
accountability to its stakeholders and how this will be enhanced e.g. accountability to the founders,
investors, and the recipients of FARA services, and adoption of the proposed enhancements; carrying out of
a study to recommend ways to enhance the FARA Board’s performance, appraisal and contracting of the
Executive Director (e.g., though preparation of Terms of Reference, definition of appropriate compensation
criteria, etc.), and implementation of these recommendations; and carrying out of a study to recommend
measures for ensuring that the FARA Board members have the diversity and appropriate balance of skills
necessary to take on board the fiduciary responsibility of FARA, including in financial management, and
adoption of these recommendations.



2.2. Developing context specific corporate governance systems. This sub-component would support
carrying out of a review of FARA’s Corporate Systems with a view to bringing them in line with international
best practices; carrying out of a human resource study of FARA’s job evaluation, job grading, salary
structuring, and staff organization in order to improve FARA’s operations; and carrying out of a program to
update and enhance recruitment and selection procedures, performance and promotion procedures,
conditions of service, health and safety procedures, industrial relations framework, disciplinary/grievance
handling and dispute resolution procedures, procurement procedures, risk management procedures, and
asset management procedures.



2.3. Facilitating Good Governance and Best Practice at FARA and SRO levels. This sub-component
would support carrying out of a program to promote dialogue among FARA and Sub-Regional

                                                                                                Page 4 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    FARA Trust Fund (P112684)



  Organizations board representatives on improving corporate governance and systems, particularly issues
  covered in sub-component 2.2 above. Provision of technical assistance to further support the governance-
  related capacity strengthening carried out by CAADP Pillar IV Expert Reference Group.Organizing learning
  events other activities to promote information sharing between FARA and the Sub-Regional Organizations,
  particularly in areas outlined in sub component 2.2 above. Conducting an annual user survey of National
  Agricultural Research Systems and Sub-Regional Organizations to gauge user satisfaction of FARA
  services.



  2.4. Program Management. The MDTF would finance operating costs and FARA General Assembly
  meetings, the Secretariat’s information and communication services, travel, accommodation and per diem,
  as well as M&E activities.



  3. Research Activities (appraisal estimate: US$13.9 million, additional financing: US$2.72 million,
  actual cost: US$1.90 million). This component would provide sub-grants to beneficiaries for specific
  development projects involving research and advocacy in support of NSFs 1 through 4. These activities
  form part of FARA’s portfolio of essential continuing functions. It would also finance international and local
  consultancies, goods, training and workshops.



  4. Management and Supervision of the Trust Fund (appraisal estimate: US$1.7 million, additional
  financing: US$1.53 million, actual cost: US$1.90 million). The aim of this component is to manage,
  administer and supervise the Trust Fund.



  Revised Components. As part of the December 2013 restructuring, components 1 and 3 were revised as
  follows:

  Component 1. The Network Support Functions were consolidated into three Strategic Priorities: Enabling
  environment for implementation of African agricultural innovation (NSF1, 2, and 3), Integrating Capacities
  for Change (NSF 4), and Visioning Africa’s agricultural transformation (NSF 5).


  Component 3. Sub-grants for sub-projects were modified in scope to focus narrowly on financing sub-
  projects on capacity building, networking, advocacy and training for sub-regional organizations.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was expected to be US$49.71 million. The actual disbursed amount as
  reported by the ICR (p. 2) was US$49.30 million.




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FARA Trust Fund (P112684)



   Financing. The project was financed through a Multi Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) established at and
   administered by the World Bank. The MDTF was expected to receive US$45.90 million in donor
   contributions. However, only US$33.5 million were committed. In December 2013, an additional financing
   (AF) in the amount of US$45 million was approved. By the original closing date on December 31, 2013, only
   US$31 million was disbursed (ICR, p. 11). The total amount disbursed at completion was US$49.30 million
   (ICR, p. 2). These included US$33.5 million from the original MDTF contributions and US$15.8 million from
   the AF.



   Borrower Contribution. This project was fully funded through the MDTF.



   Dates. The project was approved on December 4, 2008 and became effective nine months later on
   September 4, 2009. The project had two Mid-term Reviews (MTR), the first was conducted on February 1,
   2012. This was in line with the appraisal date where the MTR was expected to be conducted in the third
   year of implementation (Project Document, para 53). The second MTR was in June 2016. The original
   closing date was on December 31, 2013. However, the project closed five years later on December 31,
   2018. The ICR did not provide an explicit reason for the five year extension. However, the Restructuring
   Paper stated that on December 13, 2013, "the Bank approved a 5-year extension of the Grant and US$45
   million in additional financing (AF) in support of FARA’s MTOP2 (2014- 2018)."

   The project was restructured twice. The first restructuring was a Level 2 on June 28, 2012 when the amount
   disbursed was US$20.54 million. This restructuring involved changes to: the Result Framework, the PDO
   indicators, and grant reallocation. According to the ICR (p. 11) these changes were required to "ensure
   FARA can continue its work program activities uninterrupted; and (ii) ensure adequate reporting against a
   more clearly defined performance measurement framework, data collection and ownership of the indicators
   by FARA." The second restructuring was on December 13, 2013, when the amount disbursed was US$31
   million (Restructuring Paper, p. 2). This restructuring included: the approval of US$45 million in Additional
   Financing (AF), the revision of the Project Development Objectives, amendments to the Results
   Framework, extension of the loan closing date from December 31, 2013 to December 31, 2018, a change to
   the Environmental Category rating from B to C, and modifications to component 1 and 3 (Restructuring
   Paper p. 8). According to the ICR (p. 12) these changes were to "to respond to changing context in African
   science and agriculture setting (transformation agenda, a widened mandate covering private sector
   engagement, youth & gender), increased capacity of FARA’s main partners, changes in resource availability
   and lessons learned during the implementation of MDTF."




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA) is a continent-wide umbrella organization bringing
together and forming coalitions of major stakeholders in agricultural research and development in Africa.
The FARA Secretariat was created in 2002 and is based in Accra, Ghana. FARA complements the activities
of national, international and sub-regional institutions to deliver more responsive and effective services to its

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 23
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      FARA Trust Fund (P112684)



               stakeholders. FARA is committed to the implementation of the African Union’s New Partnership for Africa’s
               Development (AU-NEPAD) Comprehensive African Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP)
               which sets an ambitious goal of 6% per annum growth for the agriculture sector. A key component of the
               CAADP vision calls for improving agricultural productivity through enabling and accelerating innovation.The
               African Union Commission and AU-NEPAD have given the FARA Secretariat the mandate to serve as the
               lead institution responsible for coordinating CAADP Pillar IV activities (FARA TF Program Document, paras
               1,2, and 3).


               At appraisal, the original objectives were in line with African Union's Comprehensive African Agriculture
               Development Program (CAADP) that described the African leaders’ collective vision for how to reach a goal
               of 6% per annum growth for the sector. Objectives were also in line with CAADP Pillar IV which was
               launched in 2006 as a strategy to support Africa’s agricultural research, technology dissemination and
               adoption efforts. Objectives were also in line with the Bank's strategy and priorities set in the Africa Action
               Plan.

               At completion, the original objectives became less relevant due to a change in the context of African
               science and agriculture setting (ICR, p. 12). The revised objectives were in line with the World Bank's 2015
               Agenda for ending poverty by 2030. The Agenda (p. 7) called for improved agricultural productivity and
               climate resilience, strengthened links to markets, agribusiness growth, and the need to raise rural non-farm
               incomes. The revised objectives were also in line with the African Union-NEPAD’s CAADP vision for how to
               reach the goal of 6% per annum growth for the sector through effective research, extension, and training
               and education.



               The original statement of objectives was broad and lacked a connection to the higher-level objective,
               namely to achieve 6% agricultural growth per annum. The ICR (p. 24) stated that the original PDO was
               "vague and hard to measure." While the PDO was totally revised at restructuring, the revised PDO
               statement continued to be broad without a clear connection to the higher-level objective. The ICR (p. 17)
               correctly noted that the revised PDO was "overly ambitious and hard to measure" because agricultural
               innovation capacity in Africa is a broad term that involves a wide spectrum of interventions, and these were
               " mostly not supported by the project."

               Relevance of objectives is rated substantial for both the original and revised PDO due to the broad
               statement of objectives, the lack of a connection to higher level objective, and the difficulty in measuring the
               outcome.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                     Page 7 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   FARA Trust Fund (P112684)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To align African agricultural institutions at the national, regional, and continental levels with the principles and
objectives of the Comprehensive African Agricultural Development Program (CAADP) - Pillar IV, for effective
agricultural research, extension, technology adoption, and training and education.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The theory of change hinged on the need for a continental mechanism to advocate for
and manage support for agricultural research and development (ARD) in Africa. The project aimed to achieve
its development objectives (PDO) through the following activities: (i) Enhancing FARA Secretariat’s capacity
to act as a continental ARD coordinator and project manager; (ii) Advocacy for increased investment into
ARD institutions and programs at the country and sub-regional level; (iii) Capacity-building and promotion of
Innovation to Impact pathways; (iv) Building of continent-wide knowledge exchange systems and enabling
environment; and (v) Supporting regional and national level agencies’ capacity.

Expected intermediate outcomes from the above-mentioned activities include: improved governance structure
and management systems, development of ARD partnerships and transformation agenda among
stakeholders, strengthening continental capacity to respond to agricultural innovation demand, establishing
an enabling environment for agricultural investments and implementation of agricultural innovation service.

Expected outcomes include: African agricultural institutions at the national and regional levels have aligned
their ARD programs with CAADP pillar IV FAAP principles, and strengthening Africa's capacity for agricultural
innovation.

Higher level outcomes: reduced poverty, improved food security, and enhanced environmental sustainability.

Critical assumptions underlying the project included the principle of subsidiarity to guide collaboration among
the key partners of FARA, financial support from DPs, sharing of resources for coordinated activities among
partners, sustained commitment of partners to the regional agenda and sufficient capacity of National
Agriculture Research Systems (NARS) and Sub-Regional Organizations.

Overall, the theory of change suffered from weak causal links between the stated activities and the expected
outcomes. Also, it was not clear how the achievement of outcomes would contribute to the higher level
outcomes.



Outputs

The outputs below were reported in the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.



1. Strengthening institutional and organizational structures/arrangements for regional ARD:




                                                                                                      Page 8 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   FARA Trust Fund (P112684)




      33 country investment plans (target: 25, baseline: none) integrate CAADP Pillar IV elements
         (research, advisory services, and education - target exceeded).



2. Enhanced access to knowledge and technology for agricultural stakeholders in Africa

      6 gender-sensitive continental platforms (target: 6, baseline: 3) on knowledge exchange and
         technology dissemination for ARD in Africa were established (target achieved).
        11 innovations (target: 12, baseline: none) facilitated through technology dissemination platforms
         (target almost achieved).
        29 national information and learning systems (target: 25, baseline: none) on agricultural innovations
         established (target exceeded).
        2,821 stakeholders (target: 2,500, baseline: 200) using gender-sensitive knowledge management
         tools for knowledge exchange at continental level (target exceeded).
        48 country platforms (target: 25, baseline: none) integrated into continental platforms (target
         exceeded).



3. Strengthening human, organizational and institutional capacity for agricultural innovation in Africa.

      7 capacity strengthening initiatives (target: 7, baseline:2) developed and implemented (target
         achieved).
        6 capacity strengthening initiatives (target: 5, baseline: 2) were funded and implemented (target
         exceeded).
        71% of the targeted organizations (target: 80%, baseline: none) showed improved organizational
         performance (a composite index incorporating changes observed in SWOT factors-target not
         achieved).
        3 agricultural innovations (target: 4, baseline: none) developed by the targeted African National
         Agricultural Research Systems (NARS) (target almost achieved).
        Targeted NARS had 30% women scientists (target: 40%, baseline: 20%) (target not achieved).



4. Improved support for agricultural innovation platforms (IPs) in Africa.

      66 functional innovation IPs (target: 51, baseline: none) were established (target exceeded).
      27 institutions (Sub-Regional Organizations, National Agricultural Research Systems, farmer
       organizations) adopted the IP approach (target: 20, baseline none, target exceeded).
      14 operational guides (target: 8, baseline: none) for establishing IP were developed (target exceeded).
      66 institutions (target:51, baseline: none) (Sub-Regional Organizations, National Agricultural Research
       Systems, NGOs, private sector, farmers’ organizations) were using the operational guides (target
       exceeded).



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   FARA Trust Fund (P112684)




      11 partnerships and Strategic Alliances (target: 8, baseline: 2) were established reflecting regional and
       global knowledge and capacity exchange (target exceeded).



Outcome

The ICR (Box 1) explained that "alignment with FAAP principles refers to ‘Country-Regional Economic
Community (REC) compact signing’ which is a process covering advocacy for a planning process (by FARA),
key country level stakeholder engagement and consultation, and signing of the compact to show commitment
to CAADP-FAAP process. After signing, the second part of the CAADP process entails follow-up stock-taking,
identification of national aspirations, and development of a country investment plan (CIP). The CIP part
involved establishing guidelines, training, identification of CAADP focal points and facilitation of lessons
learned (by FARA) to integrate AIS into the national program.

The progress on alignment was measured by three outcome indicators. At the country level through the
number of FAAP compliant CAADP country compacts addressing agricultural research, advisory services and
higher education. The project supported 30 country compact preparation processes (against the target of 37,
target not achieved) through advocacy and stakeholder engagement. At the regional level the project was
envisaged to ensure compliance of the Regional Economic Community (RECs) and was expected to have
6 regional compacts signed. However, only 2 RECs were supported (target not achieved). The ICR (p. 14)
reported that most of the six RECs were reluctant and did not have the capacity to align their ARD programs
with FAAP. Also, due to the overall delays in start-up, implementation, and funding, all alignment centered
activities were not fully completed -which affected achievement of the outcome (ICR, p. 14). The achievement
rates for country and REC compacts were 81% and 33%, respectively. The third indicator was measuring the
percentage of Activity Work Programs (AWPs) implemented on target, on budget and on time. While 118% of
AWPs (against a target of 80%) were implemented on target, on budget and on time, the ICR (Annex 1)
correctly concluded that this indicator was "a poor choice to measure achievement of outcomes" because it
did not "provide evidence on the achievement of outcomes."

Therefore, and based on the above-mentioned assessment, the efficacy of this outcome is rated Modest due
to the failure in achieving the outcome targets.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To strengthen Africa’s capacity for agricultural innovation with purposefully determined outcomes, creating
capacity for innovation and enabling environments for implementation.

Revised Rationale
Theory of change. Despite the revision of the PDO, the project relied on the same original theory of change
as mentioned above to achieve the revised PDO.


                                                                                                 Page 10 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   FARA Trust Fund (P112684)




Outputs

The outputs mentioned under the original objective pertain to the revised objective as well.

The outputs below were reported in the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.



1. African agricultural stakeholders determining how the sector should be transformed and
establishing the needed collective actions in a gender sensitive manner.

      41 countries (target: 15, target exceeded) with Agriculture Research and Development agendas were
       influenced by foresight studies reflecting access to and use of relevant data for decision-making.
      859 functional partnerships and platforms (target: 1000, baseline: 130) for agricultural innovation and
       trade among African stakeholders and between them and northern and southern partners established
       reflecting adoption of Agricultural Innovation System (AIS) in practice (target significantly achieved).
      1.5 million participants were directly reached (target: 1.7 million, baseline: 1.25 million, target partially
       achieved) and 15.9 million farmers (target: 22 million, baseline: 15.3 million, target partially achieved)
       were indirectly reached, 9,062 (target: 8,800, baseline: 1,650, target exceeded) participated or
       contributed to IPs, consultations, workshops, meetings, 54,133 professionals were trained (target:
       70,437. baseline: 4,731, target partially achieved). The ICR (Annex 1, p. 50) explained that the
       reported data measured reach and participation but not necessarily benefits, and attribution was a
       challenge.



2. Strengthened and integrated continental capacity responding to stakeholder demands within the
agricultural innovation system in a gender sensitive manner.

      254 institutions adopted FARA-initiated interventions or mechanisms for identifying, articulating and/or
       addressing capacity needs (target: 300, target significantly achieved).
      136 institutions had their capacity development needs assessed and/or supported (target: 150, target
       significantly achieved). However, assessment of needs and/or capacity support does not mean an
       improvement in capacity.
      4 functional Community of Practices (CoPs) were established for creating gender sensitive capacities
       and to address and identify capacity deficits in the design and implementation of ARD programs
       (target: 3, baseline: 2, target exceeded).



3. Enabling environment for increased AR4D investment and implementation of agricultural
innovation systems in a gender sensitive manner.




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   FARA Trust Fund (P112684)




      44 countries and RECs had FAAP principles and guidelines embedded in CAADP national and/or
         regional compacts and Agriculture and Food Security Investments Plans (AFSIPs) (target: 52,
         baseline: 32, target significantly achieved).
        103 information and knowledge products/packages (books, manuals, reports, target: 104, baseline:
         63), 87 staff publications (target: 108, baseline: 33), 2,649 volume of information were deposited on
         the website and social media pages (target: 2,138, baseline: 1,500) and were all made available to
         stakeholders.
        639, 437 people (target: 539,214, baseline: 82,889, target exceeded) were reached with information
         through continental information and knowledge sharing platforms (websites, publications, visual and
         social media).
        120 platforms used for information delivery and exchange (target: 200, target not achieved).
        41% improvement in availability of information and communication technologies (ICTs) (magnitude of
         ICT speed and capacity performance, reliability of internet access, equity, service quality, cost-
         effectiveness) amongst targeted NARS institutions (target: 34%, baseline: 11%, target exceeded).



4. Strengthened gender responsive governance and management systems.

      Pluralistic decision-making processes (stakeholder representation in governance bodies, program
       management). This was a yes or no indicator, answer was yes.
      Compliance with operational procedures and standards. This was a yes or no indicator, answer was
       yes.
      FARA reserve fund reached US$2.35 million (target: 1.61 million, baseline: US$ 1.0 million).
      63% of Activity Work Program (AWP) activities were implemented on time, on target and on budget
       (target: 100, not achieved).



Outcome

The outcome included two elements: the outreach/coverage of FARA-led interventions and improved skills
and knowledge for innovation among stakeholders. The outreach was assessed through an outcome indicator
that measured the percentage increase in number of individuals, groups, organizations directly affected or
reached by FARA interventions. The ICR (p. 16) reported that outreach among farmers reached 89%, 82%
among professionals and practitioners, and 73% among countries (target: above 90%).
The second element of the PDO relates to improved capacity and improved skills and knowledge for
innovation, which implies a behavioral change. The outcome was measured by percentage increase in core
competencies, capabilities and capacities for innovation among targeted (individual, organizational/inter-
organizational and/or institutional) ARD actors. The ICR (p. 16) reported that organizational capacity was
improved by 77% (target: above 90%) and change in human capital reached 87% (target: above 90%). The
impact of these improvements on innovation was not captured due to the absence of relevant indicators in the
RF.

The project strengthened capacity for innovation mainly through providing training. However, the ICR (p. 16)
reported that "most trainings were of management skills (not core innovation capacity)." This was confirmed
by an independent institutional analysis conducted in 2017 on FARA, where 55% of FARA constituency

                                                                                                Page 12 of 23
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 FARA Trust Fund (P112684)



                              stated that FARA’s capacity-building interventions need improvement (ICR, p. 17). To improve enabling
                              environment for AIS, the project produced 190 knowledge products (against target of 212) and maintained
                              knowledge sharing (reached 119% of target) and other exchange platforms (60% of target), and 41 countries
                              (target 15) used foresighting studies in development of their ARD agendas. However, the ICR (p. 17) reported
                              that "feedback (from the independent Institutional Analysis, 2017) pointed to limited results with the
                              knowledge management activities."

                              This Review is in agreement with the ICR that the revised PDO was overly ambitious and hard to measure
                              because innovation capacity (in Africa) involves a wide spectrum of interventions, mostly not supported by the
                              project. While the project had some positive achievements, it did not meet its outcome targets and fell short
                              on achieving a number of its output/intermediate outcome targets, and the impact on innovation was not
                              captured.

                              Therefore, and based on the above-mentioned assessment, the efficacy of the post-restructuring outcome is
                              rated Modest.



                              Revised Rating
                              Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Pre-restructuring. Efficacy was rated modest because the overall delays in start-up, implementation, and
                            funding negatively impacted the project-supported alignment centered activities-which according to the ICR
                            (p. 14) "were not fully completed." Also, the project did not meet its outcome targets for the two main PDO
                            indicators.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Post restructuring. Efficacy was rated Modest because the outcome targets were not met, and there was no
                            evidence on improvement of innovation as most training provided by the program was related to management
                            skills. Also, knowledge management activities had limited results. Assessing the post restructuring outcome
                            was challenging because innovation capacity (in Africa) involves a wide spectrum of interventions, mostly not
                            supported by the project.


                                                                                                                             Page 13 of 23
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        FARA Trust Fund (P112684)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                       Primary Reason
  Modest                                                   Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Efficiency

ex ante

The FARA Trust Fund Program Document did not include an ex ante economic and financial analysis.



ex post

     The project ex post efficiency was assessed through two parameters, first, through evaluating overhead
        costs and relevant comparisons to relevant organizations, and second, through examining resource use
        efficiency.
       Overhead costs. At 44% of the total funding, FARA’s Secretariat cost to total project cost was high. On
        the other hand, the technical programs received 31% (US$14 million) of the total funding. The FARA
        secretariat included over 60 permanent staff with FAO level salaries and benefits. This number was
        reduced to 38 after significant streamlining in 2016. Despite the reduction, the proportion of overhead
        costs remained high at 69%.
       Comparison to relevant organizations. Operating costs for non-profit organizations range from 60 -
        80%, leaving 20-40% to overhead costs including salaries. In the private sector and according to 2013
        prices, overhead averages 22%, but may reach up to 50% if professional, scientific and/or technical
        services (including consultants) were provided (ICR, p. 18). By any account, FARA’s overhead costs
        were relatively high and significantly exceeded the average among relevant organizations.
       Resource Use Efficiency. According to the ICR (p. 18) "FARA’s resource use was not efficient during
        the MDTF phase" and "cost efficiency was not strongly applied." Delays and inefficiencies within FARA
        were exacerbated by unfamiliarity with the Bank's procedures and the lack of results-based performance
        culture within FARA. In 2014-2015, the Bank raised significant concerns over high operational costs and
        lack of adequate value for money for some expenditures. Most stakeholders stated that the FARA MDTF
        was Fair to Good value for money. To address fiduciary challenges and value for money concerns,
        FARA attempted to increase the efficiency of resource use through streamlining of secretariat, cost-
        sharing, and improving cost efficiency.
       Overall, efficiency is rated Modest due to two main reasons. First, many of the project interventions
        incurred the associated costs, but did not contribute to achieving the PDO outcome. Second, the lack of
        efficiency in resource use which was reflected in the relatively high overhead costs.



Administrative and Institutional Efficiency




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FARA Trust Fund (P112684)



The original closing date was on December 31, 2013. However, the MDTF closed five years later on December
31, 2018. The ICR did not provide an explicit reason for the five year extension. However, the Restructuring
Paper stated that on December 13, 2013, "the Bank approved a 5-year extension of the Grant and US$45
million in additional financing (AF) in support of FARA’s MTOP2 (2014- 2018)." The project suffered from
various delays including: in start-up, implementation, and funding. This affected the achievement of the project's
outcome because all alignment centered activities were not fully completed (ICR, p.14). Also, implementation
and reporting both suffered from delays due to capacity limitations (ICR, p. 21). In addition, FARA's open ended
staff contracts and lack of time-bound or results-based performance system contributed to implementation
delays. The ICR (p. 29) reported that frequent changes at the Task Team Leadership towards the end of the
MDTF "was not conducive to quality supervision and operational support" which contributed to disbursement
delays in 2017-2018 time period.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Original PDO

Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial while both Efficacy and Efficiency are rated Modest. The PDO was
broad and difficult to measure. Efficacy was rated modest because the overall delays in start-up,
implementation, and funding, all negatively impacted the project-supported alignment centered activities-which
according to the ICR (p. 14) "were not fully completed." Also, the project did not meet its outcome targets for the
two main PDO indicators. Efficiency was modest because many of the project interventions claimed financial
resources, but did not contribute to achieving the PDO, and overhead costs were relatively high.



Revised PDO

Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial while both Efficacy and Efficiency are rated Modest. The revised
PDO was broad and difficult to measure. Efficacy was rated Modest because the outcome targets were not met,
and there was no evidence on improvement of innovation as most training provided by the program was related

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FARA Trust Fund (P112684)



to management skills. Also, knowledge management activities had limited results. Efficiency was modest
because many of the project interventions entailed costs, but did not contribute to achieving the PDO and
overhead costs were relatively high.



Split Rating:

The amount disbursed at restructuring was US$31.77 million against a total of US$49.30 million which
represents 64.4%.

Pre-restructuring and Post restructuring outcome ratings were both Moderately Unsatisfactory, which
corresponds to a 3 on 1 to 6 scale.

Weighted outcome: 3 X 0.64 + 3 X 0.36 = 1.92 +1.08 = 3 which corresponds to Moderately Unsatisfactory.

The Overall outcome rating is Moderately Unsatisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (Table 3) stated several risks that could impact the sustainability of the development outcome. The
following are emphasized:

      Sustainability of FARA institution. To be sustainable, FARA must identify its value added,
       mandate, and ownership, serve as a lean umbrella organization with a clear strategic focus,
       accountability to its constituency, and a resource mobilization strategy. FARA often functioned as a
       parallel competitor to Sub-Regional Organizations. However, FARA also faced competitors at the
       continental level including from the African Agricultural Technology Foundation (AATF) funded by
       several donors, Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA) funded by Bill and Melissa Gates
       Foundation (BMGF), the Food, Agriculture and Natural Resources Policy Analysis Network
       (FANRPAN) funded mostly by BMGF, and the African Union Development Agency funded by JICA.
      Alignment of countries and regions with the Framework for African Agricultural Productivity
       (FAAP)-Comprehensive African Agricultural Development Programme (CAADP). More than
       forty countries and Sub-Regional Organizations have adopted FAAP principles in their
       country's National Agriculture Innovation Projects (NAIPs). Some are already taking steps towards
       integrating the Science Agenda for Agriculture in Africa (SA3) and developing a second stage NAIPs.
       However, the SRO commitment to S3A is still lacking.



                                                                                                 Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FARA Trust Fund (P112684)



     Capacity of African agricultural innovation system (AIS). While FARA and SROs were able to
      collaborate well on selected initiatives e.g. Innovation platforms (IPs), their collaboration suffered from
      limited trust and competition. FARA and the National Agricultural Research Institutions (NARIs) level
      collaboration was smoother and centered on CAADP-FAAP, IPs and capacity-building. While FARA
      has raised the profile of AIS stakeholders and supported change, the continental level coordination is
      still lacking. A coordinated effort is required among governments, core AIS stakeholders (including
      private sector) and development partners to invest in priority areas of AIS, including enabling
      infrastructure and regulatory matters (such as seed and fertilizer sector) that currently constrain
      technology adoption, private sector engagement and value-added activities




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At the request of FARA, the World Bank and FARA’s group of Development Partners (UK’s Department
  for International Development-DfID, Canadian International Development Agency-CIDA, Netherlands,
  and the European Commission) established a recipient-executed Multi Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) for the
  World Bank to facilitate joint-financing and to assist the further institutional development of FARA. The
  Bank also provided FARA with capacity building support to develop and implement its programs. The
  Bank role was key to convene with core developing partners and relevant African institutions to galvanize
  support and coordinate activities.

  However, Quality at Entry suffered a number of significant shortcomings. First, according to the ICR (p.
  20) Trust Funds were not required to develop a PAD. This negatively impacted Quality at Entry because
  the lack of a fully developed PAD contributed to undefined objectives and incomplete components-
  especially for component 3 (ICR, p. 20). Second, the roles of FARA and those of the sub-regional and
  national stakeholders were not clearly defined which created confusion among stakeholders. Third, the
  Theory of Change / Results Framework demonstrated poor causal links between the suggested activities
  and the desired outcomes, and the original objectives of the MDTF were broad and hard to
  measure. Fourth, M&E suffered from design weaknesses with an "incomplete understanding of results-
  based M&E (ICR, p. 20)." Fifth, several risks were underestimated or not properly identified at the
  appraisal stage including donor commitment to financing, institutional sustainability, capacity of the
  implementing agencies including M&E capacity (ICR, p. 21).

  Based on the above-mentioned information, it is evident the Quality at entry suffered from significant
  shortcomings. Therefore, Quality-at-Entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FARA Trust Fund (P112684)



 Over the implementation period, the project had twenty supervision missions, two Mid Term Reviews
 (MTRs) and two restructurings. An informal Advisory Committee consisting of four Development Partners
 (UK’s Department for International Development-DfID, Canadian International Development Agency-CIDA,
 Netherlands, and the European Commission) and the Bank met initially bi-annually and contributed to the
 quality of the MDTF, including reviews of science agenda, recruitment, M&E, and restructuring of the
 MDTF . According to the ICR (p. 27) the informal Advisory Committee was "instrumental in discussing the
 conditions, development and financing" of the MDTF.

 Despite limited implementation progress in the first two years of the project, the corresponding ISRs
 ratings for this period were unrealistic (ICR, p. 27). At the time of the second restructuring, the project
 financial risk was high and there were significant challenges with resource mobilization. Despite these
 challenges, an additional US$45 million of grant financing was requested and approved. After the second
 restructuring the Bank's supervision and knowledge sharing became focused on streamlining
 FARA's secretariat and its activities.

 M&E activities could have benefited from more attention by the Bank. In 2010, FARA made informal
 revisions to the Results Framework and indicators. The ICR (p. 27) correctly noted that the Bank should
 have advised FARA to carry out a formal restructuring of the project. The entire RF was again informally
 changed in 2016. This made tracking milestones and assessing achievements difficult due to the presence
 of two RFs. To remedy this situation, the Bank initiated a third restructuring in 2017 to formally approve the
 revised RF. However, this activity was dropped because the project was coming to an end (ICR, p. 27).



 Quality of Supervision suffered from significant shortcomings, most notable was the failure to address M&E
 weaknesses that plagued the project throughout implementation. Also, the two restructurings could have
 been used better to address revisions to the RF especially after revising the PDO. The approval of an
 additional US$45 million in additional financing is questionable given the financial and resource
 mobilization challenges, and the project's overall poor performance,

 Therefore, Quality of Supervision is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory and the overall rating of Bank
 performance is Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


a. M&E Design



                                                                                                    Page 18 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FARA Trust Fund (P112684)



 The overall monitoring and evaluation would be under the responsibility of FARA. However, the Project
 Document lacked details on M&E arrangements.

       The original PDO was to be assessed through three outcome indicators: number of national and
        regional institutions supported by FARA that reflect FAAP principles in their ARD programs, percent
        of NARS and SROs that indicate satisfaction with FARA’s contribution to the implementation of
        CAADP Pillar IV process, and percent of results of activities achieved (PD, Annex 1). However, the
        ICR (p. 8) stated that the PDO was to be assessed through four outcome indicators (the same three
        mentioned in the PD) and another indicator that assessed the development and implementation of
        the strategy for strengthening national and regional institutional and program capacities for ARD.
       The first two outcome indicators mentioned in the PD were relevant and linked to the PDO,
        however, the third was a poor choice because it did not provide any assessment of outcomes.
       The RF included six intermediate outcome indicators to assess activities under components 1 and
        2. However, the RF lacked any indicators to assess components 3 and 4. Most indicators were
        quantifiable and according to the ICR (p. 24) "all indicators had baselines and targets."
       Overall, M&E design was weak with an incomplete RF that suffered from misalignment between
        outcome and outputs (ICR, p. 24).




b. M&E Implementation
  Overall, M&E implementation was challenging. Recruiting an M&E expert was difficult. Data collection
  was negatively impacted because data providers were not clear on how to collect data as they were not
  consulted on the formulation of indicators. In addition, implementing partners had limited capacity which
  hindered M&E activities. M&E reporting until mid of 2012 was against PDO and intermediate
  results indicators that were unofficially revised in 2010. However, these were officially adopted after the
  formal restructuring in June 2012. In 2016, FARA made informal changes to M&E reporting to
  accommodate financial shortfall and the change of focus by the African Union Heads of state.
  Accordingly, FARA adjusted its focus, revised the entire RF and reorganized and renamed the
  components "without the consent of the WB" (ICR, p. 22). This negatively affected M&E and created
  confusion because the project targets were tracked against 2012 and the 2016 RFs.

   M&E implementation weaknesses were compounded by the implementing agency's lack
  of understanding of results-based M&E, and the confusion over the roles of FARA and those of the sub-
  regional and national stakeholders.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 25), "M&E data was used in planning, in reporting achievements and in
  development of resource mobilization strategy." However, utilization was probably limited due to design
  weaknesses, implementation challenges and frequent changes to the Results Framework.

  The overall rating of M&E Quality is Modest. M&E design at entry suffered from significant shortcomings,
  and implementation was weak. The frequent changes to the RF (twice informally and twice


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FARA Trust Fund (P112684)



  formally) resulted in "significant confusion on M&E implementation and challenges in tracking
  milestones (ICR, p. 25)." Utilization was consequently undermined.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Trust Fund was initially rated as Environmental Category B, since the components were expected to
   have relatively limited environmental impact. The following policies were triggered: Environmental
   Assessment, Pest Management, Forests and International Waterways. The project was expected to provide
   technical leadership and guidance for agricultural technology generation and adoption in Africa. Impacts of
   these programs could include onsite effects such as soil degradation (e.g. salinization, loss of organic
   matter), nutrient depletion, and soil erosion; offsite effects such as groundwater depletion, agrochemical
   pollution, loss of local biodiversity, soil erosion downstream effects, hydrological change, and pasture
   degradation; and global effects such as greenhouse gas emissions, animal diseases, loss of crop genetic
   diversity, reduced carbon sequestration, and loss of biodiversity (PAD, paras 71 and 73).

   In December 2013, as part of the restructuring of the project, the Environmental Category was changed
   from B to C. No safeguards policies were triggered since the envisioned activities were not implemented.
   Furthermore, the Trust Fund was not expected to undertake any activities that would require physical or civil
   works (Restructuring Paper p. 8).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. According to the ICR (p. 26) "the project complied fully with the financial
   covenants of regular submission of acceptable quarterly interim financial reports." However, the 2014
   audit report highlighted some minor internal control lapses. In 2015, the Bank carried out a
   detailed Financial Management and Value for Money audit covering the period from 2012 through 2014.
   The Review raised some key issues including: "concerns expressed by the Bank on the need for more
   scrutiny and fiduciary oversight of the use of project funds generally and particularly regarding expenditure
   of the ED’s Office; submission of a formal response from FARA to the Bank advising how it intends to
   address the recommendations of the report; and refund of ineligible expenditures (ICR, p. 26)." The Bank
   also issued an invoice to FARA to refund the ineligible expenditure identified by the review. FARA officially
   responded to the recommendations of the review by August 2016 and a full refund of the ineligible
   expense was processed by the Bank on October 5, 2016.




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FARA Trust Fund (P112684)



   Procurement. Procurement suffered from limited staff capacity and unfamiliarity with the Bank's
   procurement procedures (ICR, p. 23). This in turn contributed to implementation delays. Procurement
   performance improved upon hiring a procurement officer following the insistence of the Bank's supervision
   team (ICR, p. 30). However, recruiting experienced personnel was often challenging. Also, FARA staff saw
   their contracts as open-ended rather than time or results-bound. This further contributed to implementation
   delays (ICR, p. 23).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                  IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Relevance of objectives is rated
                                                                                 Substantial; overall efficacy prior
                                                                                 to and after restructuring are
                                 Moderately          Moderately
Outcome                                                                          both rated Modest; efficiency is
                                 Satisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 Modest. Based on these sub-
                                                                                 ratings, overall outcome is
                                                                                 Moderately Unsatisfactory.
                                                                                 Quality at Entry and Quality of
                                 Moderately          Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                 Supervision are both rated
                                 Satisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 Moderately Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest              Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included fifteen lessons and recommendations. The following three are emphasized with
some adaptation of language:

      Quality supervision and operational support needs stable Task Team leadership. High
       Task Team Leader turn-over at the end of the MDTF was not conducive to quality
       supervision and operational support. Significant delays with disbursement (2017-2018) partly
       arose from these changes.

                                                                                                    Page 21 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FARA Trust Fund (P112684)



       A rigorous M&E design is needed at entry combined with active supervision and
        adequate implementation capacity to ensure capturing the project's outcomes. The
        M&E set-up was complex whereas capacity for M&E was limited. Effort was needed to
        assess the capacity and provide a minimum level of understanding of results-based M&E.
       An exit strategy is needed to ensure sustainability beyond donor support. FARA’s size
        was overestimated and it eventually became an isolated large organization with high levels of
        salaries and at times superfluous expenses, requiring significant resources to stay functional.
        FARA became to some extent a victim of the fluctuating donor priorities, both Developing
        Partners and the constituency questioning value for money. FARA has not been able to
        design a sustainable exit strategy from continued donor support.



The following lesson is emphasized by IEG:

       Regional projects need rigorous background analysis and studies to support an
        adequate project design and implementation arrangements, and hence ensure a
        higher chance of achieving the desired outcomes. Regional projects are challenging to
        coordinate and require a clear understanding of the conditions on the ground. Also, such
        projects need realistic PDOs that could potentially be achieved within the implementation
        time-frame and available funding.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  An assessment will be helpful to verify the project's outcomes on the ground given the divergence between
  IEG's ratings in this Review and the ICR ratings. Also, to derive lessons of potentially high value regarding the
  serious challenges in designing, implementing and measuring the outcomes of multi-country projects, which
  involve mostly qualitative outcome indicators, as well as complex institutional layers and networks across the
  country stakeholders, thus raising issues of causality and attribution.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of evidence. M&E performance was poor in general and this in turn negatively impacted the quality of
evidence. In a further communication, the project team explained that the team used a number of previous
analysis that looked into institutions, capacity-building, satisfaction, use and access to knowledge to overcome
M&E weaknesses.




                                                                                                    Page 22 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FARA Trust Fund (P112684)



Quality of Analysis. The linking between evidence and findings was challenging given the poor causal links
between activities and intended outcomes. This was further undermined by poor M&E.

Extent to which lessons are based on evidence and analysis. Lessons were based on the project experience;
however, they were formulated more as recommendations.

Results Orientation. Discussion on outcomes was undermined by the poor linking between the PDO and the
supported activities. Also, there are concerns on the accuracy of the M&E data.

Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were logically linked and integrated.

Consistency with guidelines. The assigned outcome ratings in the ICR were generous and provided an
unrealistic assessment of the program.

Conciseness. The ICR provided thorough coverage of the implementation experience and candidly reported on
shortcomings. However, reporting on outcomes was a challenge given the weak M&E. The ICR also included
numerous acronyms some of which were not reflected in the abbreviation and Acronyms table, for example:
ICTs, AFSIPS, among others.

Overall, the ICR Quality is rated Substantial, despite some minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 23 of 23
