     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Resilience, Inclusion and Growth(P162071)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0021904

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P162071                                    Resilience, Inclusion and Growth

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Turkey                                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-87810                                 29-Aug-2018                                        408,605,505.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Aug-2017                                29-Aug-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                             400,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              400,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                          408,605,505.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Judyth L. Twigg              Malathi S. Jayawickrama         IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The Program Development Objective (PDO) of the Resilience, Inclusion and Growth Development Policy
   Financing (RIG-DPL) was to increase domestic savings and enhance fiscal transparency, support the
   economic inclusion of vulnerable groups, and reduce structural bottlenecks to sustainable growth (Program
   Document, PD, page 1).

   While Program documentation, including the ICR, is based on three objectives, combining “domestic savings”
   and “fiscal transparency” as one objective, IEG notes that the Program in fact had four objectives: (i) to
   increase domestic savings; (ii) to enhance fiscal transparency; (iii) to support economic inclusion of vulnerable

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Resilience, Inclusion and Growth(P162071)



   groups; and (iv) to reduce structural bottlenecks to sustainable growth. Efficacy will be assessed on the basis
   of these objectives.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   The PDO indicates three pillars for the operation. However, the analysis will draw on four pillars, separating
   the first pillar into two pillars. The four pillars of the operation are as follows:

   Pillar 1: increasing domestic savings. This was to be achieved by introducing automatic enrollment into
   private pension schemes against the likelihood of a less generous public pension scheme in the future.

   Pillar 2: enhancing fiscal transparency. This was to be achieved by increasing the amount of fiscal
   information available in audit reports to enhance accountability and fiscal transparency in public financial
   management.

   Pillar 3: supporting the economic inclusion of vulnerable groups. This was to be achieved by expanding
   the rules for flexible employment, increasing access to childcare to facilitate women's entry into work, and
   facilitating the integration of foreigners into the labor market on a temporary basis.

   Pillar 4: addressing structural bottlenecks to sustainable growth. This was to be achieved by legislation
   encouraging innovation; facilitating access to credit for small and medium enterprises (SME); deregulation of
   network industries by liberalizing the railways sector; and supporting renewable energy investments.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   Program cost and financing. The commitment under RIG-DPL was US$400 million equivalent. US$408.61
   million was disbursed, the difference between the two numbers reflecting exchange rate changes.

   Dates. The RIG-DPL was approved on August 29, 2017, became effective on October 19, 2017, and closed
   on August 29, 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  The RIG-DPL’s objectives were relevant to the country situation: decelerating economic growth challenged by
  domestic and external economic conditions, and long-standing structural rigidities that are threatening gains
  in poverty reduction and shared prosperity. The objectives were fully consistent with Turkey’s 10th
  development plan and are partly consistent with its new 11th development plan (2019-2023). The main
  inconsistencies in the latter relate to refugee employment and financial audits for all general budget

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 12
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Resilience, Inclusion and Growth(P162071)



       institutions, which no longer are listed as explicit priorities. The objectives were consistent with an
       evolving Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the 2017-2021 period. The operation covered all three of
       the CPF's focus areas: in growth, with its emphasis on containing fiscal risk; in inclusion, with increased labor
       force participation of women and vulnerable groups; and in sustainability, with generation of renewable
       energy.



       Rating
       Substantial

   b. Relevance of Design
       There was a causal link between the actions supported by the operation and expected outcomes for all three
       objectives. Under Pillar 1, private retirement savings accounts were to increase domestic savings and reduce
       dependence on external financing; and audited financial statements for all general budget institutions were to
       enhance transparency and encourage fiscal discipline. Under Pillar 2, economic inclusion of vulnerable
       groups was to be increased by facilitating their entry into the job market through more flexible work
       arrangements; for women through easier access to childcare; and for external refugees through temporary
       work permits. Under pillar 3, some structural bottlenecks to long-term growth were to be addressed through
       supply-side reforms that were expected to increase private sector productivity and investment (through
       easier access to credit, competition in the transport sector), and with an emphasis on environmental
       sustainability. The results chain and the link between the three pillars and the nine prior actions were
       straightforward. Intended outcomes as measured by the results indicators were monitorable.

       The macroeconomic framework was deemed adequate for the operation. The economy had proven resilient
       to crisis owing to strong fiscal discipline and a well-capitalized banking system. Still, continued domestic and
       external imbalances made the country dependent on external financing, creating risks to growth. The IMF’s
       Stand-by Arrangement for Turkey was successfully completed in 2008, and the latest Article IV consultation
       report published in 2017. The report emphasized the need to move forward on the policy reform agenda,
       notably through policies aimed at increasing domestic savings and raising potential growth.




       Rating
       Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1

                                                                                                          Page 3 of 12
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Resilience, Inclusion and Growth(P162071)




    Objective
     To increase domestic savings

    Rationale
    The law on private pension savings was amended as a prior action to introduce auto-enrollment into the
    private pension system with an opt-out option. The scheme was introduced in 2017 as a means of creating a
    sustainable and diversified pension system that would shield participants from any future reductions in the
    generosity of the current public pension pillar that might be required by any future deterioration in the fiscal
    situation.
    As of January 2019, all employees of companies with more than five employees had become part of the
    system, which had more than 5 million participants, compared to a baseline of zero and a target of 2
    million. However, there has subsequently been a fall-off, as participants have opted out; according to the
    ICR, around two-thirds of the new enrollees do so. This would indicate that the impact of the voluntary
    pension scheme on domestic savings in the short- to medium term may be less than anticipated.

    Summary: While the introduction of the private pension scheme initially appears to have exceeded
    expectations, this may have been driven initially by the automatic enrollment of all eligible employees as
    participants, judging from the subsequent fall-off. What will happen over the longer term is a function of the
    credibility that the scheme managers succeed in building.




    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     To enhance fiscal transparency

    Rationale
    To promote transparency in public spending and increase the accountability of public institutions (i.e.
    encourage fiscal discipline), the audited financial statements for 2015 of all general budget institutions were
    submitted to Parliament in October 2016 as a prior action.

    As a consequence, individual financial statements now are published annually, not only for all general
    budget institutions (45 in 2018), but for a large number of other public institutions.

    Summary: The fiscal transparency initiative did meet its immediate objective of transparency; it is still too
    early to determine its longer-term impact on fiscal discipline.




                                                                                                         Page 4 of 12
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Resilience, Inclusion and Growth(P162071)




    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective
     To address structural bottlenecks to sustainable growth

    Rationale
    Amendments to labor market legislation were expected to facilitate labor market participation of women,
    youth, long-term unemployed, and foreign refugees (Syrians) under temporary protection, by supporting
    increased access to childcare (women), flexible employment (youth and long-term unemployed), and
    integration of refugees into the labor market.

    As prior actions, the income tax law was amended to reduce the corporate tax paid by private nursery
    schools; labor legislation was amended to make contractual working arrangements more flexible; and work
    permits for foreigners under temporary protection (essentially Syrian workers) were introduced.

    The tax incentives for childcare are operational and have been strengthened by exempting employers from
    income tax. The prior action relating to flexible work contracts is not yet operational in the absence of
    accompanying bylaws on implementation arrangements. Action on these bylaws is included as part of the
    country's new development plan.

    Access to childcare increased as measured by net enrollment rates in childcare facilities, which rose from
    35.5 percent in 2016 to 38.5 percent in 2018. At the same time, the number of private pre-schools increased
    by some 13 percent over the same period. Women’s labor force participation rose from 32.5 percent in 2016
    to 34.2 percent in 2018, against an expected target of 34.9 percent. The increase in women’s labor force
    participation should not be seen only as due to increased access to childcare facilities, but is also likely to
    have been influenced by positive trends in the economy and the job market. A survey conducted by the
    National Statistics Office in 2018 found that only 13 percent of women who work use a formal childcare
    service.

    So far, the working arrangements for implementing flexi-work arrangements benefiting women (beyond the
    impact of childcare arrangements), youth, and long-term unemployed have not been put in place, and this
    particular action has yielded no results.




                                                                                                        Page 5 of 12
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Resilience, Inclusion and Growth(P162071)



    The introduction of work permits for recent refugees (essentially Syrians under temporary protection) had
    been extended to some 22,000 refugees in 2018, meeting the target. However, with some 430,000 refugees
    able to work, work permits cover only 5 percent of eligible refugees.

    In summary, the operation had a modest, if positive, effect on women’s labor force participation as a function
    of easier access to childcare services. Its efforts at flexi-work, not yet in force, had no effect on the intended
    beneficiaries of that program - women, youth and vulnerable groups. The arrangements for job creation for
    immediate refugees are likely to have had a minor impact on the potential beneficiaries.




    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 4
    Objective
     To address structural bottlenecks to sustainable growth

    Rationale
    Legislation was introduced as prior actions, including: (i) modernizing the protection of intellectual property to
    encourage research and development and innovation; (ii) enabling the use of movable property as collateral
    for access to finance, especially for SMEs and startups; (iii) liberalizing railway transport by unbundling
    infrastructure and operations, supporting competition between inter-modal (road, rail) transport options; and
    (iv) introducing incentive mechanisms towards environmentally favorable production in the areas of energy
    efficiency and transport.

    Strengthening the legal framework for the patent system has contributed to a rise in patent applications from
    6,450 in 2016 to 8,600 in 2017, exceeding the target of 8,500 set for 2018, but declining to 7,300 in
    2018. According to the ICR, a more robust legal framework is likely to have contributed to the increase in
    patent applications, while the subsequent decline in patent applications was likely to have been influenced by
    factors such as lower perceived returns to patents. A stronger indicator of the impact of new legislation
    might be observing longer term trends, which was not possible within the timespan of the operation.

    The volume of credit supported by movable collateral increased from zero to Turkish Lira (TL) 50 billion in lira
    terms, with an additional US$8.2 billion and euro 1 billion in foreign currency lending. The ICR argues that
    all of it can be considered as an outcome of the reform. The Doing Business survey improved its
    assessment of ease of credit in Turkey from a 2 in 2017 to 7 in 2019.



                                                                                                          Page 6 of 12
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Resilience, Inclusion and Growth(P162071)



    With the liberalization of railway transport (the unbundling of the railway company), four private sector
    operators have signed framework contracts and have been licensed to use rolling stock on the national rail
    system. These services are now operating. The original target was at least one operator. The national
    railway company is considering infrastructure development to allow further private rail services.

    With regulations to support the establishment of renewable energy resource areas (zones), the first three
    areas are under development with the construction of new solar and wind farms expected to be completed in
    late 2019 or 2020. The estimated value of the projects, which were based on auctions, is US$3.4
    billion. When on-stream, they are estimated to have energy capacity of up to 3 GW. The total installed
    renewable energy capacity that is being developed in these areas is 2,000 MW, which will be a significant
    addition to the existing renewable installed capacity of 12,000 MW (ICR, page 20).



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome


       • Relevance of objectives and design were both rated substantial, with minor shortcomings in both
       areas. Efficacy was rated modest for Objective 1, domestic savings, and Objective 3, economic inclusion;
       while Objective 2, fiscal transparency, and Objective 4, structural bottlenecks, were rated substantial. These
       ratings reflect moderate shortcomings in the operation overall, producing an outcome rating of moderately
       satisfactory.


  a.       Outcome Rating
           Moderately Satisfactory


  6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

  The reforms under the operation closely paralleled the government’s reform program, and the risk to the
  development outcomes should be modest. However, in some cases distinctions need to be made. Outcomes
  under Pillars 1 and 2 have so far consistently had government support, are policy priorities, and are therefore
  likely to be sustainable. Performance under Pillar 3, notably in terms of job creation for women and immigrant
  refugees, has not been strong, and a certain degree of political uncertainty attaches to job creation for refugees:
  it was low under the operation, and understandings between the European Union and Turkey on refugees


                                                                                                        Page 7 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Resilience, Inclusion and Growth(P162071)



remain tenuous. Outcomes under Pillar 4 may have political backing, but in terms of credit, for instance, the
volume of credit with movable collateral has risen beyond expectations and may well prove unsustainable in the
medium term, leading to more stringent credit conditions for targeted borrowers.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
    Modest

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank’s intervention was strategically relevant, focusing on areas that were likely to reduce poverty and
  further shared prosperity destabilized by domestic and external events. According to the ICR, its prior
  actions built on extensive prior technical analysis of the policy areas supported under the operation, as
  well as reforms that had been started under earlier DPLs, notably the Sustaining Growth
  DPL. Lessons taken into account in the operation's design and signaled in the ICR included: the need for
  adequate institutional capacity; a basis in knowledge work and synergies with other Bank and stakeholder
  engagement in the country; and a good understanding of the links between policy and actions (as reflected
  in a results matrix where causality was clear). The approach, a single stand-alone DPO, was appropriate.
  It addressed an immediate need to improve fiscal balance, and it responded to political volatility at the
  time, as the country came out of a recent (failed) coup attempt. But it also introduced uncertainty regarding
  the longer-term sustainability of policy actions, albeit according to the ICR the government commitment to
  them was strong. While arrangements for M&E allowed project progress to be monitored, some of the
  operation’s interventions raised challenges of attribution (see Section 9a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  No formal supervision missions were undertaken during the implementation period. Still, dialogue between
  the Bank team and government was able to continue and progress was monitored despite delays due to
  organizational changes across government, including a high turnover of staff as the country transitioned to
  a presidential system.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Resilience, Inclusion and Growth(P162071)




a. Government Performance
  The government, through the Treasury, and later through the Ministry of Finance, oversaw preparation
  and implementation of the operation. The ICR notes that the government's previous experience with
  DPOs, and strong links between the contents of this operation and the country's development strategy
  maintained momentum despite changes in government personnel without extensive disruptions. Still,
  untimely fiscal and monetary policies and personnel changes did influence some of the intended
  outcomes of the reforms, as noted in Section 4.



  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  Not assessed.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The policy and results matrix for the operation provided a sequence of prior actions that underpinned the
  policy changes. Key indicators for systematic tracking of outcomes were identified in the matrix, including
  specifications of baselines and targets. In most instances, the indicators were sufficient to measure results,
  albeit in some cases results were too broadly formulated to allow unique attribution (for instance, aggregate
  labor market outcomes); and in other cases, meaningful results were hard to attain over the short period of
  time – a year – that the operation covered.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Treasury was responsible for coordinating data gathering and monitoring of the operation, notably
  results indicators, drawing on information from relevant ministries and agencies.



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Resilience, Inclusion and Growth(P162071)



  The Treasury prepared quarterly evaluation reports and presented semi-annual progress reports to the
  government.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  No safeguard policies were noted in the ICR.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
No fiduciary concerns were noted in the ICR.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None noted.



d. Other
  The operation helped promote the economic inclusion of women into the job market, albeit with modest
  results. It also supported the burgeoning refugee crisis by offering work permits for foreigners under
  temporary protection, again with relatively narrow coverage.




11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                      ICR                     IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                             Moderately
Outcome                                             Moderately Satisfactory    ---
                             Satisfactory
Risk to Development
                             Modest                 Modest                     ---
Outcome
                             Moderately
Bank Performance                                    Moderately Satisfactory    ---
                             Satisfactory
                             Moderately
Borrower Performance                                Moderately Satisfactory    ---
                             Satisfactory

                                                                                                Page 10 of 12
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Resilience, Inclusion and Growth(P162071)



Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                 ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

The following lessons are drawn from the ICR:

DPOs can be an effective means to support structural change when they are part of the planning
process. The operation was able to help initiate significant reforms over a wide range of subject areas despite
a volatile political environment and an uncertain macroeconomy.

Program design should recognize macroeconomic risk. Major changes in the political and institutional
framework will test a program's strength, and a program should be designed with resilience to such factors in
mind: for instance, linking the results framework closely to precise results of prior actions rather than broad
aggregates, and assessing trade-offs between shorter and longer time horizons to allow outcomes to be more
rigorously assessed.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a good foundation for assessing performance on this operation. The review drew a careful
balance between the short-term effects of the policies being introduced and their often medium-term results
perspective. A more nuanced discussion of the usefulness of an M&E approach that is based on short-term
results could have been a thought-provoking addition to the ICR, albeit perhaps a bit outside the strict
framework of a core ICR.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 12
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Resilience, Inclusion and Growth(P162071)




                                                                         Page 12 of 12
