     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration Modernization Project (P111942)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0021835

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P111942                                     Tax Administration Modernization Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Armenia                                     Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51140                                   30-Apr-2016                                         10,966,927.82

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 03-Jul-2012                                 31-Jan-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             12,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              12,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                          10,966,927.82                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Judyth L. Twigg               Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 4), the Project Development Objective (PDO) was to reform and
   modernize the tax administration to: (a) increase voluntary tax compliance; (b) reduce tax evasion; (c) reduce
   compliance costs; and (d) increase administrative efficiency. The Project Appraisal Document (PAD) had the
   same PDO.




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration Modernization Project (P111942)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had four components:

   Component 1: Institutional development (estimated cost at appraisal - US$2.2 million; actual cost -
   US$1.0 million). The component was to strengthen Ministry of Finance (MOF) capacity to formulate tax
   policy and help the State Revenue Commission (SRC) improve strategic planning, strengthen management,
   and increase efficiency in tax inspectorates at the field level. To do so, the project was to provide consulting
   services for workflow analysis and organizational restructuring, and equipment for tax administration training
   centers. The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) was to provide support for
   strategic planning.

   Component 2: Strengthened operations (estimated cost at appraisal – US$1.0 million; actual cost –
   US$1.3 million). The component was to strengthen compliance management by re-engineering business
   processes for more effective self-assessment, routine processing of returns and calculation of taxes,
   automated risk management, stronger risk assessment, better audit skills, better detection of tax fraud, and
   improved taxpayer services and appeals structures. Project financing was to procure equipment, while
   technical assistance and training was to be provided by USAID.

   Component 3: Information technology (IT) infrastructure and system modernization (estimated cost
   at appraisal – US$11.0 million; actual cost - US$10.0 million). The component was to upgrade information
   and communications technology in the SRC for a comprehensive and integrated tax management system
   that was to unify functions at all levels, improve telecommunications and web connectivity, strengthen
   information exchange with other agencies, and augment other technological infrastructure. The aim was to
   create an efficient and effective environment for tax operations and management that would improve
   reliability and availability of information, better target compliance activities, lower administrative costs, and
   improve revenue collection.

   Component 4: Project management (estimated cost at appraisal – US$0.9 million; actual cost US$0.9
   million). The component was to strengthen the Borrower’s capacity to implement the project by financing
   consulting services to support procurement, financial management, and technical implementation of project
   components, as well as operating costs for project implementation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost and financing. At appraisal, total project costs were estimated at US$15.1 million, with US$12.0
   million in International Development Association (IDA) financing and US$3.1 million in domestic
   resources. US$6.0 million in parallel financing was provided by USAID to finance complementary technical
   assistance. Actual costs at closing were US$13.2 million, with US$10.9 million in IDA financing. The
   difference in IDA financing between appraisal and actual is mainly due to shifts in the SDR/US$ exchange
   rate.


                                                                                                        Page 2 of 11
                                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                        Tax Administration Modernization Project (P111942)



                                      Dates. The project was approved on July 3, 2012. It became effective on December 28, 2012. The project
                                      underwent five Level 2 revisions during implementation. A first revision was introduced in March 2014 to
                                      accommodate an administrative adjustment in project management, giving responsibility for implementation
                                      to a project management board, which avoided the need to establish a separate Steering Committee for
                                      project management. Subsequent revisions consisted of extensions of the Closing Date that were driven by
                                      government change, changes in the institutional framework (tax legislation), and slower-than-expected
                                      implementation. The original Closing Date, April 30, 2016, was extended twice, a first time on November 4,
                                      2015, to December 31, 2017; followed by three additional extensions - to April 15, 2018, then to September
                                      30, 2018, and finally to January 31, 2019, when the project closed.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               The project objectives were relevant to addressing public finance challenges that Armenia was facing in the
               aftermath of the international economic and financial crisis in the latter part of the last decade, notably
               significant fiscal deficits coupled with low tax collection rates. The objectives were aligned with Bank
               strategy as set out in its Country Partnership Strategies (CPS) at appraisal (CPS 2009-2013) and
               throughout implementation (CPS 2014-2017). The former emphasized tax reform, and the latter reduction in
               tax compliance costs. The current CPS, covering the period 2019-2023, also raises revenue collection
               efficiency as a tool for addressing limited fiscal space for public spending. All three CPSs support the
               government’s ongoing tax administration reform strategy.

               To achieve the objectives, the project mainly focused on investments in information and communications
               technology (ICT) infrastructure and equipment and, selectively, software development. Related institutional
               changes and human resource requirements, also essential for achieving the project’s objectives, were
               financed by USAID. In the ICR, USAID-financed activities were not taken into account in assessing project
               outcomes.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase voluntary tax compliance

                             Rationale

                                                                                                                                    Page 3 of 11
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Tax Administration Modernization Project (P111942)



The objective was to be achieved by equipping the SRC with modern ICT infrastructure. This was to expand
capacity in tax revenue management, notably allowing the expansion of modules essential for electronic
service delivery (taxpayer registration, VAT refunds, e-invoicing, electronic tax declarations). This in turn was
to contribute to lower compliance costs, and increased taxpayer registration and filing, resulting in an increase
in voluntary tax compliance.

The objective of an increase in voluntary tax compliance was met:

      The number of active VAT payers increased by 32 percent between January 2011 (11,800) and end-
       January 2019 (15,590). This exceeded the original target of 12,400 that had been set for 2016 (based
       on an annual 1 percent increase set out in the indicator). The actual result, 15,590, attained in end-
       January 2019, exceeded the 1 percent per annum growth target.
      The number of active corporate income tax (CIT) payers increased from 13,100 to 16,000 (a 22
       percent increase) between 2014 and 2018. The original baseline was 29,000, with a target of 30,400
       (again assuming an annual increase of 1 percent), but legal changes to the classification of taxpayers
       in 2014 reduced the number of active CIT payers. Maintaining the annual growth target, the 2018
       number exceeded the target.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To reduce tax evasion

Rationale
The objective was to be achieved through the introduction of new systems that were to reduce CIT
evasion. They included a new tax audit case management system to raise audit efficiency and transparency;
an analytical tools system to analyze business transactions; and sub-systems for tax revenue management,
notably for data cross-checking and for applying third-party information.



The objective to reduce tax evasion was met:



      CIT productivity (reduced tax evasion) increased from 0.10 in 2011 to 0.14 in 2018, achieving the
       original target; no revised target was set to take into account the extension of the project.
      Average adjustments following audit results more than doubled, from a 2011 baseline of AMD10.1
       million to AMD22.1 million in 2018, compared to an original target of a 20 percent increase over the
       period 2012 to 2016.




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 11
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Tax Administration Modernization Project (P111942)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To reduce compliance costs

Rationale
The objective was to be achieved by investments in ICT infrastructure to introduce electronic filing, e-
invoicing, and electronic payments; and by improving taxpayer services, including the establishment of a call
center, a queue management system, and a monitoring center, as well as establishing and equipping service
center points.



The objective was met, based on survey results. Surveys on perceptions among taxpayers indicated that
professionalism and honesty in the tax administration has risen from 23.7 percent in 2013 to 62.5 percent in
2018. However, the 2013 and 2018 surveys are not strictly comparable, as the former was a household
survey while the latter focused on a representative sample of taxpayers. On average, 83 percent of
respondents thought that the tax submission process as a whole had become much simpler, and also stated
that the introduction of automation had reduced administrative costs for taxpayers. An increase in tax returns
filed electronically, from 20 percent in 2011 to 97.5 percent in 2018, may have mainly reflected the
introduction in 2013 of a legal obligation to file electronically.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To increase administrative efficiency

Rationale
The objective was to be achieved through change management and capacity building.



The objective was met. Capacity building was provided through a newly established Training Center and
taxpayer service centers, used for training and distance learning. Here, training capacity extended to 3,000
trainees per year. Several study visits abroad were undertaken. A printing house linked to the Training Center
allowed essential documentation and learning materials to be made available.




                                                                                                 Page 5 of 11
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Tax Administration Modernization Project (P111942)



                            Achievement of this objective was measured by the evolution of the ratio of revenue collected by the SRC to
                            its operating costs, with a target of a 10 percent increase by the end of the project (2016). That ratio
                            increased from 74 in 2011 to 107 in 2018, a 69 percent increase from 2011.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            All the objectives are rated substantial; they all indicate substantial improvements over the project period,
                            extrapolating from the original targets, as none of the indicators was adjusted to take into account the much
                            longer implementation period.



                            That said, there are challenges of attribution in assessing achievement of the individual objectives. The
                            achievement of these objectives is interrelated; for example, changes in compliance costs influence voluntary
                            compliance and vice versa, and both influence administrative efficiency. In addition, USAID played an
                            important role in providing technical assistance, which directly influenced project outcomes but was not
                            assessed in the ICR.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   An economic analysis was undertaken in the PAD and the ICR. However, the two analyses are not comparable,
   as the former was based on the total increase in tax revenues, while the latter more correctly assessed only the
   effects of increases in revenue over and above the trendline. Using a discount rate of 5 percent, and based on
   reasonable assumptions about GDP growth, increase in the number of taxpayers, and inflation, the ICR found
   a financial internal rate of return of 219 percent and net present value of US$275 million. The economic analysis
   indicated a net present value of US$14.2 million, and an internal rate of return of 31 percent.

   Efficiency was also influenced by qualitative factors. The positive side included technical assistance provided by
   USAID that drove the application of much of the infrastructure and software of the project; institutional changes
   during implementation, notably the relocation of project management under the MoF; financial management
   arrangements that were placed under an experienced fiduciary agency; and interplay with other Bank projects
   that were supporting better governance, i.e. a series of Public Sector Modernization projects. The extension of
   the project by 33 months is likely to have provided better value for money by allowing the project to surpass the

                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 11
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Tax Administration Modernization Project (P111942)



original targets, essentially at no additional investment costs. However, there were some minor
shortcomings driving that extension, including complications with procurement, notably non-responsive bids and
excessive bids that required additional time to complete bidding processes.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated high, as the project directly addressed and significantly contributed to reducing
concerns over fiscal imbalances, as these no longer had a prominent role in the latest CPS. Efficacy is rated
substantial, as the project mostly achieved its four objectives: it provided IT infrastructure, upgraded ICT, and
developed key modules for the tax management system, leading to lower tax evasion and gains in revenue, and
ultimately, contributing to gains in efficiency of tax administration. Efficiency is rated substantial. Taken
together, these ratings indicate only minor shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation, leading
to an Outcome rating of satisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

With the investments in IT systems and infrastructure in the SRC completed, training and capacity building
undertaken, and a strategic plan for the SRC in place to further strengthen systems and maintain staff skills,
the risk to the development outcome appears low. Potential risks are further diluted by a Bank development
policy operation about to come on-stream (a fourth Armenia DPO, P169624) that includes the roll-out of a tax
audit case management system as a prior action.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration Modernization Project (P111942)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically relevant in supporting efforts at sustainable deficit reduction and focusing on
  revenue collection to do so. The components could reasonably have been expected to achieve project
  objectives. M&E design included difficulties in attribution in applying indicators (see Sections 4 and 9). At
  the government’s request, preparation (and later, implementation) was closely coordinated with USAID,
  with the former emphasizing ICT and the latter related technical assistance, emphasizing the importance
  of proper sequencing. Project design drew on lessons learned in supporting tax administration reform,
  focused on anchoring investments in government reform plans, linking ICT to business processes (and
  not vice-versa), and applying incremental reforms. At the same time, project preparation envisaged a
  relatively short implementation period that may not have been realistic based on experience with other
  tax reform projects.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank undertook an intensive supervision effort, including headquarters and locally based task team
 leaders (TTL), and experts in IT and tax administration. Following a slow start due to rotating TTLs, the
 team subsequently operated proactively to address implementation issues and move the project onto a
 more realistic time frame.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 A detailed results framework and monitoring plan were developed during preparation. Six outcome
 indicators were to be tracked, all with baseline data, milestones, and targets covering a five-year
 implementation period. All of the indicators were measurable and relevant to their respective
 objectives. While the formulation of the project's outcome targets did permit extrapolation to measure the
 validity of outcomes when introducing the almost three-year extension of project implementation, it would

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration Modernization Project (P111942)



 have been reasonable to introduce adjustments during implementation. Now the M&E is limited to
 estimates of outcomes: were they achieved or not, albeit on a relatively solid basis, because of the way the
 indicators were formulated. Moreover, attribution is challenged by the fact that some indicators influence
 each other, as noted in Section 4. Likewise, parallel financing of technical assistance by USAID made it
 difficult to determine the precise impact of the Bank’s IT investment on SRC performance.



b. M&E Implementation
  The SRC collected data on outputs and outcomes for quarterly and annual reports, focusing on results-
  based accountability and accomplishments against milestones.



c. M&E Utilization
  Progress reports were reviewed on a quarterly basis, and SRC coordinators met regularly to discuss
  implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assessed as a Category C project, and therefore no environmental assessment was
   required.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The fiduciary function was carried out by the Foreign Financing Project
   Management Center. It had experience and capacity to implement projects in accordance with the World
   Bank’s policies and procedures. Financial management arrangements were adequate and satisfactory to
   the Bank throughout the project implementation period. All disbursement procedures were in compliance
   with the Bank’s disbursement guidelines. The auditors issued unmodified (clean) opinions on the project’s
   annual financial statements, which were received by the due dates.



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration Modernization Project (P111942)



   Procurement. Procurement was carried out in accordance with the Bank’s Procurement and Consultant
   Guidelines. Some packages had to be cancelled and re-bid primarily due to lack of competition. Rebidding
   required more time to complete key project activities and was the main reason for the last two extensions
   of the project closing date.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory              Satisfactory
                                                                                    IEG notes shortcomings in QAE
                                                                                    sufficiently serious to influence
                                                                                    overall project progress during
                                                                                    implementation. Moreover, the
Bank Performance                Satisfactory              Moderately Satisfactory   ICR rated QAE as MS, and thus,
                                                                                    according to the harmonized
                                                                                    guidelines, overall Bank
                                                                                    Performance should also be
                                                                                    rated MS in the ICR.
                                                                                    IEG notes that outcome targets
                                                                                    were not adjusted when the
Quality of M&E                  Substantial               Modest
                                                                                    project was extended, as well as
                                                                                    challenges of attribution.
Quality of ICR                  ---                       Substantial


12. Lessons

Three factors contributed to good design. First, project design was informed by several pieces of
analytical work. Second, the project built on existing SRC operations and facilities, which ensured
that changes were incremental and therefore manageable. Finally, the project design reflected an
integrated approach, including the technical assistance on institutional changes and process re-
engineering provided by USAID and IT investments financed by the Bank.




                                                                                                      Page 10 of 11
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Tax Administration Modernization Project (P111942)



The efficiency of an integrated approach may be difficult to assess. In this project, the
economic and financial analysis exclusively focused on the efficiency of Bank-financed components,
including the benefits of the USAID-financed activities but not their costs.

There are key features to developing complex ICT systems. The upgrading to a comprehensive
and integrated tax management system is usefully accompanied by a series of key considerations:
(i) vision and strong leadership to ensure consistency in IT strategy and priorities; (ii) the right
sequencing of technical assistance and IT investments to help ensure smooth and timely
implementation; (iii) realistic timelines when choosing between a customized system (the project
option) and a commercial off-the-shelf solution; (iv) the local IT market’s capacity when opting for
customized systems; and (iv) the extent of technical assistance needed to support business process
reengineering and change management.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a thorough assessment of the project. It covered the relevant sections in sufficient detail,
providing sufficient evidence-based information and analysis to allow the ICR Review to be completed. It drew
important lessons that also were covered in the text.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 11 of 11
