     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Urban Transport Transformation Progr (P107159)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021920

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P107159                                   MX Urban Transport Transformation Progr

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Mexico                                    Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-78830,TF-96291                       30-Jun-2017                                       114,039,026.94

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Mar-2010                               30-Apr-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           350,000,000.00                               200,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            350,000,000.00                                 62,015,667.76

 Actual                                        114,039,026.94                                 62,015,667.76




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Katharina Ferl             John R. Eriksson             Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. iv) and the Financing Agreement of July 21, 2010 (p.
   5), the objective of the Urban Transport Transformation Program (UTTP) project was “to contribute to the
   transformation of urban transport in Mexican cities toward a lower carbon growth path”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Urban Transport Transformation Progr (P107159)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  18-Jul-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included three components:

   Component 1: Capacity Building: Provision of Technical Assistance (TA) and training to the eligible
   beneficiaries in the participating entities (appraisal estimate US$10 million, of which nothing was
   disbursed due to the lack of demand for UTTP funds. According to the ICR, this lack of demand
   reflected a reluctance by local governments to borrow for capacity building as well as the
   availability of counterpart funds for capacity building and TA. ICR, p. 18-19). This component was to
   finance technical assistance such as: i) preparing, updating or completing Integral Transport Plans (ITPs),
   which were to include climate change mitigation considerations; ii) developing plans for modernizing traffic
   management and for efficient allocation of public space for transport and non-motorized modes; iii)
   supporting urban transport institutions or regional transport coordination commissions responsible for sector
   coordination, modal and fare integration promotion and updating of ITPs; and iv) training of local
   government staff and other civil servants in areas such as transport system inventory, urban transport
   planning and programming, traffic management, formulation of urban transport projects including bus rapid
   transit projects, traffic safety, non-motorized transport modes, environmental and social evaluation and
   rehabilitation and maintenance of roads.

   Component 2: Development of Integrated Transit Systems that reduce CO2 emissions (appraisal
   estimate US$340 million, actual US$357.3 million): This component consisted of two sub-components.

   Component 2a: Mass transit corridors and ancillary investments. This sub-component was to finance:

   a) The development of Integrated Mass Transit Corridors (IMTC) in the participating entities (municipalities
   or groupings of municipalities), including, inter alia: the preparation, design, construction, supervision,
   maintenance and rehabilitation of roads for trunk lines and feeder roads, terminals, yards, transfer and
   access stations, mixed traffic lanes, and the acquisition of rolling stock, signaling, control centers,
   information systems, environmental monitoring equipment, and fare collection systems.

   b) Carbon-reduction transport investments, including, inter alia: the adoption of traffic management
   measures, non-motorized transport, design of and implementation of universal access facilities, carrying out
   of studies and design of facilitates for bike-transit integration, parking space and transfer stations, vehicle
   use restriction, public space improvements, including sidewalks, adoption of safety and security programs,
   design of land use density and clustering plans, intelligent transportation, transport demand management
   marketing and promotion, freight management and car free planning.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MX Urban Transport Transformation Progr (P107159)



  Component 2b: Low-carbon bus technologies and scrapping of displaced buses. This sub-
  component was to finance:

  a) The acquisition of low-carbon rolling stock to be operated in the participating entities.

  b) Programs concerning the scrapping of old and displaced buses, including, inter alia: (i) building
  institutional capacity to develop and/or adopt clean and environmentally sound scrapping strategies
  (collection, dismantling and final disposal); (ii) the purchasing of displaced rolling stock; and (iii) financing of
  the scrapping process, defined as the collection, destruction and recycling of steel scrap and disposal of
  non-recyclable materials.

  Component 3: Project Management (the costs of this component were to be financed by the
  Borrower): This component was to finance support (including the implementation of a technical monitoring
  system) to the eligible beneficiaries (states, municipalities, decentralized entities, private sector) for the
  supervision and monitoring of the implementation of the sub-projects in the participating entities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$2,694 million. Actual cost was US$114.039 million.
  Reason for the significantly lower costs was the lack of demand for the UTTP funds.

  Financing: The project received financing in the amount of US$200 million (of which US$62.1 million
  disbursed) by the Clean Technology Fund (CTF) and financing in the amount of US$150 million (of which
  US$52.03 million disbursed) by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD).

  Borrower Contribution: According to the Bank team (December 10, 2019), the project leveraged
  US$243.4 million from both private sources and public sources, of which a total of US$51.5 million was
  privately financed. Mexico's National Development Bank for Public Works and Services (BANOBRAS) was
  to support public and private investments, through on-lending for the provision of grants, loans and
  guarantees to support mass transit sub-projects.

  Dates: The project was restructured four times:

        On August 22, 2012 (level 2 restructuring) the project was restructured to allow for “spot starting
         conversions” for both the IBRD and CTF loan. The client could pick any date, and upon acceptance
         from the Bank, the conversion would enter into effectiveness. This was originally included in the
         IBRD loan agreement but not in the CTF loan agreement.
        On May 3, 2013 (level 2 restructuring) the project was restructured to introduce the option to use
         commercial practices for the acquisition of low-carbon rolling stock.
        On July 18, 2016 (level 2 restructuring) the project was restructured to: i) clarify coordination
         mechanisms, roles, and functions of different actors within the client entities, and the different
         phases of the sub-project cycle; ii) establish clearer criteria and processes for assessing the
         eligibility of sub-projects to receive Bank funds; iii) design a tool to support the government in
         carrying out the supervision of safeguards, and reporting on intermediate indicator; iv) reallocate
         funds from component 1 to component 2a and within component 2; v) to decrease the targets of two
         intermediate outcome indicators, drop two indicators and rephrase one indicator.


                                                                                                         Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Urban Transport Transformation Progr (P107159)



         On December 21, 2016 (level 2 restructuring) the project was restructured to extend the closing date
          by 22 months from June 30, 2017 to April 30, 2019 to align the project’s disbursement period to the
          execution timeline of Mexico City’s MB-L5ext sub-project. According to the Bank team (December
          10, 2019) this sub-project was one of the most relevant sub-projects. The project was eventually
          financed with no Bank/Clean Technology Funds, therefore cannot be considered to be part of the
          UTTP.

   The Mid-Term Review was planned to take place in March 2013 but ended up taking place in October 2014.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 1), at the time of appraisal 75 percent of Mexico’s population lived in urban areas
and continued to urbanize. This had a significant impact on urban services, including the urban transport
network, negatively affecting both economic productivity and citizens’ quality of life. Under conditions of
rapid growth, mass transit development in Mexican cities was not able to keep pace. Motorization in
Mexican cities was increasing by about 10 percent annually. According to the PAD (p. 2), transport was the
main contributor to Mexico’s carbon footprint. Transport-related emissions accounted for 18 percent of
Mexico’s Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions. Also, between 2000 and 2009, the emissions of the transport
sector had increased by almost 40 percent. However, most mass transport was provided through
unregulated private bus operations. Due to lack of access to financing most mass transport was conducted
through aging buses that were not sufficiently safe, comfortable and contributed significantly to GHG
emissions. Also, road infrastructure was deteriorating. Furthermore, most cities faced institutional
weaknesses, insufficient staff capacity, and lack of an adequate framework for transport policy and
planning, transport corridor management, and inadequate operations and maintenance budgets.

To address the urgent need for modern urban transport infrastructure, the government launched the
National Infrastructure Fund (FONADIN), a financial window in the National Development Bank for Public
Works and Services (BANOBRAS) to promote investments in infrastructure through grants, loans and
guarantees. For urban transport improvements the government also created the Federal Support Program
for Mass Transit (PROTRAM) to finance mass urban mass transit systems.

The project’s objective supported Mexico’s National Development Plan (2007-2012), in particular, the
environmental sustainability pillar which aimed to turn the concept of environmental sustainability into a
cross-sectoral dimension of public policies and assure that all public and private investments were
compatible with environmental protection. At appraisal the objective of the project was in line with the
Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (2008-2013), which focused on providing strategic support to Mexico
in furthering sustainable growth, improving competitiveness, promoting social inclusion, reducing poverty,
developing infrastructure, ensuring energy security, and strengthening institutions. Also, the objective of
the project was in line with Pillar four of the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Strategy (2014-2019),
which aims at promoting green and inclusive growth.



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MX Urban Transport Transformation Progr (P107159)



               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To contribute to the transformation of urban transport in Mexican cities toward a lower carbon growth path

                             Rationale
                             The project’s theory of change linked several outputs such as the delivery of support to eligible beneficiaries
                             with preparation and design of sub-projects and monitoring of operating sub-projects, training of sub-national
                             entities, completion of climate-informed integrated transport plans, operation of mass transit corridors and
                             implementation of ancillary carbon reduction investments with the outcome of transformation of urban
                             transport in Mexican cities. Furthermore, the project’s theory of change linked outputs such as deployment of
                             low-carbon vehicle technologies and scrapping programs in place in participating cities with the outcome of
                             transformation toward a lower carbon growth path. The project offered loans through on-lending from the
                             State Development Bank, BANOBRAS, to sub-national governments and private entities to finance their
                             respective contributions to any of several sub-projects supported by the Federal Program to Support Mass
                             Transport (PROTRAM).

                             Outputs (The ICR did not provide any targets for these outputs):

                             The following results were achieved at the Output level, with varying degrees of completion.

                                        Two new mass-transit corridors (Monterrey and Tijuana’s Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) were developed
                                         and the mass -transit corridor of Guadalajara was expanded (through the purchase of trains for the
                                         electric train SITEUR) as planned.
                                        In Tijuana, an exclusive lane for a trunk BRT corridor was constructed. However, delays in
                                         reorganizing incumbent operators delayed the sub-project operation which started in a limited way
                                         with only 14 buses in the trunk corridor.
                                        In Monterrey: a new department within the Ministry of Sustainable Development to manage the new
                                         BRT system was established. In Tijuana, two new departments were created, a new city-level
                                         secretariat for general mobility and Tijuana’s Integrated Transport System (SITT) for managing the
                                         new integrated transport system. SITEUR (a state-owned company created for managing the Urban
                                         Electric Train System) in Guadalajara did already exist but the project provided SITEUR with technical
                                         assistance in areas such as road safety, disability accessibility, and engineering rolling stock design.
                                         All three cities approved Integrated Sustainable Urban Mobility Plans (PIMUS) indicating better
                                         planning and implementation capacity.

                             Outcomes:



                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX Urban Transport Transformation Progr (P107159)




      The amount of avoided CO2 emissions was 46,842 tons, not achieving the original target of 1.96
       million tons.
      2.12 integrated mass transit corridors (IMTCs) were implemented, not achieving the original target of
       18 IMTCs. The ICR (p. 43) stated that an IMTC is an instrument to normalize measuring the extent of
       implementation of the PROTRAM program. The normalization is based on length of the corridor
       (weight = 1/3) and the demand carried by the corridor (weight = 2/3).
      The finance leveraged (intended to propel sectoral transformation) reached US$243.3 million, not
       achieving the original target of US$2.344 million.
      Three transport plans included climate change mitigation, not achieving the original target of eight
       plans.

While certain Outputs were achieved, none of the intended Outcomes were achieved or were likely to do so
at project closure, thus corresponding to the IEG Guidelines for a Negligible rating for Efficacy.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective remained the same, only the outcome targets were revised.

Revised Rationale
The Outputs were the same as stated above.



Outcomes:

      The amount of avoided CO2 emissions was 46,842 tons, not achieving the revised target of 340,000
       tons.
      2.12 integrated mass transit corridors (IMTCs) were implemented, not achieving the revised target of
       9.30 IMTCs.
      The finance leveraged (intended to propel sectoral transformation) reached US$243.3 million, not
       achieving the revised target of US$585 million.
      Three transport plans included climate change mitigation, not achieving the revised target of five
       plans.



Revised Rating
Negligible




                                                                                                Page 6 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                MX Urban Transport Transformation Progr (P107159)


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of the original and revised outcome targets was Negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                 Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                              Low achievement


   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency:

   Ex ante economic and financial analysis

   The PAD (p. 81) built a model to carry out the cost benefit or economic evaluation of the entire project and the
   financial evaluation of the concession to the private sector of the bus fleet. The incremental analysis was to
   compare with-project and without-project alternatives on a 20-year planning horizon. All infrastructure elements
   were estimated to have a useful life of at least 20 years, coinciding with the evaluation horizon. Buses, on the
   other hand, were estimated to have a useful life of 10 years and hence investment in buses were to take place
   twice during the evaluation horizon.

   The basis of the economic and financial evaluation models was a demand model that assumed 154,000 rides
   per day in year 1. Demand was to grow at 1 percent per year. The model also estimated year by year the fleet
   required as a function of demand. Fleet acquisition costs were a function of the number and type of buses
   purchased by the concessionaire.

   For the cost benefit or economic analysis model the following costs were considered: (i) cost of preparing the
   project (planning, engineering, and safeguard studies); (ii) land acquisition, for example for transfer terminals;
   and (iii) infrastructure construction (busways, transfer terminals, and bus depots). Travel time savings for users
   of the mass transit system: obtained from comparing the with and without project situations. In the "with" project
   situation an increase of 7 kilometers per hour was estimated. The Bus Rapid Transfer project was to contribute
   to reducing GHG gases because of the modal shift, the innovative technology of the buses, and because of
   speed improvements. The reductions were valued at US$8 per ton, which was the estimated value a facility
   such as the Carbon Partnership Facility was to pay. The Economic Analysis estimated a Net Present Value
   (NPV) and Economic Rate of Return (EER) for different scenarios (see PAD p. 82-83 for more details on the
   scenarios). The NPV ranged from US$84,193 to US$239,624. The ERR ranged from 22.9 percent to 33.1
   percent.

   The financial evaluation looks only at the element of the project that was to lend itself to private sector
   participation. In all scenarios the private sector was to recover its investment, hence the positive financial NPV
   and the IRR larger than the discount rate. The financial NPV ranged from US$7,051 to US$15,595. The
   Financial Rate of Return (FRR) ranged from 15.3 percent to 18.7 percent.

   Economic analysis at third restructuring



                                                                                                                           Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MX Urban Transport Transformation Progr (P107159)



During the third project restructuring the Economic analysis was updated. The analysis included four specific
sup-projects and estimated a weighted combined Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 13.07 percent.
The combined sub-projects had a NPV of US$377.3 million at a discount rate of 4.5 percent.

The ICR (p. 53-58) confirmed the estimates calculated at the project’s third restructuring. An EIRR of the
Monterrey sub-project was estimated at 17.15 percent, for the Guadalajara sub-project at 13.65 percent, and for
the Tijuana sub-project at -2.94 percent. The ICR did not calculate an EIRR or FIRR for the entire project at
project closure.

Operational Efficiency:

The project experienced several implementation delays due to procurement and financial management related
bottlenecks. The project required a 22 months extension of the closing date. Also, high cost of supervision
(US$2.6 million) and two thirds of funds being undisbursed at project closure indicate inefficiencies.

 While estimated ERRs were relatively high at appraisal, they dropped sharply by the third restructuring, and
operational efficiency was adversely affected by substantial delays and high supervision costs. Overall efficiency
is therefore rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objective was High before and after the revision of key outcome targets at the time of the
July 2016 restructuring, given its alignment with GoM strategies and Plans and with the Bank’s most recent
Country Partnership Strategy (2014-2019).. Efficacy was Negligible for before and after the target
revisions since none of the targets was close to being reached. Efficiency was Modest. This results in an overall
Unsatisfactory rating before and after the revision of key outcome targets..


a. Outcome Rating


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MX Urban Transport Transformation Progr (P107159)



   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR (p. 38), the national government continues to be committed to the ongoing sub-projects
which is critical for their sustainability. In order to ensure an adequate level of service, transport authorities
need to ensure continuous maintenance and reinvestment. The ICR (p. 38) stated that additional
interventions are necessary in the Monterrey sub-project to lease new bus depots to perform
repair/maintenance and to ensure that the current fleets are not deteriorating even more due to the lack of an
adequate facility.

According to the ICR (p. 39), the sustainability of the institutional changes that have been made will depend
on the government’s continuous efforts to strengthen implementation of the national urban transport policy.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (p. 30), the project was built on lessons learned from previous Bank projects and
  ongoing transport activities in Mexico. These lessons included: i) the institutional framework is key to
  advancing needed reforms; ii) there is a role for the federal government in the implementation of urban
  transport services reforms; iii) implementation strategy should have both high political involvement and
  strong technical support; iv) GHG mitigation is a long-term problem that requires a long-term response;
  and v) the mobility needs of the poor are different.

  The Bank team identified relevant risk factors and rated the following as Substantial: i) low demand for
  funds because not enough cities were ready for participating in the project or cities find it too complex to
  participate in the project; ii) sub-project implementation delays, due to problems with local agencies for
  contracting and managing contingencies; and iii) low-carbon emitting buses might not be ready for
  implementation when the sub-projects require them or might present operational and maintenance
  problems. According to the ICR (p. 36), mitigation measures were not adequate and the risk of sub-
  national governments not seeking project funds for projects due to barriers materialized. Also, the risk
  that additional resources would be needed to support BANOBRAS’ promotion of the project, supervision,
  and implementation of Bank policy materialized. Also, the ICR stated that project design did not anticipate
  the lack of local government capacity and that of private agents, to procure debt. Furthermore,
  BANOBRAS’ had limited capacity to assess the financial risk of small bus operators. Finally, the project
  design did not address the risk of low readiness for implementation.

  According to the ICR (p. 31), the project’s design and institutional arrangements were complex. Instead of
  setting up an intermediary loan with indirect access to the final beneficiaries and with BANOBRAS as an
  intermediary responsible for implementing Bank policy, the design included the application of Bank
  policies as in a traditional loan with BANOBRAS being responsible for compliance with the Bank’s policy
  terms. However, no financial resources were provided to execute this role.


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Urban Transport Transformation Progr (P107159)



  The project’s Results Framework had several shortcomings such as not including any indicators for
  measuring sectoral transformation (see section 9a for more details).

  In sum, there were significant shortcomings in the Bank’s Quality at Entry performance, which is
  consequently rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 30), BANOBRAS and the Federal Program to Support Mass Transport
 (PROTRAM) were responsible for leading project promotion and implementation with limited resources.
 Frequent changes in staff at BANOBRAS had a negative impact on project implementation. Furthermore,
 the lack of local government capacity, which included high administrative turnover, a lack of norms and the
 capacity to prepare sub-projects to become eligible for the project resulted in implementation challenges.
 Furthermore, non-financial barriers such as operators’ risk aversion and learning curve in using new
 technologies resulted in additional costs to utilize the newly introduced technology leading to the absence
 of low-carbon bus technologies. Also, high up-front costs were often a barrier to obtain financing from the
 Clean Technology Fund (CTF) for purchasing low-carbon buses.

 The ICR (p. 30) stated that the Bank conducted active supervision (three to six supervision missions a
 year) and benefited from constant specialist support from the Country Office. Also, the Bank supported the
 entire PROTRAM portfolio. However, the Bank also conducted identification missions to new prospective
 cities resulting in high administrative costs for supervision and less financial resources being available for
 the supervision of actual sub-projects supported by the Bank. Furthermore, the project faced procurement
 issues such as private operators in Monterrey having to follow an international competition for bus
 purchasing resulting in sub-optimal results (see section 10 b for more details).

 According to the ICR (p. 37), the Bank addressed the issue of complex project design by working with
 BANOBRAS in aligning processes and requirements of the project with those in PROTRAM and
 coordinating responsibilities between different departments. The Bank also coordinated with BANOBRAS
 in conducting an analysis of implementation readiness including areas such as indebtedness capacity and
 stages of project preparation and supported BANOBRAS in carrying out identification and preparation visits
 to sub-projects allowing for more effective targeting of potential sub-projects. The Bank also provided
 support in areas such as safeguard compliance, procurement and M&E. According to the ICR (p. 38),
 during the Mid-Term Review, the Bank also discussed with BANOBRAS changes to improve the usage of
 project resources such as the possibility of on-lending project resources to private financial institutions
 already providing loans to private operators. However, due to the closing date approaching this change
 was not made.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Urban Transport Transformation Progr (P107159)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change and how key activities and outputs would lead to the intended outcomes
 was sound. While the Results Framework included indicators to measure critical benefits such as avoided
 CO2 emissions and time savings, it did not include an indicator to measure reduction in the value of
 operational cost, another component to economically justify the project. The project’s objective was
 relatively broad and required institutional and sectoral transformation of the country’s transport sector.
 However, the Results Framework did not include an indicator to measure sectoral transformation and only
 used the development of Integrated Sustainable Urban Mobility Plans (PIMUS) to measure institutional
 transformation. Also, none of the indicators had a baseline.

 BANOBRAS was responsible for the project’s M&E activities and was to prepare quarterly progress reports
 describing the main achievements of the project and sub-projects financed. The Coordinating Unit (UC)
 was to support the cities to carry out annual Results Based M&E activities including information on project
 outputs such as actual use of the transport services, user satisfaction with the quality of the infrastructure
 and services, tariffs, and reduction of travel time, among other indicators. For this purpose each city was to
 prepare a base-line study and was to organize participatory focus group discussions, consumer satisfaction
 surveys or other participatory methods.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 34), the Borrower faced challenges implementing the project’s M&E. Data
  collection was conducted rarely and the eligible beneficiaries did not conduct the surveys required to
  assess modal shift and time savings. Also, the project did not provide any budget to support the
  government to conduct M&E activities and fulfill its M&E responsibilities.

  During the restructuring in July 2016 the project’s Results Framework was revised to decrease the
  targets of two intermediate outcome indicators, drop two indicators and rephrase one indicator.

  The ICR (p. 34) stated that when a new sub-project received UTTP support, the project was able to
  obtain data from sub-national clients who conducted feasibility studies for projects.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 34), the project’s M&E data was used to monitor progress of sub-projects.
  Since the data was estimated, rather than systematic, the project team had to confirm and complement
  the estimated data with field visits, secondary sources of information, and interviews with eligible
  beneficiaries. The ICR stated that the data did not inform the government’s decision making.



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Urban Transport Transformation Progr (P107159)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category A and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary
   Resettlement). According to the ICR (p. 34), the project prepared an Environmental and Social Framework
   (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The Government adopted the ESMF for all Federally-
   funded projects (MASTU in Spanish). The project provided technical assistance for introducing social and
   environmental management systems to ensure that all sub-projects, no matter what their source of
   financing was, complied with the Bank’s safeguard policies. The ICR (p. 34) stated that the Tijuana and
   Jalisco sub-projects had no safeguard issues. The wEcovia (Monterrey) sub-project was challenged by
   compliance with the Bank’s norms for maintaining and repairing rolling stock. A new bus terminal
   was planned but due to budget constraints, construction had not started at project closure. The Bank also
   raised with the authorities of Nuevo Leon the safety issue in the Bus Rapid Transit corridor which
   experienced a significant number of traffic accidents in 2018. The Bank provided technical assistance to
   conduct a road safety assessment and shared the results with the state authorities who committed
   themselves to indroduce new measures to improve the corridor's safety.

   According to the ICR (p. 35), social safeguard compliance was Satisfactory at the time the project closed.
   The rating was only downgraded to Moderately Satisfactory due to missing documentation in 2018. The
   issue was addressed and the project built institutional capacity for safeguards documentation. Each Urban
   Transport Transformation Program (UTTP) sub-project included a social management plan with a
   communication strategy and grievance redress mechanisms (GRMs). Sub-national government entities in
   charge of the implementation of sub-projects administered the GRMs. The ICR (p. 35) stated that the GRMs
   were functioning and feedback was received and addressed in a timely manner by the implementors of the
   sub-projects.

   Notwithstanding the above examples, the ICR is relatively sparse regarding issues of compliance and
   environmental impact of sub-projects.The MASTU framework is reported to include measurement of cultural
   heritage (ICR, p. 66) but the ICR does not mention involuntary resettlement apart from citing the relevant
   OP/BP.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement:

   According to the ICR (p. 31), the project planned that private operators in Monterrey follow an international
   competition for fleet acquisition to obtain IBRD/CTF financing. Even though the private operators were
   experienced in the procurement of buses, the project faced several bottlenecks. The type of selected
   buses was not known to the operators, was more expensive than known models, and did not have the
   passenger capacity as defined in the technical specifications. These issues resulted in implementation

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Urban Transport Transformation Progr (P107159)



   delays. In order to overcome these bottlenecks, the Bank conducted an assessment of commercial
   practices in the country and aligned the application of procurement guidelines in the project with the actual
   practices of private operators. The ICR (p. 35) stated that prior reviews of procurement took place as
   defined in the procurement plan. No instances of violation of procurement practices were declared when
   reviews were conducted of all procurement processed during the Urban Transport Transformation
   Program.

   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (p. 35), the project’s financial management complied with the legal agreement. The
   annual audits had unqualified opinions throughout project implementation and Interim Financial Reports
   were submitted in a timely manner and were of satisfactory quality. The project’s financial management
   risk was rated Moderate until 2015 and was then Substantial until project closing due to delays in
   processes and low disbursement levels. The ICR (p. 35) stated that weak planning in terms of
   procurement and preparation of sub-projects at the sub-national level did not allow for a timely
   disbursement of funds. Also, the ICR (p. 32) stated that BANOBRAS’s department responsible for
   evaluating the risks of private borrowers was tasked to assess the risk of private operators. Due to the
   relatively small number of deals, the department did not always prioritize these deals resulting in a low
   demand for UTTP funds from potential private borrowers who might have also found that the department
   had relatively high transaction costs and lacked flexibility.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 39 to 41) provided several lessons learned which were adapted by IEG:


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MX Urban Transport Transformation Progr (P107159)



        Ensuring implementation readiness before project approval is critical for mitigating
         any potential risks to a successful implementation. This project could have benefitted
         from conducting a market analysis to confirm more potential borrowers, identifying mitigation
         measures for the risk of low demand for project financing and identifying the opportunity for
         BONABRAS to on-lend to private commercial banks with confirmed demand and capacity for
         processing loans to private operators. Also, more attention at preparation could have been
         given to effective coordination between BANOBRAS and PROTRAM.
        Flexible technical requirements benefit national programs when they can be adapted
         to the context of local needs. In this project, PROTRAM had several requirements such as
         all sub-project promoters creating a transport authority, approving an integrated mobility plan,
         and having an appropriate technical, economic, and legal structure and assessment .
        Low-emissions programs benefit from improving public transport. Low-carbon
         vehicles may be more successfully introduced to private operators when the
         additional climate and environmental benefits are clearly explained. In this project, the
         introduction of low-carbon vehicle technology added complexity, higher potential investments
         costs, and technology risks that negatively impacted project implementation and deterred
         private operators from seeking resources for the purchases of buses.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a good overview of project preparation and implementation. The ICR was internally
consistent, identified useful lessons learned and included an Economic analysis. The report lacked conciseness
(ICR guidance recommends a length of 15 pages for the main text but the main document of this ICR was 41
pages). Furthermore, the ICR did not provide sufficient information on risks to the sustainability of development
outcomes.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
MX Urban Transport Transformation Progr (P107159)




                                                                                 Page 15 of 15
