          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          TN - Governance Opportunities & Jobs DPL(P128251)



                                                                                     Report Number : ICRR0021245

   1. Project Data



    Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
    Tunisia                                    Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


    Programmatic DPL
    Planned Operations:          0              Approved Operations:          0

    Operation ID                                Operation Name
    P128251                                     TN - Governance Opportunities & Jobs DPL


     L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
     IBRD-82100                                31-Dec-2013                                         513,087,454.13

     Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
     27-Nov-2012                               31-Dec-2013

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                           500,000,000.00                                             0.00

     Revised Commitment                            500,000,000.00                                             0.00

     Actual                                        513,087,454.13                                             0.00




     Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
     Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Judyth L. Twigg              Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)


PHPROJECTDATATBL




     Operation ID                               Operation Name
     P132709                                    TN - Governance Opportunities Jobs DPL-2 ( P132709 )



                                                                                                      Page 1 of 14
          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          TN - Governance Opportunities & Jobs DPL(P128251)




     L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
     IBRD-82100,IBRD-83580                    30-Jun-2015                                        242,507,627.86

     Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
     29-Apr-2014                              30-Jun-2015

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                            Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                          250,000,000.00                                            0.00

     Revised Commitment                           250,000,000.00                                            0.00

     Actual                                       242,507,627.86                                            0.00


PHPROJECTDATATBL




     Operation ID                               Operation Name
     P150950                                    TUNISIA: Third GOJ DPL ( P150950 )


     L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
     IBRD-83580,IBRD-85360                    31-Dec-2016                                        497,634,433.26

     Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
     01-Oct-2015                              31-Dec-2016

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                            Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                          500,000,000.00                                            0.00

     Revised Commitment                           500,000,000.00                                            0.00

     Actual                                       497,634,433.26                                            0.00




   2. Program Objectives and Policy Areas

   a. Objectives
        The Governance, Opportunity and Jobs (GOJ) Development Policy Loans (DPLs) originally consisted of two
        operations, but due to slower-than-expected implementation the second DPL was split into two operations.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN - Governance Opportunities & Jobs DPL(P128251)




   The development objective (PDO) for GOJ1 (Program Document, page 31) was to lay the policy foundations
   for a more competitive business environment, a strengthened financial sector, more inclusive and accountable
   social services, and more transparent public governance. The PDO remained substantively the same through
   all three operations.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   There were four policy areas:

   Policy area 1: Attracting investment and job creation. This was to be achieved through regulatory
   reforms aiming at creating a more competitive business environment, and by opening the
   telecommunications market to competition.

   Policy area 2: Strengthening the financial sector. This was to be achieved by improving the financial
   situation and governance of public banks.

   Policy area 3: Improving the quality of social sector services and inclusive policies. This was to be
   achieved by improving quality and governance in active labor market programs and in health and education
   services, making them more inclusive and accountable.

   Policy area 4: Strengthening governance, transparency and accountability. This was to be achieved by
   promoting access to information, introducing greater transparency in public finances, and strengthening the
   public procurement system.

   Revisions to Policy Areas

   While the policy areas were not formally revised, some changes in emphasis were introduced during
   implementation, albeit without substantive changes to contents. The biggest change occurred in Policy
   Action 1, where explicit mention of “job creation” was dropped, and the emphasis placed on developing the
   business environment. Job creation was already an auxiliary objective to a better business environment, as
   well as being explicitly addressed in Policy Area 3 under active labor market programs.

   Other Significant Changes

   The program was implemented during a turbulent time in Tunisia. It was launched under a post-revolutionary
   interim government and would be implemented while a new constitution was being written and new elections
   held, as well as with a deteriorating security situation and its effects on tourism and budget
   revenues. Consequently, the program experienced slower-than-expected implementation as well as shifting
   emphasis within the policy areas. The operation expanded from two to three DPLs, the overall amount of the
   loan was increased, and targets were revised to take into account delays.

                                                                                                 Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN - Governance Opportunities & Jobs DPL(P128251)




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   Project cost and financing. The commitments under GOJ1 and GOJ2 were originally US$500 million
   each. However, implementation of GOJ2 experienced delays due to the volatile political and economic
   environment and an uncertain security situation. Consequently, the original GOJ2 was split into two
   operations of US$250 million each (a revised GOJ2 and a new GOJ3). GOJ3, envisaged as a two-tranche
   operation after the split, was reformulated as a single-tranche operation. The amount of GOJ3 was
   then increased to US$500 million to help alleviate domestic financing needs that had arisen as tourism
   revenues dropped in response to the worsened security situation. Ultimately, total disbursements for the
   whole series came to US$1.25 billion, rather than the originally envisaged US$1 billion.

   Dates. GOJ1 was approved on November 27, 2012, became effective on December 14, 2012, and closed on
   December 31, 2013. GOJ2 was approved on April 29, 2014, became effective on August 11, 2014, and
   closed on June 30, 2015. GOJ3 was approved on October 1, 2015, became effective on December 23, 2015,
   and closed on December 31, 2016.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  The GOJ series objective helped address the pressure for social and economic change that had brought
  about regime change in Tunisia in 2011. It supported the government’s medium-term strategy in seeking to
  mitigate some of the effects of a weak economy by strengthening the investment climate and the financial
  sector; addressing social concerns, notably labor market intermediation, and access and quality of education
  and health services; and addressing concerns about transparency and accountability in governance.

  The series was relevant to the Bank’s Interim Strategy Note for Tunisia, put in place following the 2011
  revolution, and is relevant to the new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (2016-2020). Pillar I of the CPF
  focuses on strengthening economic and fiscal management as well as trade and competitiveness, and
  improving the business environment for private sector job creation, innovation, and entrepreneurship, aligning
  with the series’ Policy Areas 1 and 2. Pillar III of the CPF emphasizes social inclusion and targets World Bank
  Group assistance to particularly vulnerable segments of society, with the aim of helping to build greater citizen
  trust and promoting skills development, transparency, and accountability, aligning with Policy Areas 3 and 4.



  Rating

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            TN - Governance Opportunities & Jobs DPL(P128251)



       Substantial

   b. Relevance of Design
         Program design, including chosen policy areas and proposed actions, were relevant to achieving the
       PDO. The results chain was set out in a policy reform matrix. It was clear, and prior actions and triggers could
       reasonably be expected to deliver the intended outcomes. Indicators were measurable. Program design
       drew on previous analytical work and on lessons drawn from previous DPLs, in particular a 2011 single
       operation that preceded the series; and it built on the spirit of optimism and promise that surrounded the
       country’s political transition to a multi-party democracy . While appropriate at the time, and highly relevant,
       the program also was ambitious, and sensitive to the kinds of external shocks that soon would come to make
       themselves felt – political turbulence, social tensions and security threats. This resulted in implementation
       delays and in some instances only partially achieved outcomes (see Section 4). That said, it did set in motion
       important reform initiatives on which to build for the future.

       The macroeconomic framework during preparation of GOJ1 was deemed adequate and sustainable over
       time. The medium-term growth outlook was positive with expected recovery of exports, tourism, and foreign
       direct investment. The domestic economy drew on a package of reforms introduced by the new government
       that were expected to lead to growing investment. The fiscal position was characterized by a widening deficit
       in the short term, which was subsequently expected to decrease with better expenditure control and
       increasing tax revenues. The International Monetary Fund supported the government’s choice of fiscal
       policies, and a Standby Arrangement was signed in June of 2013.



       Rating
       Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     Lay the policy foundations for a more competitive business environment

    Rationale
    The objective was to be achieved: (i) by introducing a regulatory reform process of simplifying business
    procedures with participation by the private sector; and (ii) by removing institutional bottlenecks to increase
    competition in the telecommunications market. In the short term, streamlining business procedures was
    expected to lead to a substantial reduction in compliance costs, and in the longer term, to enhance
    transparency in administrative processes. Increasing competition in the telecommunications market was




                                                                                                         Page 5 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            TN - Governance Opportunities & Jobs DPL(P128251)



    expected to reduce the price of international telecommunications over the medium term, increase the
    competitiveness of Tunisian companies, reduce network redundancy, and increase network security.

    Simplifying business procedures. A regulatory review process of business formalities was initiated as a
    prior action for GOJ1 with a nine-month results horizon. For reasons largely outside the control of either the
    government or the Bank see Section 3b), as the political situation this initial phase took over four years. At
    the end, an inventory of business formalities identified 1,107 formalities, with 240 formalities identified for
    simplification. Of these, 154 have been approved for simplification, and 137 effectively either removed or
    simplified. Compliance cost savings estimated at US$18 million were achieved against an original target of
    US$3 million and a revised target of US$30 million, set in 2016. The simplification process is continuing with
    the support of the Bank under a subsequent development policy financing operation; however, the ICR (page
    35) indicated that it appears to have lost momentum, with low participation by the private sector.

    Increasing competition in the telecommunications market. The series advanced competition in the
    telecommunications market, albeit not to the extent originally envisaged. Access to landing stations for
    international telecommunications cables to more operators was legally opened as a prior action for
    GOJ1. It did not have the expected impact, as the telecommunications authority set a prohibitive access
    price. Developments were more favorable in the domestic mobile market, where the penetration rate for
    mobile data increased from 19 percent in 2012 to 63 percent in 2016, as alternative fiber-optic infrastructure
    existed in two state-owned enterprises, and was opened for leasing to licensed operators. A further initiative,
    a prior action under GOJ 3, had more limited applicability: Internet service providers were to be allowed to
    develop their own infrastructure; unbundling/bitstream regulations were to allow operators direct access to
    local loop telecommunications infrastructure; and numbers portability was introduced. Only the last item was
    implemented successfully; the two other items, while creating the opportunity, did not meet with the market
    response: no new infrastructure was built; and available copper infrastructure held less interest due to higher
    demand for fiber-optic cable. A further prior action under GOJ3 initiated restructuring of the
    telecommunications authority. The restructuring plan was completed, including a 20 percent reduction in
    staff, while creating a new staffing structure, including higher salaries and clear job descriptions under which
    new staff can be hired.

    Formally, the reform measures did open the telecommunications market to more competition. While in some
    cases this has not immediately resulted in sought-for outcomes, the platform that the formal changes have
    created can be expected to allow for more far-reaching reforms in the future.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

                                                                                                        Page 6 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            TN - Governance Opportunities & Jobs DPL(P128251)



     Lay the policy foundations for a strengthened financial sector

    Rationale
    The objective was to be achieved by improving the financial position and governance of public banks. This
    was to be done by restructuring the three public banks – Societe Tunisienne de Banque, Banque Nationale
    Agricole, Banque d’Habitat -- and strengthening key aspects of prudential regulation in the banking sector.

    Bank restructuring. Bank restructuring was initiated under GOJ1, where a prior action included the
    launching of strategic and financial audits of the three banks. Corporate governance was reformed as a prior
    action for GOJ2, redefining the roles of management, board, and state in public bank governance. The
    audits were completed in 2015, and based on them, restructuring plans were adopted (prior action for
    GOJ3). The restructuring plans include modernization of information technology systems, introduction of
    performance contracts, and initiation of staff restructuring. These processes are currently being
    implemented.

    Strengthening prudential regulation. The Central Bank issued a circular outlining stricter prudential
    regulation for the banking sector as a prior action under GOJ1. With the completion of audits in 2015, the
    three banks were recapitalized (prior action for GOJ2), their solvency ratios rising from 8.9 percent in 2013 to
    11.3 percent end-2016, above the minimum requirement of 10 percent.

    Bank restructuring and stronger prudential regulations are plausibly moving the system towards international
    practice, restoring stability, increasing competition, and providing improved access to finance.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective
     Lay the policy foundations for more inclusive and accountable social services

    Rationale
    The objective was to be achieved as follows: in employment, by the consolidation of existing employment
    insertion programs, and a results-based monitoring and evaluation framework to improve job insertion rates
    and monitoring of program performance; in health, by establishing an auditing, evaluation, and accreditation
    system to improve quality in health care; in higher education, by establishing a national authority for
    evaluation, quality assurance, and accreditation to ensure quality in the supply of higher education services;
    and in public service delivery, by institutionalizing mechanisms for participatory evaluation of the
    performance of public services.




                                                                                                        Page 7 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            TN - Governance Opportunities & Jobs DPL(P128251)



    Employment. The government’s intention to replace six ongoing active labor market programs – the
    decision to do so was a prior action for GOJ1 – was not realized due to limited capacity for implementation in
    the employment fund. Instead, two programs focusing on insertion were expanded, and two new programs
    were introduced. The results-based monitoring and evaluation framework was not introduced due to
    differences on methodology with the Bank team, and limited capacity in the employment fund.

    Health. A national authority for the evaluation and accreditation of health services (INAS) was established as
    a prior action for GOJ1. An operating budget and staffing are in place, and INAS has initiated the process of
    getting its experts and procedures internationally accredited.

    Higher education. A national authority for evaluation, quality assurance, and accreditation of higher
    education was established as a prior action for GOJ1. It became operational in 2014 and has so far carried
    out 27 evaluations. It still would need international recognition for any accreditations it might issue.

    Public service delivery. The government institutionalized participatory evaluations of service delivery as
    prior action for GOJ2. However, the executing body – the public services control entity – has neither the staff
    nor the budget to carry out any participatory evaluations of service delivery.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 4
    Objective
     Lay the policy foundations for more transparent public governance

    Rationale
    The objective was to be achieved by promoting access to information about the operations of public
    agencies by clarifying the rules for dissemination of information on the government’s websites; strengthening
    fiscal transparency through disclosure of information on budget planning and execution; and improving the
    public procurement system by increasing transparency and streamlining procedures.

    Transparency and accountability. Procedures for the implementation of the 2011 law on the right of the
    public to gain access to documents held by public agencies were introduced as a prior action for GOJ1. They
    provided guidelines on the publication of key information on public finances, including a citizen’s budget (a
    simplified budget presentation) and an online open budget platform giving citizens direct access to detailed
    and timely public expenditure data. To ensure coherent interpretation of the guidelines at all levels of the
    administration, legislation was passed as a prior action for GOJ3 focusing on how to implement the
    transparency measures. An action plan to apply the legislation was approved and a commission set up for
    implementation. As a result of these initiatives, budget proposals and budget execution reports are published


                                                                                                        Page 8 of 14
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               TN - Governance Opportunities & Jobs DPL(P128251)



    online; a citizen’s budget (a simplified budget with explanations) is issued; and local budget data are
    published, as are consolidated financial data of state-owned enterprises. The Bank team assesses that
    Tunisia has a relatively open environment for information disclosure, ranking 11th out of 111 countries

    Procurement. Following a joint assessment by the Bank and the African Development Bank, an action plan
    was developed to improve the public procurement system. Revisions to the system were introduced as a
    prior action for GOJ2 and focused on improving the legal and regulatory framework; introducing electronic
    procurement and electronic publishing of procurement processes; and a mechanism for resolution of
    disputes. The reform, which has been implemented, significantly shortened the procurement process, from
    200 days to 129 days on average.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  Relevance of objectives was rated substantial, while relevance of design was rated modest, the latter rating
  reflecting a design that was too ambitious taking into account the uncertainties that surrounded the political
  situation in the country at the time. These same uncertainties are reflected in the Efficacy ratings: modest for
  two objectives and substantial for two. IEG considers that, overall, the emphasis in Efficacy tends
  toward substantial rather than modest; where targets were not achieved – largely because of external factors -
    processes were nevertheless initiated and in most instances can plausibly be expected to achieve results over
  time. The outcome rating is therefore moderately satisfactory, reflecting moderate shortcomings in the
  operation's preparation and implementation.


  a.      Outcome Rating
          Moderately Satisfactory


  6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

  The government, despite several changes and elections, appears to remain committed to the reform program,
  and this is confirmed by its policy declarations. That commitment is backed by broad popular support for
  reforms that improve governance and social and economic performance. The political and social risks that
  affected program implementation remain as post-program risk factors. Economic risks are mitigated by active
  donor support for the government’s medium-term reform agenda, including a robust relationship with the

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN - Governance Opportunities & Jobs DPL(P128251)



Bank. The Bank delivered a follow-up operation in 2017 focusing on the business environment, and another one
in 2018.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
    Substantial

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The series drew on the government’s strategies at the time, focusing on interventions that would temper
  governance and socio-economic issues that were at the forefront of the country’s democratization effort. It
  provided timely budget support at a time of uncertain international and domestic economic perspectives. Its
  programmatic approach recognized the need for continuity in donor support; it built on the experience from
  a single-tranche Governance and Opportunity Loan (GODPL) that preceded the series, as well as drawing
  on policy notes that the Bank had prepared in key sectors. Attention was given to maintaining close
  coordination with other major donors. Potential risks were identified, but also means to mitigate the social
  and economic ones, the former by improving the quality and provision of social services and giving greater
  voice to the population, and the latter through effective fiscal policy. The political ones - the resurgence of
  social tensions and security challenges - lay outside the influence of the Bank or its programs. Still, the
  result was an ambitious, multi-sector program that, while addressing the major challenges set out in the
  PDO and the results matrix, in some instances fell short of its intentions. M&E design, notably the selection
  of indicators in some instances, did have some shortcomings that would not allow the full monitoring of
  progress or results of policy actions (addressed in Section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  An intensive supervision effort included support from Bank activities in related subject-matter areas, as well
  as collaboration with other donors. It faced the challenges of a turbulent period as Tunisia was shaping its
  post-revolutionary institutions. Still, the supervision effort was able to bring the program to closure,
  adjusting the pace of implementation to challenges on the ground.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN - Governance Opportunities & Jobs DPL(P128251)




a. Government Performance
  The immediate, post-revolutionary government, faced with political, social, and economic tensions, was
  strongly committed to the reforms that were being introduced with the series, and which were essential
  for successful transition. The short-term dynamics of the subsequent post-transition period -- including
  constitutional reform, several government changes, and security issues – would divert attention from the
  reform effort and contribute to slow program implementation. The coordinating agency - the Ministry of
  Development, Investment and International Cooperation -- which initially played a strong coordinating
  role, would become progressively weaker in the uncertain environment. Instead, without strong central
  coordination, relevant sector agencies came to play a more important role in implementation, but also
  exacerbated capacity constraints.


  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  Not assessed.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The policy and results matrix for the series provided a logical sequence of prior actions underpinning the policy
  changes. Key indicators for tracking outcomes were identified, including specifying baselines, milestones, and
  targets where appropriate. In some instances, outcome indicators did not fully measure policy actions; for
  example, while indicators did measure opportunity and insertion rates for labor market programs, no explicit
  measure for governance was included, instead proxies were introduced.



b. M&E Implementation
  Monitoring was based on the government’s regular monitoring and evaluation activities, reinforced by
  support from the Bank teams and other donors. Still, in the volatile political environment, actual data
  collection or analysis through the central data collection mechanisms would turn out to be insufficient to
  provide timely updates on progress across all four objectives.


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN - Governance Opportunities & Jobs DPL(P128251)




c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR provides no information on M&E utilization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  No safeguard policies were noted in the ICR.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  No fiduciary concerns were noted in the ICR.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None noted.



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                     ICR                     IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                            Moderately
Outcome                                             Moderately Satisfactory      ---
                            Satisfactory
Risk to Development
                            Substantial             Substantial                  ---
Outcome
                            Moderately
Bank Performance                                    Moderately Satisfactory      ---
                            Satisfactory
                            Moderately              Moderately
Borrower Performance                                                             ---
                            Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
Quality of ICR                                      Substantial                  ---

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TN - Governance Opportunities & Jobs DPL(P128251)




Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

  The following lessons are drawn by IEG:

 A complex transition requires careful consideration of trade-offs between ambition and feasibility in
 project design. In Tunisia, political pressures and economic challenges called for broad multi-sectoral
 interventions, but success might have been greater with a more careful assessment of institutional capacity in
 key reform areas.

 Reforms are especially prone to being undermined by their weakest link. In Tunisia, employment
 reforms were affected by the lack of ownership of the employment agency. In such instances, other actors, for
 example non-governmental organizations, can be helpful through outsourcing.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a sufficient discussion of the background and rationale of the GOJ series, as well as the
environment in which it was implemented, to allow assessment of results and ratings. Still, a more thorough
discussion of efficacy would have been helpful, notably a more rigorous juxtaposition of activities, outputs and
outcomes to key indicators and targets. This could also have been the case for M&E, where the process
remained unclear. However, referring to the Project Document, one does get the impression that there was not
much material available on which to review monitoring and evaluation.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
TN - Governance Opportunities & Jobs DPL(P128251)




                                                                                 Page 14 of 14
