     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Punjab Public Management Reform Program (P132234)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0021844

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P132234                                 Punjab Public Management Reform Program

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                   Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53140                               31-Dec-2018                                           46,291,178.06

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Nov-2013                             31-Dec-2018

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         50,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                          50,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                      46,291,178.06                                                0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof     Judyth L. Twigg               Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (page 4), the Project Development Objective (PDO) for the Punjab Public
   Management Reform Program was to improve transparency and resource management of targeted
   departments of the Program Implementing Entity. (“Program Implementing Entity” denotes the Province of
   Punjab.) The Program Appraisal Document (PAD) had the same PDO.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 9
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Punjab Public Management Reform Program (P132234)



  No


c. Components
   The PDO was a Program for Results (PforR) operation. It was to be achieved by interventions in three
   results areas:

   Results area 1: improved transparency and citizens' access to information. Activities included
   consulting services and training of public officials to: proactively disclose official information by targeted
   administrative departments pivotal to the reform process (the excise and tax department; the information
   technology board; the procurement regulatory authority; the resource management program); establish
   automated record management systems in the targeted administrative departments; and use smart phones
   to monitor basic information on infrastructure development schemes and publish that online.

   Results area 2: performance monitoring. Activities included performance monitoring and making
   performance information available for decision making and to citizens, to be implemented by introducing a
   data and feedback collection system based on smart-phones; producing performance reports based on the
   data and feedback collected for decision making; and publicly disclosing the performance reports.

   Results area 3: resource management. Activities focused on improving resource management by
   improving efficiency and transparency in tax administration and procurement processes. Results area 3a
   was to focus on reforming the provincial tax base by strengthening administration of the urban immovable
   property tax, to result in improved tax collection, focusing on billing, compliance, and performance
   management. Results area 3b was to improve procurement practices.




d. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Program cost. Total project cost at appraisal was estimated at US$70.22 million. Actual expenditures at
   closing were US$107.90 million.
   Financing. An International Development Association Credit denominated in Special Drawing Rights
   (SDR) was provided. The full amount, SDR32.6 million, was disbursed. The original US dollar equivalent
   was US$50 million. Due to exchange rate changes, US$46.2 million was disbursed in US dollar terms.
   Borrower contribution. The estimated government contribution at appraisal was US$20.22 million. The
   actual contribution at closing was US$61.7 million.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 9
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Punjab Public Management Reform Program (P132234)



       The PDO was relevant to the situation in Punjab, it supported government strategy, and it was aligned with
       the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2015-20. While Punjab is the
       wealthiest province in Pakistan, poverty and economic inequality are high, and the quality of public services
       is poor. Reliable information about performance and service delivery is scarce, limiting accountability within
       the administration and vis-a-vis the public, and the shaping of appropriate policies. Insufficient fiscal space
       to meet investment needs and sustain service delivery at adequate levels points to the need to enhance
       effectiveness of revenue collection and public spending. The Punjab governance reform program addresses
       these challenges: it aims at strengthening accountability and transparency to improve service delivery and
       improve financial management systems in Punjab. The CPF includes governance as an important part of
       the Bank’s engagement with Punjab and emphasizes accountability and transparency for building
       management and administrative systems. The Punjab governance reform program provided the basis for
       developing a Bank-supported Program that addressed a coherent sub-set of the Punjab governance reform
       program, one that focuses on transparency, performance monitoring, and resource management. It also
       provided a good basis for determining the type of intervention: program support through a PforR instrument
       that allowed direct emphasis to be placed on results by making them the basis for disbursement of funds;
       and linking the Bank’s technical and financial assistance closely to institution-building and capacity
       development. A robust results chain provided a framework for the activity.



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To improve transparency of targeted departments of Punjab

    Rationale
    The objective was to be achieved by improving citizens’ access to information, notably the proactive
    disclosure of official information on the activities of targeted administrative departments (provincial and
    district offices). This was to be facilitated by introducing automated record management systems in the
    targeted departments to (i) facilitate access to public services and interactions between the services and
    citizens through information and communications technology interfaces; and (ii) enhance performance
    monitoring and feedback systems, including engagement by the public.

    By the end of the Program, all department-level decision-makers were using service delivery information to
    monitor selected public services provided in Punjab (health, education, agriculture). 2.9 million
    enquiries/comments had been received by the Citizens Contact Center seeking information about providing
    feedback on key services. No data were provided on the number of these that were responded to.



                                                                                                          Page 3 of 9
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Punjab Public Management Reform Program (P132234)



    Specifically, the following had been achieved:

    Altogether 84 targeted departments were publishing updated institutional information on their websites for
    information to the public, exceeding the target of 75 departments.

    246 of a total of 320 public investment projects of targeted departments were geo-mapped and published
    online, representing 77 percent of projects, and exceeding the target of 75 percent.

    8 departments have automated departmental records, compared to a target of 7.

    68 public services provide information on their services (farm inputs, agricultural subsidies, immunizations,
    professional services, etc.) through a Citizens Contact Center, compared to a target of 30.

    Province-wide online application services are available for 14 services (training programs, registration
    services, etc.), compared to a target of 13.

    161 public province-wide functional facilitation centers are operational (against a target of 36), providing civil
    registration documents, driver's licenses, property title documents, etc.. An additional 393 centers (against a
    target of 300) are operating as public-private partnerships.

    216 district services are being monitored by smart management tools (field workers transmitting data
    through smart phones to field supervisors for performance monitoring and analysis), compared to a target of
    216 services.

    144 district services proactively collect citizen feedback on agriculture and health services, and on
    performance of field staff, compared to a target of 100.

    180 district services publish performance information and citizen feedback online, equaling the target. The
    ICR does not provide information on client satisfaction. The ICR does not provide information on client
    satisfaction.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     To improve resource management in targeted departments of Punjab

    Rationale


                                                                                                            Page 4 of 9
                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                        Punjab Public Management Reform Program (P132234)



             The objective was to be achieved by improving efficiency and transparency in tax administration by focusing
             on improving the administration of the urban immobile property tax, and on procurement processes.

             As a result, a digital database of property records (a digital property registry) was developed to improve tax
             collection. Currently, 36 districts have a functional digital property registry, compared to a target of 34
             districts; and 1.08 million properties have been added to the registry during the five-year Program period.
             During 2018, 155,600 properties were added to the property registry, compared to an end-of-Program
             annual target of 150,000. By Program closing, urban immovable property tax collections had reached over
             10 billion Pakistani rupees (PKR), more than double the baseline, and exceeding the target of 6.9 billion
             PKR.

             To improve procurement processes, the PPRA introduced a procurement MIS as part of the PforR, and at
             Program closing, 153 targeted organizations were using it to carry out procurement of large contracts. In
             addition, all contracts in targeted organizations were being processed through basic e-procurement modules,
             exceeding the target of 75 percent.




             Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale




Overall Efficacy Rating
---

     5. Efficiency

                  ---



     Efficiency Rating
     ---


     a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
       and the re-estimated value at evaluation:



                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 9
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Punjab Public Management Reform Program (P132234)



                                      Rate
                                                           Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                      Available?
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated high, as they are well aligned with the CPF and governance challenges being
addressed by the government’s reform program. Relevance of the DLIs is also high, reflecting their consistency
with the PforR objectives and outcome indicators. Efficacy is rated substantial for both objectives, with targets
mostly met. These ratings are consistent with only minor shortcomings in the project's preparation and
implementation, resulting in an outcome rating of satisfactory.


a.    Outcome Rating
      Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The PforR risk was rated “high” in the PAD, primarily on the basis of technical innovations in design and the
involvement of multiple agencies in implementation. This was overcome and is reflected in the Outcome
rating. The risk looking forward appears low, as participating Punjab authorities, according to the ICR (page 24),
have taken ownership of the transparency and accountability measures that were introduced under the project,
and budget allocations are being made to continue activities introduced under the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     The PforR was strategically relevant. It focused selectively on key areas of Punjab’s governance reform
     program, addressing transparency and accountability, and fiscal constraints. The instrument – a PforR –
     was new and high-risk, being a first for both Pakistan and the Bank, albeit being introduced into a province
     with a solid track record of governance reform (ICR, page 23). Design drew on lessons from the Pakistan
     portfolio, and was guided by the findings of a 2010 IEG review that recommended anchoring interventions
     in larger government planning contexts. Institutional capacity building was introduced as an inherent part of



                                                                                                        Page 6 of 9
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Punjab Public Management Reform Program (P132234)



  the program, ensuring that capacity would be in place when needed. The results framework was internally
  consistent, with DLIs and key indicators coordinated, measurable, and linked to outcomes.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  Project implementation benefited from Bank field presence and a local administration that placed a strong
  emphasis on performance. A strong Bank team in the field facilitated a smooth transition in TTLs during
  implementation. The executing agency ensured day-to-day implementation, while the Bank provided twice-
  yearly supervision, combining it with timely support from the Bank’s field office. Altogether 10
  Implementation Status and Results Reports (ITS) were issued by the team. The major challenges related to
  the PforR flow of funds where the release of funds sometimes was irregular, requiring temporary financing
  from non-development budgets.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The results framework for the operation provided a logical sequence of activities that was consistent with the
  key outcomes and the PDO. Three key outcome areas were defined, with three PDO indicators and five DLIs to
  monitor progress and determine outcomes. All were measurable.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Punjab Resource Management Program (PRMP) had overall responsibility for PforR implementation and
  M&E. Verification protocols were developed to ensure that PRMP could collect, analyze, and report on each
  DLI during implementation. The process also included annual third-party verification.



c. M&E Utilization
  All indicators were regularly tracked, providing feedback to the government on how well the program was
  progressing and where interventions might be needed.


                                                                                                 Page 7 of 9
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Punjab Public Management Reform Program (P132234)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
  The Program did not trigger any of the Bank’s safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. The Program mainly supported the provincial government's expenditures through its
  normal budgeting processes. Disbursements were made upon achievement of the DLIs, with third party
  validation. The program prepared regular financial reports and benefited from close implementation support by
  the task team and Bank Financial Management Specialist. The Program’s external audit was conducted by the
  Office of Auditor General of Pakistan (AGP), the supreme audit institution of Pakistan, which is acceptable to
  the Bank as an external auditor. The external audit was conducted in accordance with International Standards
  of Supreme Audit Institutions, and an unqualified opinion was expressed by AGP in the audit reports of each
  fiscal year.

  Procurement. The ICR did not discuss procurement.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None noted.



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                      ICR                       IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                      Satisfactory             Satisfactory                ---
Bank Performance             Satisfactory             Satisfactory                ---
Quality of M&E               Substantial              Substantial                 ---


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 9
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Punjab Public Management Reform Program (P132234)



Quality of ICR                                           Substantial                ---

12. Lessons

The following lessons are drawn from the ICR.

Implementation can benefit from governance-sector reform momentum and political ownership. A key
factor for success of this operation stemmed from the fact that it was introduced to explicitly support a wider-
scale governance reform program in Punjab, with the main components aligned to this broader initiative.

A results-based operation can provide the right financial and non-financial incentives to deliver
intended results. This PforR aimed at improved transparency and resource management rather than
measurable qualitative or quantitative improvements that might have been difficult to attribute to the Program.
PDO indicators were associated to realistic targets, and Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) were carefully
selected to provide the right incentives for achieving the intended development outcomes, in a context
characterized by implementation challenges and capacity constraints. The Program focused on strengthening
the institutional capacity of a few key agencies, which helped ensure that cross-cutting reforms were effectively
implemented.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well-argued and concise. It provided a clear discussion of the PforR and its challenges to allow
an assessment of the results and ratings of the operation. Some more attention might have been paid to the
implications (if any) of balancing a high country risk and local support for an ultimately successful intervention
in a new area.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                        Page 9 of 9
