     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan FSF (P168274)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0021846

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P168274                                   Afghanistan FSF

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                               Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A9129                                  31-Jan-2019                                        100,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Nov-2018                               31-Jan-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         100,000,000.00                                  100,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                  100,000,000.00

 Actual                                      100,000,000.00                                  100,000,000.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Jorge Garcia-Garcia        Clay Wescott                 Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   To support improved predictability of recurrent expenditure payments of the Government of the Islamic
   Republic of Afghanistan during the period of political transition (p. 11, PAD).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   No

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 9
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan FSF (P168274)




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Support to Core Government Functions

   The component financed payment of civilian recurrent expenditures during a period of political transition. Its
   purpose was to prevent any delay in paying recurrent expenditures that could disrupt delivery of essential
   services and cause social unrest. The component supported prioritizing salary payments to ensure their
   delivery.

   To withdraw the funds the government had to fulfill three conditions upon project effectiveness:

         Actual revenue collected equals at least 80 percent of the revenue target for FY2018 agreed with the
          International Monetary Fund (IMF) during the fourth Extended Credit Facility (ECF) review. The total
          amount of the target was Afghan Afghani (AFN) 137.6 billion.
         There are no civil servant’s salary claims pending with the Treasury for more than 10 working days.
         The average Treasury cash balance between August 10 and November 10, 2018, is not less than
          the floor of AFN 10 billion agreed with the IMF during the fourth ECF review.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project cost $100 million and the International Development Association (IDA) financed it with a Grant
   from the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund. The project was approved on November 14, 2018,
   became effective on November 21, 2018 and was closed on January 31, 2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The country’s electoral experience of 2014 showed that during periods of uncertainty, like elections, the
government ran short of cash for paying the bills because it did not collect enough revenues to pay for its
expenses. To ensure the government would have the necessary liquidity to pay the salaries, the project had
three conditions that could be easily achieved and verified before the fiscal year ended. The conditions
were associated with fiscal stability, necessary for building fiscal institutions and improve financial
management. By emphasizing fiscal management, the project supported the fiscal performance
improvement plan and complemented the support from three instruments established in 2017: the US$100
million Fiscal Performance Improvement Support Credit, the Advisory Facility for the fiscal performance
improvement plan, and the Investment Program Development Policy Grant for US$300 million per year.

The objectives were aligned with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework for Afghanistan and
with the government’s Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework. The project supported:
(a) the Country Partnership Framework’s pillar building strong and accountable institutions which sought to

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Afghanistan FSF (P168274)



               improve public financial management and the performance of key government institutions; and (b) the
               Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework program which sought a credible and
               implementable national budget, essential for a well-functioning government. Afghanistan has two pervasive
               and intertwined problems: internal conflict and fragility. Building effective institutions is necessary to
               address these problems. The project sought to prevent the conflict and violence that could be triggered by
               the failure to deliver essential services because public servants were not paid their salaries.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improved predictability of recurrent expenditure payments of the Government of the Islamic Republic of
                             Afghanistan during the period of political transition.

                             Rationale
                             Disbursement of the funds was conditional on the government meeting three targets for: revenues, minimum
                             cash balance held by the Treasury, and payment by the Treasury to civil servants within 10 days of the day
                             salaries are claimed.

                             Revenue: The expected result was to collect revenues of, at least, AFN 137.6 billion which is an amount
                             equivalent to 80 percent of the AFN 172 million revenue collection agreed to with the IMF in its fourth review
                             of the ECF. By November 10th, 2018 the government had collected revenues of AFN 147.78 billion,
                             exceeding the target. The IMF estimates the government collected AFN 189.9 billion of revenues in FY2018
                             (IMF Country Report No. 19/157, p. 26).

                             The expected result was achieved.

                             Cash balance target: The expected result was for the Treasury to have a minimum average cash balance
                             (without restrictions) of at least AFN 10 billion during the period August 10th to November 10th, 2018. The
                             actual average cash balances were AFN 21.46 billion, exceeding the AFN 10 billion floor. The large cash
                             buffer reduced the likelihood of the government having to ask the donors for emergency financial assistance.

                             The expected result was achieved.

                             Timely payment of civil servants' salaries: The expected result was that as of November 10th, 2018 the
                             Treasury would pay civil servant’s salary claims within less than 10 working days. Payment was verified with
                             the Afghan Financial Management Information System, which showed there were no claims outstanding on
                             that date. The payment system had already been working well: between December 22, 2017 and November


                                                                                                                                Page 3 of 9
                                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                   Afghanistan FSF (P168274)



                            22nd, 2018, only 82 of 112,516 payment transactions processed for payroll were delayed more than 10 days.
                            As of April 2019, all salaries were paid on time.

                            The expected result was achieved.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            ---

                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The project was completed on time, within budget and the results exceeded the expected outcomes. Given the
   nature of the project, the project appraisal document did not have estimates of efficiency. The following reasons
   suggest the project’s efficiency is high:

                                   Per dollar of project cost, the revenue collected and the cash balances outstanding exceeded their
                                    expected values by 10 and 100 percent;
                                   Civil servants received their salaries within the 10 days period agreed to; in addition, salaries were paid
                                    on time between January and April 2019. As a result, the households of civil servants were better off
                                    because they did not have to disrupt their consumption plans;
                                   The project showed a way to strengthen fiscal institutions while preventing a repeat of the experience in
                                    2014: low revenue, dwindling cash reserves, and growing salary arrears. By forcing more discipline in
                                    managing revenues and salary expenditures, the project helped to put in place a coherent framework for
                                    preventing future potential liquidity shortages.


   Efficiency Rating
          Substantial


          a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
            and the re-estimated value at evaluation:


                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 9
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Afghanistan FSF (P168274)




                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The objective was achieved in an efficient manner. The project helped ensure the predictability of the
government’s recurrent expenditure payments during a period of political transition. The government collected
more revenues and maintained a higher level of cash balances than expected, thereby permitting the payment
of civil servants' salaries within 10 days after the claims became effective. Because salaries were paid on time:
(a) civil servants' households were better off than they would have been otherwise; (b) Afghan households,
enterprises and family businesses were better off because they had access to government services without
interruption. Finally, the institutional arrangements put in place led to a better management of government
revenues and expenditures.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Sections 4 on efficacy and 6 on outcome show that the expected outcomes were exceeded and the potential
risks identified at the time of evaluation did not materialize. The project was a one–time event that lasted
three months. The expected benefits have been obtained already, and there is no risk of losing them. The
risk to development outcome is negligible to low.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The FSF was financed by the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF). Managed by the World
  Bank since 2002, the ARTF has had two main funding windows: 1) baseline financing provided support to
  government's recurrent costs with few conditions attached; and 2) the incentive program introduced in
  2008 provided annual incentive payments in exchange for completed reforms. Since 2008, the balance of
  funding has increasingly shifted to the incentive program. In 2018, the baseline window was replaced by
  the FSF, so that all ARTF funds are now conditional and based on completed reforms. This transition to



                                                                                                      Page 5 of 9
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan FSF (P168274)



  results based financing has been well designed to enable the government to have enough time to build
  up sufficient capacity to succeed in such a program.

  The Bank designed the project in a way that guaranteed the government could meet the disbursement
  conditions while ensuring fiscal stability, timely payment of salaries and delivery of services without
  interruption. The revenue and cash balance conditions were part of the agreement reached between the
  authorities and the IMF during the fourth review of its ECF, a program which the government had been
  complying with. The targets could be verified and the steps required to do so were appropriate. In sum,
  the conditions ensured the project objectives were achieved.

  The design considered disbursing 40 percent of the grant as an advance and 60 percent after the
  conditions were verified. The two-tranche disbursement plan did not work because of the short life of the
  project; a single, 100 percent disbursement was made once the conditions for releasing the funds of the
  grant were met. It is possible that if sufficient time had been allowed for preparing the operation, the split
  disbursement could have been carried out, but there is no evidence that disbursing in a single tranche
  impinged on project results.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision was appropriate. All the funds were disbursed after verifying achievement of the targets. The
 Oversight Committee comprised of three Director Generals in the Ministry of Finance oversaw project
 implementation, reviewing the evidence on revenue collection, cash position and timely salary
 payment prior to informing IDA. IDA staff reviewed and verified the evidence but they could not verify the
 quality of the data on the Treasury’s cash position because the Ministry of Finance lacked a system to keep
 up with the outputs of the Afghanistan Management Information System. IDA staff also verified in the
 financial reports of the management information system the details on salary claims pending with the
 Treasury, concluding that as of November 10, 2018 there were no outstanding claims.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project objective was clearly specified, the indicators selected were clear, specific, measurable,
 achievable, relevant, time-bound and appropriate to measure the achievement of the objective. The text in

                                                                                                        Page 6 of 9
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan FSF (P168274)



 the Bank Performance section of the ICR concludes that M&E design was sound and aimed at collecting
 and verifying the information required to establish fulfillment of the disbursement conditions. A Third-Party
 Monitoring Agent would certify the fulfillment of the withdrawal conditions. The cash balance report from the
 Da Afghanistan Bank [the country’s Central Bank] was to be compared with the information in the
 Afghanistan Management Information System.



b. M&E Implementation
  The government collected the information on time and reviewed its quality. The Third-Party Monitoring
  Agent and IDA staff verified the information. IDA and the Monitoring Agent concluded that the data
  received were reliable and of good quality, but they could not verify this to its full extent as mentioned
  above under Quality of Supervision.

  The short time span between reception and verification of the information and project termination
  prevented IDA and the Treasury from sharing it with donors beforehand. Donors received the findings
  and information during a joint donor and government meeting. Although no rules were broken –the
  project did not consider delivering the information to donors in advance– distributing the information
  during the meeting forced donors to raise their questions publicly leaving the impression among some
  government officials that donors did not fully trust the Monitoring Agent.



c. M&E Utilization
  The World Bank used the data collected to assess achievement of outcomes and to authorize
  disbursement of the grant.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project did not trigger social and environmental safeguards




b. Fiduciary Compliance
    The project complied with fiduciary requirements. The monitoring agent verified the expenditures reported,
   reviewed the withdrawal applications and verified fulfillment of the conditions for releasing the funds of the
   grant.




                                                                                                       Page 7 of 9
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan FSF (P168274)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None



d. Other
   None



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                  IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory        Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory        Satisfactory
                                                                                M&E implementation had some
Quality of M&E                   High                Substantial
                                                                                drawbacks.
Quality of ICR                   ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

The lessons from the ICR are summarized below:

      The Fiscal Sustainability Framework design can be an important instrument under the
       right circumstances. Under circumstances where budget support is needed but the
       authorizing environment or fiduciary controls are weak, it is appropriate to use short-term,
       reasonably easy-to-achieve targets as a steppingstone to transitioning to conditions that will
       have a longer policy term impact.

      Changes to long-established programs need to be adequately socialized over time.
       After 16 years of unconditional baseline support from the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust
       Fund, transitioning to a new modality requires enough time and socialization for all parties to
       become comfortable and adjust to the new reality. The dependency can be lessened by
       programs that help increase government revenues.

      In fragile environments, preparing for the worst case scenario may be the best option.
       The negative impacts of preparing for a fiscal shock that does not materialize are minimal
       compared with the risks of not being prepared.

      Identifying and implementing a precautionary fiscal response mechanism gives
       confidence to the Government and partners when a fiscal shock is feared. By
       implementing the FSF Project, the Government was able to confidently move forward with


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 9
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Afghanistan FSF (P168274)



         recurrent payments and avoid holding back expenditures out of fear that it would face a
         revenue shortage in the later months of the year.

The review draws the following lessons:

        It is possible to withdraw unconditional support and replace it with conditional
         support that could help develop better institutions without disrupting normal
         government functions. These findings have implications for how to proceed with the new
         program built around the Incentive Program Development Policy Grant and for how the
         baseline facility and the Ad-Hoc Payment Facility are managed in the future.
        Implementing the transition from unconditional to conditional support may be fast.
         While it may take time to wean aid recipients from unconditional to conditional support, it is
         possible to prepare a project in a short time where conditions can be implemented and the
         objectives achieved, and where precedents for good financial management are established.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR describes in a clear and concise manner about the project origins, the choice of design, the reasons
for it and the results achieved. The analysis explains well the problems, their causes and their solutions; the
graph on the results chain gives a useful picture. The ICR describes fully the monitoring and evaluation
processes and the actions taken to verify the evidence received from the government.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 9
