     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021771

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P125996                                      VN-Distribution Efficiency Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                      Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51560,TF-13456,TF-13468                  31-Dec-2018                                        439,004,299.90

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Sep-2012                                  31-Dec-2018

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                478,900,000.00                                37,975,402.18

 Revised Commitment                                 473,874,989.34                                27,320,691.52

 Actual                                             439,004,299.90                                25,119,022.87




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Fernando Manibog             J. W. van Holst                Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)
                              Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   The project development objective (PDO) is “to improve the performance of the Recipient’s Power
   Corporations in providing quality and reliable electricity services, and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
   through demand side response and efficiency gains.” (Financing Agreement dated November 8, Schedule 1,
   page 6)


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



   For the purposes of this ICR Review, the following three sub-objectives within the PDO will be assessed
   separately. The three sub-objectives are relevant in the context of an integrated, interconnected infrastructure
   investment, thus making it technically inaccurate to create a full separate theory of change for each sub-
   objective:

   Sub-objective 1 (referred to as Objective 1 in Section 4): “To improve the performance of the recipient’s power
   corporations in providing quality electricity services”. Providing quality electricity services meant reducing
   voltage fluctuations.

   Sub-objective 2 (referred to as Objective 2 in Section 4): “To improve the performance of the recipient’s power
   corporations in providing reliable electricity services”. Providing reliable electricity services meant reducing the
   duration and frequency of planned and unplanned outages.

   Sub-objective 3 (referred to as Objective 3 in Section 4): “To reduce greenhouse gas emissions through
   demand side response and efficiency gains”.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three main components:

   Component A: System Expansion and Reinforcement

   (Appraisal estimate, US$694.4 million; actual cost, US$561.17 million)

   This component was to support the construction and reinforcement of 110 kilovolt (kV), medium voltage
   (MV) and low voltage (LV) electricity distribution networks, including substations, of the Power Corporations
   (PCs), in order to meet load growth, address load supply constraints, reduce losses and improve reliability
   and quality of supply.

   Component B: Introduction of Smart Grid Technologies in Distribution

   (Appraisal estimate, US$95.5 million; actual cost, US$53.07 million)

   This component was to support energy efficiency improvements, which translate into lower carbon
   emissions from energy generation, through: (i) automation of the PCs’ electricity distribution network
   operations and data collection, through the introduction of supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA)
   systems; and (ii) introduction of Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) systems, including two-way
   communications systems, as smart grid technologies for key substations and consumers of selected PCs.



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



   Component C: Technical Assistance and Capacity-Building

   (Appraisal estimate, US$10.5 million; actual cost, US$5.56 million)

   This component was intended to support two main activities: (i) technical assistance and capacity-building
   for Electricity Regulatory Authority of Vietnam (ERAV) to improve its efficiency in tariff-setting, incorporation
   of smart grid technologies and renewable energy in the grid, preparation of distribution codes, development
   of demand response and smart grid programs, and project management and monitoring and evaluation
   (M&E); and (ii) technical assistance and capacity-building to assist the PCs in project implementation,
   financial modeling and planning, customer surveys and improving customer satisfaction, implementation of
   AMI systems, programs to promote efficient electricity use, and project M&E.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The original amount approved was US$800.4 million. The actual cost at completion was US$
   619.3 million.

   Financing. At appraisal, the financing commitments were US$448.9 million equivalent from IDA, US$30
   million from the Clean Technology Fund (CTF), and US$8 million from the AusAID Trust Fund. At project
   closing, the project was financed by IDA (US$413.86 million), the Clean Technology Fund (US$19.88
   million), and AusAID (US$4.75 million).

   Borrower Contribution. At appraisal, the Borrower committed US$313.5 million. At project closing, the
   Borrower had provided US$180.81 million in counterpart financing.

   Dates. The project was approved on September 11,2012 and declared effective about five months later on
   February 7, 2013. A mid-term review was conducted on October 19, 2015. The project underwent a Level 2
   restructuring that was approved on June 23, 2016, in response to the request from the State Bank of
   Vietnam (SBV) to remove the project's performance indicators from the Legal Agreements and placed them
   in the relevant project manuals. The original closing date was December 31, 2018 and the project closed on
   that date, without any extensions.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


Country Context

According to the Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR, paras 1 to 3), Vietnam emerged
from its status as a lower-middle-income, primarily rural agricultural economy in 2009, by which time it had
transformed itself by the project’s appraisal in 2012 into a mixed economy with rapid growth in commercial

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



and industrial activities. In 2011, the country’s GDP growth was 5.1 percent, per capita income had reached
US$1,515, and the poverty rate had fallen to 14.2 percent. By 2012, however, Vietnam was finding it harder
to maintain high levels of growth because of periods of macroeconomic instability with high inflation levels,
currency volatility and depreciation, and signs of significant internal capital flight. To address the structural
drivers of macroeconomic instability and enhance the economy’s efficiency, the Government of Vietnam
(GOV) defined its 2011-2020 vision through its Socio-Economic Development Strategy (SEDS). The overall
goal of the SEDS was to “lay the foundation for a modern, industrialized society by 2020.” (para 3) This
provided the national policy context for the project.

Sector Context

According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paras 5 and 9), at the time of project appraisal in 2012,
Vietnam was experiencing challenges in achieving energy security and sustainable growth in its electricity
sector because of rapid urbanization, large increases in energy consumption in part due to the success of
its own electricity access program, improvements in living standards, and growing industrialization. In the
15-year period between 1995 and 2010, household electricity access increased from 50 percent to over 96
percent, while annual per capital electricity consumption grew more than six times from 156 kilowatt-hour
(KWh) to about 983 kWh. Industrial energy consumption was also growing at a faster rate than the national
average. Meanwhile, power sector investments were insufficient to meet demand growth, resulting in load
shedding particularly during periods of peak demand and dry hydrology. At the same time, greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions had more than doubled, with the industry, power and transport sectors expected to
account for most of the future increases.

To support economic growth and poverty reduction, the main challenge in the power sector is to increase
the quantity, quality and reliability of electricity supplies at competitive costs(PAD, para 10). Vietnam
Electricity (EVN), the state-owned utility, is a holding company established in 2010 that has five subsidiary
power corporations (PCs) responsible for 110-Volt electricity distribution and retail supply services in their
franchise areas:

        Hanoi Power Corporation (HNPC)
        Northern Power Corporation (NPC)
        Central Power Corporation (CPC)
        Southern Power Corporation (SPC)
        Ho Chi Minh Power Corporation (HCMPC)

In 2011, the PCs faced major hurdles in providing high quality and reliable electricity services. As explained
in the ICR (para 9), the PCs inherited the low-voltage networks previously owned by local distribution units,
which had low supply quality and high technical losses, and needed rehabilitation. The PCs also lacked
modern tools to capture and analyze system reliability and were manually recording outage data. They had
no call centers to attend to customer queries or complaints. At project appraisal, manual calculations—
which were being used to estimate the System Average Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI) and System
Average Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI) levels in each PC—found that distribution losses (technical)
were high and increasing steadily. These challenging sector conditions led the Government of Vietnam
(GOV) to recognize the need for modernizing the country’s power system if its goals of energy security and
power sector efficiency were to be achieved.

Government Strategy


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 21
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



At appraisal, the project’s objectives were highly relevant to the Government’s electricity sector strategy.
GOV’s Power Development Master Plan identified the power sector investments needed to achieve reliable
supply for the next 5 to 10 years. The Plan also called for the development of a smart grid road map for
transmission and distribution (T&D). To achieve secure electricity supplies at the lowest possible costs, the
expansion and upgrading of the distribution system, combined with modernization and enhancement of
planning and operation of the PCs’ systems, were critically needed. Consequently, the GOV requested
financial and technical support for the five PCs to improve distribution system efficiency and business
operations and support ERAV’s regulatory activities.

The project’s objectives remain highly relevant to the GOV’s current strategy. With the goal of laying the
foundation for modern, industrialized society by 2020, SEDS identified three ‘breakthrough areas’, one of
which was infrastructure development. SEDS calls for quick development of electricity sources and
completion of the electricity network system together with the use of energy saving technologies to
guarantee sufficient provision of electricity to meet demand. Concurrently, the Socio-Economic
Development Plan (SEDP) 2011–2015 elaborated SEDS' objectives by identifying measures and resources
for implementation. One of SEDP’s major targets is that “The energy consumption based on GDP will be
cut 2.5–3 percent annually”; and one of its tasks is “…assuring energy security, while effectively controlling
energy consumption demands.” (ICR, para 12) More specifically, this SEDP target refers to energy
consumption per unit of GDP, or the energy intensity of the Vietnamese economy over time. The SEDP
included this target, which was adopted by the Vietnamese National Assembly in November 2011, based
on technical analysis of past trends and future projections of energy demand, taking into account the
Government’s policies and plans. Actual energy consumption per unit of GDP has been decreasing from
0.8 kWh in 2010 to 0.71 kWh in 2015, as reported in the latest SEDP for 2016-2020. Finally, the Vietnam’s
Prime Minister’s decision approving the National Economic Development Strategy (NEDS) through to 2020
called for, among other things, adequate supply of high-quality energy and the efficient use of domestic
energy resources. The decisions in the NEDS included reducing investment needs in the power sector,
strengthening energy security, controlling and mitigating environmental pollution in energy activities, and
fostering socioeconomic sustainable development.

Bank Strategy

At the time of appraisal, the project’s objectives were highly relevant to the World Bank Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) 2012–2016. CPS Pillar 1 on competitiveness would address the low quality of key
infrastructure services due to inefficiencies in power distribution and transmission, among others, while
Pillar 2 on sustainability would address pollution control.

The project’s objectives are also highly relevant to the current World Bank’s Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for Vietnam (2018–2022), which sets as its Objective No. 9 (Focus area 3) the promotion
of low carbon energy generation and the reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by improving the
efficiency and reliability of electricity supply in Vietnam. The reduction in losses from the project’s system
expansion and reinforcement, the energy improvements from the roll-out of smart grid technologies, and the
capacity-building of ERAV and the PCs in the areas of smart grid programs, renewable energy and energy
efficiency – are all highly consistent with improving distribution efficiency, thus requiring less generation fuel
inputs, and leading to the goals of low carbon energy generation and reduction in GHG emissions.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 21
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective

                To improve the performance of the recipient’s power corporations in providing quality electricity services

                Rationale


                Theory of Change

                As indicated earlier in Section 2(a), the project development objective (PDO) is “to improve the performance
                of the Recipient’s Power Corporations in providing quality and reliable electricity services, and to reduce
                greenhouse gas emissions through demand side response and efficiency gains.” For the purposes of this ICR
                Review, the efficacy of the three sub-objectives (referred to in this Section as Objectives) of quality, reliability,
                and reduction in greenhouse gas emissions will be assessed separately. Nevertheless, since the three sub-
                objectives operate together in the context of an integrated, interconnected infrastructure investment, it is
                technically inaccurate and inappropriate to create a separate theory of change for each of them.

                Improving the quality of electricity services (meaning reducing voltage fluctuations) in Vietnam required the
                new construction or rehabilitation of 110-V, MV and LV substations and electricity distribution networks
                managed by the five PCs. The theory of change was that these investments would help the PCs to efficiently
                meet the anticipated growth in electricity demand with less fluctuations in voltage, reduced supply constraints
                due to system congestion, greater reliability, less electricity system losses, and a positive demand response
                in terms of more efficient electricity use, thus contributing to the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions
                (GHGs).

                The project’s components and corresponding activities were comprehensive for achieving the
                project's objectives. The resulting outputs from each component are logically and causally connected to the
                achievement of the intermediate and final outcomes. The technical indicators were all appropriate and
                adequate for measuring the extent to which each objective was achieved.

                The energy system technologies are well known, hence the project’s system expansion and reinforcement, as
                well as its smart grid technologies for electricity distribution, can be expected to directly deliver the physical
                targets under the project. Figure 1 of the ICR is well designed and articulated (although some lines were
                garbled in the third box under the second column, specifically the last three lines of the description of the 25
                legal documents). The critical assumptions on the need for a stable macroeconomic environment, efficient
                implementation, and adequate tariff structure, were all relevant; however, institutional capacity factors appear
                to be missing, which would be important to indicate given the institutional strengthening needs of ERAV and
                the PCs that were to be supported by the project’s Component 3.


                                                                                                                       Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



Overall, the project’s theory of change was robust and measurable, and readily translatable into a monitoring
and evaluation (M&E) framework.

Outputs

      8,587 km of 110-kilovolt (kV), medium voltage (MV) and low voltage (LV) lines were newly constructed
         or reinforced.
      4,742 MVA of 110-kV, MV and LV substations were newly constructed or reinforced.

Outcomes

The ICR (paragraph 35, pages 15 to 16) define “quality” as “a steady supply voltage that stays within a
prescribed range. Hence, the project’s outcomes were to be measured by the following indicators: (a) number
per year of voltage excursions outside +/−5% at the outlet of 110 kV substations in the project area, (b)
percentage of total losses in the project areas per year, and (c) annual reduction in GWh of electricity
consumption by PC customers with the Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) compared to the Business As
Usual (BAU) scenario without the project.

The quantitative evidence shows that the targets for measuring PDO 1’s outcomes were nearly all
exceeded. The detailed Table 3 of the ICR (pages 14 to 15) provides the data for the five PCs. The highlights
are:

      The reduction in the percentage of distribution losses exceeded the targeted reductions by 1.6 to a
         high of 7.5 percentage points, across the five PCs. EVN’s 2017 Annual Report also indicated that total
         losses were reduced during the project period: “The power losses of the entire power system fell to
         7.57 percent from 7.94 percent in 2015.” (ICR, para 37) According to the ICR, most of this reduction
         came from the distribution system, hence supporting the assumed attribution of the reduced losses
         recorded to the project’s new construction and reinforcement of substations. In 2016, EVN’s
         distribution loss rate decreased further to 5.21 percent.
        The reduction in the number of +/- 5% voltage fluctuations (per customer per year, when the voltage is
         outside the prescribed range) met the target for the PCs, except for SPC, which exceeded the target
         (4.00 targeted and 0.0005 achieved, in terms of number of fluctuations in a year as defined). SPC
         installed Automatic Voltage Regulators in addition, hence voltage excursions were almost nil at project
         completion.
        The reduction in GWh of electricity consumption with advanced metering infrastructure (AMI)
         exceeded targets for all the five PCs. The combined annual reduction for NPC, HCMPC, HNPC and
         CPC is 448.5 GWh, thus exceeding the target of 414.5 GWh. The baseline is zero GWh without AMI
         under the BAU scenario. SPC is not in this list as it did not procure smart meters; SPC only procured
         the Metering Data Management System (MDMS) under the project to synchronize with the other PCs.
        Regular customer service surveys have also shown consistent improvement of EVN’s services and
         steadily increasing customer satisfaction indices in the project areas over the project’s lifetime. The
         surveys included all classes of customers (residential, commercial, industrial) and questions related to
         power supply quality, billing, communication, customer service, tariff awareness and customer
         consensus. The data collection methods included face-to-face in-depth interviews, focus groups, and
         questionnaires.
        The call centers (see Outcomes under Objective 3 below) provide a channel for PCs to directly
         interact with consumers, promptly deal with incidents and inefficiency of the system. The benefits were

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



           manifested in terms of reduced outage times, as the PCs can quickly react to consumer complaints.
           This also had a material impact on GHG emission reductions.

There is a high degree of attribution of project outcomes to its inputs, activities and outputs. According to the
ICR team (October 22, 2019 email to IEG), the baseline values were determined taking into account the
infrastructure that was already in place, hence existing infrastructure at the time of appraisal were not a factor
in the eventual results. The incremental targets were determined based on the expected results from the
planned additional technical interventions, while also benchmarking with comparable countries in the ASEAN
region. Moreover, the ICR team also certified that there were no other similar projects that were being
implemented in the project areas covered by the Distribution Efficiency Project that might have influenced the
final results. The ICR team clarified that the project showed higher results that expected due to several
reasons:

        More subprojects were implemented than planned due to prudent procurement practices, thus
           achieving higher results than estimated initially;
          Consumer behavior improved due to (i) real time receipt of information on their electricity use and (ii)
           the use of demand response pilots to encourage reductions in consumption (ICR, para 38);
          Behavior of operators also improved due to the real time receipt of network information on SAIDI and
           SAIFI figures (discussed in more detail under Objective 2 below);
          The provision of an adequate legal framework incentivized the PCs to improve their overall
           performance; and
          Training and study tours improved the behavior of PC operators with respect to planned maintenance,
           thus avoiding unnecessary outages.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

To improve the performance of the recipient’s power corporations in providing reliable electricity services


Rationale
The theory of change presented under Objective 1 above also applies to Objective 2, for which the results are
assessed below.

Outputs

        2 automated SCADA systems were installed and upgraded. The project funded SCADA only for
           HCMPC and SPC. HNPC already had a SCADA system, while both NPC and CPC had mini-SCADA
           systems in several provinces, which they upgraded using their own funds. [Note that SAIFI and SAIDI
           indices (as discussed immediate below under Outcomes) are measures of the frequency and duration
           of outages in the electricity network, as experienced by the consumer, whereas SCADA systems

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



       provide data used toward the calculation of these indices. SCADA systems also provide the PCs with
       a real-time view of the MV systems, thus helping the grid operators to identify instantly the location of
       faults within the MV system and enable them to react quickly in order to reduce the SAIDI figures. In
       sum, a well-operating SCADA assists the PCs with network visibility and maintenance that in turn
       contribute to the reduction of SAIDI and SAIFI figures.]
      125,450 smart meters were installed. Smart meters and the MDMS (discussed immediately below)
       comprise the Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI). These were installed for all targeted PC
       consumers, including commercial customers and household consumers with consumption between
       500 to 2,000 kWh per month. The baseline was the actual 2011 sales by the PCs to the customers
       where AMI (i.e., a combination of smart meters and MDMS) would be implemented. The business-as-
       usual (BAU) scenario was determined from the baseline plus forecasted demand growth. Once the
       AMI was installed, the reduction in consumption would be seen from the total of the consumer’s bills
       compared to the BAU scenario.
      5 Meter Data Management Systems (MDMS) were installed in each of the 5 PCs. The MDMS stores
       and processes the interval load data from multiple Head-End Systems (HESs) to perform further
       processing such as billing, validation, editing and estimation (VEE). The consumption data are
       aggregated in different forms according to the requirements of the upper-layer applications, including
       multi-point data aggregation, metering data, and aggregation of consumption based on tariff structure,
       critical peak pricing (CPP). The MDMS enables bidirectional communication with HES, including
       outage data, disconnection/reconnection and load control. The MDMS provided a platform for the PCs
       to quickly aggregate data on consumers consumption to provide reports on consumption reduction;
       moreover, load analytics and control provided the PCs with information to improve their supply
       service. In addition, timely and accurate provision of consumption and billing information to the
       consumer motivates them to adjust their consumption behavior.

Outcomes

The quantitative evidence shows that achievement of reliability in the PC distribution system by reducing the
duration and frequency of planned and unplanned outages as measured by SAIDI and SAIFI exceeded the
targets. The details of the project’s performance were:

      The improvements in the System Average Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI) exceeded targets by
       significant amounts as summarized in Table 3 of the ICR. For example, the duration of interruptions
       (per year for all customers) for SPC decreased from the December 2011 baseline of 6,958 minutes
       and target of 5,525 minutes -- to the 599 minutes achieved by December 2018, representing a major
       reduction of 4,927 minutes compared to the target. Based on the same timeframes: for NPC, the
       baseline, target and actual figures were 5,145, 4,656 and 989 minutes, respectively, which also shows
       a large reduction of 3,667 minutes compared to the target. For CPC, the baseline, target and actual
       figures were 3,631, 3,234 and 1,027 minutes, respectively, indicating a large reduction of 2,207
       minutes compared to the target. Lower numbers were achieved for HCMPC and HNPC, while still
       marginally exceeding their respective targets.
      The improvements in the System Average Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI) were also significant
       and exceeded targets in reducing the number of power interruptions, e.g., from the 20.95 targeted in
       December 2011 to 9.11 achieved in December 2018 for CPC, and the 21.60 targeted and 3.23
       achieved for SPC in the same timeframe. Lower numbers were achieved for the three other PCs,
       while still exceeding their respective targets. [Note that for the foregoing SAIDI and SAIFI results, the



                                                                                                  Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



           targets were determined based on the expected results of the planned investments and activities
           under the project, while benchmarking with regional peers within ASEAN.
          EVN’s 2017 Annual Report indicated that the SAIDI and SAIFI for Vietnam were reduced during the
           project period: “A noteworthy improvement in the power supply quality was seen in 2016. The System
           Average Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI) remarkably declined to 1,651 minutes per customer in
           2016 from 2,281 minutes in 2015. The System Average Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI) dropped
           to only 10.6 times per customer (in 2016), equivalent to a 21% decrease as compared to 2015. The
           Momentary Average Interruption Frequency Index (MAIFI) (comparing 2016 to 2015 figures)
           experienced a considerable decrease of 28.7% to 1.51 times per customer.”
          Beyond the PDO outcome indicators, a broader outcome of accurately measuring SAIDI and SAIFI is
           the increased awareness of network operators of the benefits resulting from management, technical
           and behavioral changes, which can lead to improved efficiency of network operations.
          In terms of sustainability, given the success of the SAIDI and SAIFI interventions, the EVN
           incorporated institution-wide the collection of outage data and reliability indices into their daily routine
           at an institutional level. During 2014, the EVN formally announced that the SAIDI and SAIFI indices
           will be used going forward to assess the performance of the PCs, which provides further incentive for
           the PCs to ensure efficient use of the tools and information to improve network performance.
          The call centers (see Outcomes under Objective 3 below) provide a channel for PCs to directly
           interact with consumers, promptly deal with incidents and inefficiency of the system. The benefits were
           manifested in terms of reduced outage times, as the PCs can quickly react to consumer complaints.
           This also had a material impact on GHG emission reductions.

The conclusion from these measures is that the reliability of electricity services to customers in the five project
PCs has improved considerably during the project’s implementation. Attribution to the project is high based
on the same discussion provided at the end of Objective 1 above. Briefly stated, the baseline values were
determined taking into account the infrastructure already in place, hence the incremental outputs and
outcomes resulted directly from the incremental investments and activities supported by the project.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective

To reduce greenhouse gas emissions through demand side response and efficiency gains

Rationale
The theory of change presented under Objective 1 above also applies to Objective 2, for which the results are
assessed below.

Outputs

        25 legal documents were drafted and/or issued, including improved efficiency in electricity tariffs,
           incorporation of smart grid technologies in the grid and distribution codes, regulations for smart grids,

                                                                                                        Page 10 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



       grid-integrated renewable energy, efficient pricing, and demand response programs. Several
       examples of the contributions of these legal documents to the achievement of the project’s objectives
       are provided under Outcomes below.
      5 call centers were installed at the power corporations to respond to calls from electricity customers.
      25 training courses and study tours were provided.
      12 studies and surveys were conducted.

Outcomes

      The avoided GHG emissions (in tons CO2/year) exceeded the targeted levels for all the five PCs,
       ranging from 10,907 tons CO2/year higher than targeted for CPC to 53,219 tons CO2/year for
       NPC. The combined avoided GHG emissions for NPC, HCMPC, HNPC and CPC amount to 365,707
       tons CO2/year, compared to a target of 269,148 tons CO2/year and a zero baseline.
      The 25 legal documents also had beneficial outcomes, of which the significant ones include the
       following, according to the ICR Team (October 22, 2019 email):

(a) Demand Response (DR) Program. One of the 25 legal documents resulted in the issuance of Circular
23/2017/TT-BCT dated November 16, 2017 on Incentive Mechanism for Demand Response (DR) Program.
This decision was prompted by a TA subproject intended to support ERAV in: (i) the implementation of pilot
demand response programs for PCs; and (ii) the testing of incentive mechanisms, implementation procedures
of DR programs, and cooperation among PCs, consumers and stakeholders when operating a DR program.
The DR programs would assist the PCs to register reduced consumption and hence contribute to Objective 1
of the project.

The pilot DR program was implemented in the management territory of HCMPC. ERAV cooperated with the
consultant and HCMPC organized technical and marketing workshops to introduce benefits as well as all
contents of the pilot DR programs to consumers. In addition, ERAV, the consultants and HCMPC organized
face-to-face meetings with consumers to understand their thoughts and comments and explain to them
contents related to the pilot DR programs. Those workshops and meetings were effective in convincing
consumers to participate the pilot DR programs.

The pilot DR programs were implemented successfully. With the active participation of consumers,
consumption behavior during peak hours adjusted downwards and consumption reductions were realized.
Thus, this activity had a direct impact on achievement of reduced consumption by consumers, which
contributed to reducing GHG emission emissions.

(b) The legal documents also contributed to developing improved regulations, by revising Technical Codes,
Standards and Procedures on incorporating smart grids and integrating renewable energy generation. This
created a favorable environment for using clean energy to replace fossil fuel energy. This had material impact
on GHG emission reduction.

(c) The legal activities also contributed to supporting ERAV in finalization of BST mechanisms in the transition
to wholesale competitive market. This was implemented under the TA sub-project “BST Transition and Loss
Reduction Incentive”. The objective of this TA was to provide a transition path for the BST to support more
efficient pricing and loss reduction by PCs in the context of the wholesale competitive market and develop a
mechanism to provide an incentive for distribution networks to reduce network losses.



                                                                                                 Page 11 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



                            (d) ERAV developed and submitted to MOIT for issuance, the official document No. 11933/BCT-DTDL dated
                            December 19, 2017, which provided guidance for EVN in developing 2018 BST framework for PCs. The legal
                            document outlined a mechanism that provides incentives for distribution networks to reduce network losses
                            for PCs. This contributed to incentivizing PCs to focus on reducing losses (thus directly supporting Objective
                            1 of the project), which also had a material impact on GHG emission reduction.

                                    The call centers provide a channel for PCs to directly interact with consumers, promptly deal with
                                     incidents and inefficiency of the system. The benefits were manifested in terms of reduced outage
                                     times (thus directly supporting Objective 2 of the project), as the PCs can quickly react to consumer
                                     complaints. This also had a material impact on GHG emission reductions.
                                    The training courses and study tours were also focused on enhancing performance and efficiency of
                                     PCs, load research, DR, smart grid, electricity tariff for DR programs, integration of renewable energy
                                     into national grid, enhancing technical code efficiency, etc. The training courses and study tours have
                                     been evaluated and the results demonstrated improved staff capacity.

                            Attribution to the project is high. As explained in greater detail at the end of Objective 1 above, the baseline
                            values were determined taking into account the infrastructure already in place, hence the incremental outputs
                            and outcomes resulted directly from the incremental investments and activities supported by the project,



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                            The project's efficacy in achieving each of the three objectives is high. Targets were mostly exceeded, with
                            only a few being fully met. No target was partially achieved or not achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency

   Out of 99 subprojects planned at appraisal for the two-phased implementation, a total of 177 were actually
   implemented, thus significantly exceeding by 180 percent the number that the PCs originally proposed. At the
   project completion stage, economic and financial analyses were conducted for 174 out of 177 sub-projects

                                                                                                                              Page 12 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



under Components A and B, accounting for 76.2 percent (US$609.8 million) of the total project cost at the
appraisal stage (US$800.4 million) and 98.3 percent of the total project cost at the completion stage (US$619.8
million).

The economic and financial analyses showed that the project was expected to achieve higher rates of return
than estimated at appraisal. The detailed assumptions made for the economic analysis at appraisal are
presented in Annex 4, pages 57 to 63 of the ICR. The estimated economic internal rate of return (EIRR) and the
Net Present Value (NPV) for the whole project at completion were 38.3 percent and US$2,496.7 million,
respectively. The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) at completion was higher than the 29.2 percent
calculated for the Phase 1 subprojects at appraisal.

The Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) and the NPV for the whole project at completion were 19.7 percent,
and US$1,720.3 million, respectively. At the time of project appraisal, the FIRR was estimated at 16.7 percent
and the NPV at US$565.6 million. However, the financial returns at completion stage were significantly improved
because (a) the actual investment costs were lower than appraisal estimates, (b) the system efficiency was
better than expected, and (c) compared to appraisal levels, the margins between the Bulk Supply Tariff (BST)
and the average retail tariff increased a little during project implementation. (See the more detailed explanation
immediately below.) These favorable conditions produced healthy revenues that shortened the payback period
for the PCs. (ICR, paragraph 22, pages 61 to 62) On the other hand, the ICR did not discuss the situation for
household consumers as a result of the increases in retail electricity tariffs since the project was approved.

The ICR Team clarified that the conclusion regarding the margins between BST and the average retail tariff
having increased a little since appraisal was based on calculating the difference between the buying and selling
price applicable for each PC as provided by EVN. Based on this data, the increase in the margins left for PCs is
considered small after reducing the figures by 20 percent, which is the total percentage of tariff increase during
the period. (The figures are provided in Tables 4.4 and 4.5 of the ICR.) Retail electricity prices did not keep pace
with the rate of inflation. According to Section 3.4.1 of a forthcoming report (“Learning from Power Sector
Reform Experiences: The Case of Vietnam” by Ian David Lee and Franz Gerner): “In the period from 2005 to
2019, the nationally-determined average retail tariff was revised 13 times, at varying intervals of between 6 to 18
months, and between 0.8 and 17.4 percent in nominal terms compared to the previous rate. Tariff increases
have barely kept up with inflation. Nominal average electricity tariffs increased by 53 percent from January 2019
to January 2015, whereas cumulative inflation for the same period was around 56 percent.”

Administrative and Operational Efficiency

The ICR reported some delays during implementation but the project was completed as scheduled and no
closing date extensions were required. Those implementation delays included slow approval processes and
difficulties in land acquisition in big cities and provinces that also delayed the AMI start-up. The ICR did not
report any procurement-related delays, which was rated Satisfactory when the project closed


Efficiency Rating
High


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)




                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      76.20
Appraisal                                                  29.20
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      98.30
ICR Estimate                                               38.30
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the project’s objectives to the Bank’s country strategy, and to the Government’s strategies for
the Vietnamese economy and for the country’s energy sector, is high.

The overall efficacy of achieving the project’s objectives is high. Achievement of each of the three objectives
met or exceeded its original targets. Much better results than targeted were achieved due to the combined
effects of installing AMI and MDMS for large customers, which resulted in behavioral changes that favored
shifting to more energy-efficient equipment and lower energy consumption. Moreover, more efficient
procurement practices led to project savings that enabled more subprojects to be carried out. Out of 99
subprojects planned originally, 177 projects were implemented that resulted in improved network capability to
meet load growth, reduce losses, and improve power supply reliability and quality.

Efficiency is high, given the average economic and financial rates of return at project completion—38.3 percent
and 19.7 percent, respectively, for the power companies—that significantly exceeded the appraisal estimates.
Although there were delays related to land acquisition and slow approvals during the implementation period, the
project was completed by the original closing date, without any extensions.

Based on the above criteria, the overall project outcome is rated highly satisfactory


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR (para 92), the sustainability of this project’s outcomes faces risks related to growth in
energy consumption, rate of investments in the sector, and environmental impacts. These risks are
assessed below.

Growth in energy consumption. Over time, given the average annual GDP growth rate projection of 8
percent to 2030 in Vietnam, there is a risk that the corresponding growth in energy use would lead to
decreased quality and reliability of electricity supply. This would result from an overly burdened distribution
system, both in the network sections upgraded by the project and portions that were not upgraded. However,
given the training provided to PCs in monitoring the network, identifying improvement needs, and conducting
some of the works, it is expected that they will actively plan for continuous network upgrades and


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



reinforcement. As stated in to the ICR (para 93): “EVN has also included performance, reliability, and quality
indicators in their annual performance evaluation of the PCs, which are added incentives to ensure continued
improvement of their networks.” In view of the expected growth in energy demand, the project supported
capacity-building for load research, tariff efficiency, and grid integration of renewable energy, among other
key areas.

Inadequate investments to match load growth. The Government is aiming to reduce its dependence on
foreign public borrowing, yet the distribution network will require continuous upgrades and large funding
amounts. Consequently, EVN will need to decrease its use of concessional loans for financing its capital
expenditures. According to the ICR (paragraph 94, page 31): “In 2018, EVN achieved its first, positive rating
(BB with ‘stable outlook’ for long-term foreign currency) from the Fitch ratings”, which would position EVN
with an ability to access international capital markets on a non-sovereign basis. Moreover, the World Bank’s
recent report on Maximizing Finance for Development also indicated that EVN can now access commercial
financing or blended financing. This would enable EVN to continue maintaining its networks.

Increases in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from new electricity generation. The Government’s
estimated increases in required generation capacity—i.e., from the current 42 GW to 60 GW by 2020 and to
100 GW by 2030 (ICR, para 95)—means that 5 GW would need to be installed each year between 2018 and
2030. In view of the risk that generation sources that increase GHG emissions would be harnessed, the
Government has approved the Renewable Energy Development Strategy and set up specific renewable
energy (RE) targets in the Power Development Master Plan (PMDP). RE targets are assessed and updated
when the that Plan is updated every five years.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project follows a previous series of Bank-financed energy projects in Vietnam. More specifically,
  according to the PAD (para 35), “the Bank has been providing support to the PCs and ERAV for the
  development of smart grid roadmaps, financed through the Rural Distribution Project and the System
  Efficiency Improvement, Equitization and Renewables Project. Based on information in the ICR, the Bank
  project team’s technical, economic and financial analyses, and the preparation of investment subprojects
  at appraisal, were sound. The project’s design components were specifically geared towards achieving
  improvements in reliability, efficiency, and quality of electricity supply. Moreover, certain design features
  were also selected to help commercialize the PCs so they could operate in a wholesale market under a
  new regulatory framework, while achieving independence from EVN. As such, the project’s objectives
  and design were closely aligned with the Government’s prevailing energy sector priorities and strategies,
  namely, the NEDS, SEDP and PDMP7, which aimed to achieve security of energy supply after 2016,
  develop a smart grid, upgrade and expand the distribution system, and modernize planning in the PCs
  and their operations.

  The Bank team mobilized two trust funds (TF) to augment project funds aimed at providing technical
  assistance. First, the Australian TF helped to implement a series of activities to assist the Electricity
  Authority of Vietnam (ERAV) in reforming the power sector, preparing for a competitive market, and



                                                                                                      Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



  improving the capacity of PCs. The Clean Technology Fund helped PCs introduce smart metering,
  improve their services to large customers, and help to reduce GHGs.

  The design of the implementation arrangements appropriately combined Vietnam’s centralized and
  decentralized institutional and governance structures. The arrangements also built upon the accumulated
  experience from past World Bank projects and followed the Government’s regulations on projects with
  official development financing. During preparation, the Bank team assisted the PCs in following the
  practice of centralizing goods supply at the PC level to take advantage of economies of scale, while
  decentralizing procurement and supervision of works at the PC level to facilitate the implementation of
  projects covering a large area and many provinces. The latter arrangement also involved local authorities
  more closely for easier management of land acquisition/compensation and environmental management
  issues. In sum, the project had a flexible and decentralized design that readied the project or quick
  implementation start up.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Regarding staffing, the ICR (paragraph 86, page 28) indicates that project supervision “had a competent
 and experienced task team leader” supported by a task team with the required skills mix, including fiduciary
 management, procurement, and safeguards. The whole team was based locally and provided “hands-on
 and quick support to the IAs when required.”

 Based on the ICR (para 86), the Bank’s supervision missions monitored and documented project progress
 and implementation challenges through regular Implementation Status and Results reports (ISRs)—of
 which 12 were prepared during the project’s lifetime—as well as Aide Memoires. At each month-long
 supervision mission, the team conducted site visits nationwide, focusing more closely on the most
 challenging subprojects that required support on resettlement, environment, and technical issues.

 The Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) and their ratings were shared with the PCs as
 signals regarding their performance. The ICR (paragraph 87, page 29) indicates that: “The task team
 provided valuable support to these implementing agencies throughout the project lifetime, contributing to
 the project success.” The support covered a range of issues as they arose, including (a) procurement and
 progress vis-à-vis the implementation plan, (b) compliance with social and environmental safeguards, (c)
 compliance with the legal covenants of the project, (d) financial management guidance, and (e) technical
 guidance. The Bank team also transferred knowledge to the IAs through workshops, e.g., on all aspects of
 project management when the project was launched, and specifically tailored training during
 implementation, such as smart systems for utilities, and sector reform experiences of other utilities. This
 training proved valuable to the Hanoi Power Corporation (HNPC), which was implementing a Bank-
 financed project for the first time



  Quality of Supervision Rating


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The design and operation of the M&E framework was adequately prepared in the PAD. The Bank team
 took into account the lack of familiarity of some PCs with M&E. For this reason, ERAV contracted a
 consultant during project preparation to design the M&E framework. Moreover, support for capacity-building
 was also given to the PCs to implement M&E functions. As a longer-term result, EVN has incorporated the
 M&E framework in its other projects and operations.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (para 72) states that “The M&E function was managed satisfactorily by ERAV for the purposes
  of reporting.” The ICR indicated that the Bank task team agreed a common template with the PCs, which
  collected and reported monthly on the M&E indicators to the Bank task team. The PCs collected
  data using their Integrated Business Management System modules, including the Customer Management
  System, Distribution Management System, and the Metering Data Management System which was
  installed under the project. The data on PDO Indicators were calculated by the PCs (consistent with the
  guidelines of the revised distribution code), aggregated, and submitted to EVN, MOIT, and the Bank. The
  Bank task team also developed a special project monitoring template for the IAs to use to report monthly
  on performance against intermediate indicators of implementation progress (e.g., procurement,
  construction, and payment status). The ICR also stated that “if any issues emerged, the team gave
  adequate support such as advice or site visits to help the IAs solve any problem early in the subproject
  lifetime.”



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E performance data proved effective in assessing implementation progress and making
  decisions on remedial actions when there were delays. The data were submitted to ERAV and were
  used for load forecasts and planning of network maintenance and improvements. According to the ICR
  (para 71), “Some of the project indicators (SAIDI, SAIFI, and MAIDI) are now used by the EVN for
  annual performance evaluation of the PCs.” EVN utilizes the M&E framework and draws from it for the
  monitoring of all their projects.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

                                                                                                Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)




a. Safeguards
  The project triggered two social safeguard policies: Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) and Indigenous
  Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). A Resettlement Policy Framework, Ethnic Minority Policy Framework, and where
  relevant Resettlement Action Plans, and Ethnic Minority Development Plans were prepared, reviewed,
  cleared and disclosed following requirements of the Bank and the Government.

  The project also triggered the safeguard policy OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment and was classified a
  Category B given the potentially negative impacts during implementation of civil works for the sub-projects
  under Component A. EVN prepared and adopted an Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
  that was applied to all sub-projects, and for which Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) were prepared
  in accordance with the EMF. The EMF and EMPs were disclosed in the Vietnamese language at the
  Vietnam Development Information Center (VDIC), EVN, the PMUs, and the sub-project area provinces; they
  were also disclosed in English at the Bank’s Infoshop.

  The ICR (para 75) states that “Overall, the social and environmental safeguard issues were addressed
  adequately in the project design to minimize social and environmental impacts and ensure compliance with
  the relevant World Bank safeguard policies.” The PMUs allocated staff specifically dedicated for managing
  environmental safeguards. Environmental requirements were included in all bidding documents and
  achieved compliance, based on monitoring of the environmental performance of contractors. Reports on
  safeguards compliance were periodically submitted to the Bank. Issues identified during implementation
  supervision missions were always addressed and there were no outstanding environmental issues. The ICR
  (para 76) indicates that “The safeguards rating at project close was ‘Satisfactory’ for both environmental and
  social safeguards. Throughout the project cycle, the project complied with all safeguard policies triggered.”

  The ICR further states (para 78) that “A major success of the project is the integration of the World Bank’s
  safeguards policies into the EVN’s day-to-day project activities, owing to the success registered by following
  the World Bank’s policies and procedures related to social and environmental safeguards management.
  The EVN is now using the World Bank template for their own and other financier-funded projects.”




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The ICR (para 80) indicates that “Financial management complied with the Bank’s policies and procedures
  throughout the project’s life and was rated Satisfactory at project closing.” The ICR goes on to state that
  the financial management (FM) function was managed by the Accounting and Finance division and project
  management teams at all IAs. The FM arrangements were designed to be decentralized – with each PC
  responsible for budget preparation, financial reporting and auditing, contract and expenditures
  management, expenditures verification, and accounting records maintenance. The PCs also managed
  project-designated accounts at commercial banks for each of IDA and CTF sources. The PCs submitted
  quarterly Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) to the Bank. Independent firms conducted annual financial audit;
  audit reports of acceptable quality were submitted to the Bank before end of June of the following year as
  required by the Financing Agreement. EVN and the PCs also submitted to the Bank their entity audited
  financial statements in line with International Financial Reporting Standards. The ICR (paragraph 80, page




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



   27) indicates that “Financial Management complied with the Bank’s policies and procedures throughout the
   project’s life and was rated Satisfactory at project closing.”

   Procurement. According to the ICR (para 79), “Procurement performance was rated ‘Satisfactory’ at
   project closing” as a result of clear procurement regulations, training from the PCs and the World Bank,
   and intensive guidance and monitoring from the procurement expert in actual preparation of the bidding
   documents and the bid evaluation. During the project period, no cases of fraud and corruption were
   detected.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                     IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Highly Satisfactory    Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Highly Satisfactory    Highly Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    High                   High

Quality of ICR                    ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presented five useful lessons from the project. They are summarized below with some
changes in presentation by IEG:

To increase the likelihood of achieving PDOs, projects need to be designed in close
alignment with government strategies and objectives; have high technical relevance and
solid preparatory work; maintain strong government ownership during preparation and
implementation; and receive support from strong governance structures. Power system
planning in Vietnam’s energy sector is centrally managed but decision-making is collective. This
process requires that all sub-projects for implementation should be aligned with the National Energy
Development Strategy (NEDS). The lesson from implementing this project was that the collective
decision-making process ensured that there was sufficient buy-in from the management and staff of
the power companies, which increased incentives for successful project delivery.

The achievement of outcomes depends on technically sound analysis of sub-projects and
maintenance of technical expertise within the sector. The PCs carried out a series of technical
studies during project preparation to facilitate the detailed design of specific project activities. All five

                                                                                                         Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)



PCs conducted surveys during project preparation to assess the potential for smart grid technologies
in each PC, identify implementation challenges, and propose technologies for future development.
This laid the groundwork for defining the longer-term road map for introducing new technologies
such as smart meters, SCADA, unmanned substations, and improvement in the business services
such as call centers, customers’ satisfaction, and so on. Technical resources also typically remained
within the energy sector, thus achieving technical stability within the sector institutions (MOIT,
ERAV, EVN, and PCs), and thereby ensuring continuity and sustenance of the project outcomes.

The successful implementation of a large, complex project requires close and effective
supervision--both by the Implementing Agencies (IAs) and the Bank team—and capable staff
in the IAs. Project management was complex given the large number of sub-projects under three
different components that were implemented by five different IAs. The lesson was that the structure
of project implementation encouraged decision making at the lowest practicable level, to facilitate
quick decision-making during implementation. The field-based Bank task team consisted of
experienced team members, which facilitated close monitoring of project implementation. The
project management board established in each IA also had strong and capable teams, with cross-
cutting technical and project management skills.

Flexibility in project management—including aspects of physical scope and approvals—is
essential for the sustained success of large complex projects. The lesson from this project was
that it was essential that the PCs (the implementing agencies) be able to quickly adjust to
unexpected conditions as they arose. The project benefited from the flexibility of the phased
approach to project implementation as decisions on sub-project selections were made based on
those which had the flexibility to be implemented more quickly. Continuously introducing further
flexibility during project implementation also helped to shorten time for critical decisions.

Involving all relevant stakeholders including local authorities early in the project preparation
process is critical to successful safeguard activities. Land acquisition and resettlement activities
required for investments are becoming increasingly difficult in Vietnam. The project suffered delays
due to delayed approvals for land acquisition, and in some cases, the works portion of five sub-
projects could not be completed within the project lifetime; hence the project financed only the
relevant material supply. The lesson from this project’s experience was that there are benefits from
early consultations with the relevant local authorities outlining the benefits and potential impacts of
the project and receiving their consensus before project implementation. For further strengthening
the implementation of social safeguards, the areas where more emphasis was needed included the
following: (a) information disclosure and consultation at project preparation, in a more
targeted/tailored manner; (b) implementation of developmental activities (for example, training)
provided to ethnic minority communities; and (c) close collaboration with the local authorities to
match the proposed developmental support and local needs.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                   Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Distribution Efficiency Project (P125996)




The ICR was well prepared and thorough. The country, sector and strategic contexts were well articulated and
provided solid justification for the project. The results chain was causally logical and included the critical
assumptions, although the box on outputs for Component C was unclear. The ICR was evaluative and placed a
large emphasis on accountability by providing concrete evidence behind the intermediate and final outcomes.
Albeit long with 33 pages for the main text, the ICR put a lot of effort in delineating the project’s implementation
record and how specific issues evolved and were resolved. The ICR’s format and internal substance within
each section complied generally with the Bank’s guidelines on ICR preparation. The lessons were closely
based on the project’s implementation experience and could have valuable and broad replicability for other
similar Bank energy projects. The main messages, however, could have been more succinctly and clearly
articulated. Some of the data, such as in Table 3 and paragraphs 35, 36 and 37, could have been more
elaborated by providing more information



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 21 of 21
