     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Rio de Janeiro Mun. Strengthening PSM (P127245)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021634

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P127245                                   BR Rio de Janeiro Mun. Strengthening PSM

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                    Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                   Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82710                               30-Apr-2018                                           12,441,313.34

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Jun-2013                              30-Jun-2018

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          16,200,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                           12,441,313.34                                                0.00

 Actual                                       12,441,313.34                                                0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Paul Holden                Judyth L. Twigg               Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the project was to support institutional capacity strengthening of the Borrower to enhance
   public service delivery, including in health, education and environmental management (Financing Agreement,
   p. 5).

   ”Unpacking” the PDO suggests four distinct outcome areas:



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Rio de Janeiro Mun. Strengthening PSM (P127245)



   Supporting institutional capacity strengthening of the Borrower to enhance public service delivery in:


   I. Health;
   II. Education;
   III. Environment management; and
   IV. Other areas, derived from the non-exclusivity of the listed areas (implied by the word “including").

   This technical assistance project loan aimed to provide follow-on support for the World Bank Fiscal
   Consolidation for Efficiency and Growth Development Policy Loan (DPL, P111665, US$1,045 million) that had
   been approved in July 2010 and closed on June 30, 2013.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had four components.

   Component 1: Improving Medium Term Fiscal and Public Investment Management (appraisal estimate
   US$1.5 million; actual cost at closing US$3.95 million). This component aimed to strengthen processes
   connected with fiscal and public investment management in the medium term through:

   1. Integrating the results of impact evaluation and information on performance with proposed policies
   related to planning and budgets; and


   2. Undertaking diagnostic evaluations and implementing recommendations so obtained. Some of these
   included:
   • Developing criteria to account for fiscal risks;
   • Developing costing methodologies for future policies and programs; and
   • Capacity building to formulate multi-year revenue estimates.

   At a Level 2 restructuring in December 2017, the name of Component 1 was changed to Improving Medium
   Term Fiscal Management, and the budget was increased to US$3.95 million. At this restructuring, the first
   subcomponent was dropped.

   Component 2: Innovating in Service Provision (appraisal estimate US$25.4 million; actual cost at closing
   US$22.07 million). This component had two sub-components:
    1. Health: Improving health service delivery through:
   • Developing an effective referral system for hospital and diagnostic services and a hospital bed managing
   system;
   • Evaluating reforms in a specific health district related to the expansion of primary care, 24-hour
   emergency services, and the hospital system;

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BR Rio de Janeiro Mun. Strengthening PSM (P127245)



• Conducting operational research on prenatal mortality and the quality of prenatal care;
• Evaluating the impact of interventions to improve chronic disease care; and
• Supporting family health clinics.


At the December 2017 restructuring, all activities under this subcomponent except development of the
referral/bed management system and support for family health clinics were dropped.


 2. Education: Improving education quality through:
• Enhancing capacity building activities for learning assessments;
• Establishing a new office for information management to track and utilize data assessments of students;
• Supporting the creche monitoring system;
• Monitoring early childhood development;
• Managing early childhood education through an integrated quality assurance system;
• Supporting the integration of early childhood services in education, health, and social systems; and
• Designing and implementing teacher training programs.


At the December 2017 restructuring, all three early childhood support activities were dropped.


 Component 3: Strengthening Social Governance and Monitoring and Evaluation (appraisal estimate
US$3.3 million; actual cost at closing US$3.85 million). This component was aimed at promoting the
integration of secured favelas and strengthening evidence-based policy making. It had two sub-
components:


1. Strengthening the operating systems for a social Police Peacekeeping Units program through promoting
community participation with Police Peacekeeping Units in secured favelas and improving the
implementation of sectoral policies for service provision in these favelas; and
2. Design a Monitoring and Impact Evaluation System for the municipality, which included: (a) improving the
expertise of the Peacekeeping units in the collection of data in order to improve service delivery; b)
designing an integrated monitoring and evaluation system; and (c) strengthening the technical skills of the
Police Peacekeeping Units for carrying out impact evaluations for evidence-based policy making and
undertaking four evaluation assessments.


At the restructuring, the number of assessments was reduced to three in order to focus more on
implementation efforts.



Component 4: Innovating in Environmental Management (appraisal estimate US$1.04 million; actual cost at
closing US$0). This component was to implement Rio de Janeiro’s Climate Data Bank and Green House
Gas Emission Monitoring System, to track progress on meeting emissions targets. However, at the
December 2017 restructuring, this component was dropped.



                                                                                                 Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Rio de Janeiro Mun. Strengthening PSM (P127245)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The original project cost was US$32.4 million, of which US$16.2 million was an International Bank for
   Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan and US$16.2 million was to be financed by the Borrower. The
   revised amount of the project at the restructuring was US$28.6 million, of which US$12.4 million was the
   IBRD loan and US$16.2 million was to be supplied by the Borrower. The actual amounts disbursed were
   US$12.4 million from the IBRD loan and US$16.2 million from the Borrower.



   The project was approved on June 14, 2013 and became effective on October 23, 2013. It was originally
   scheduled to close on April 30, 2018 and actually closed on June 30, 2018. The project was restructured
   (Level 2) on December 21, 2017, at which point Component 4 and some other activities (as described
   above) were dropped. In the project restructuring, activities that would probably not be completed prior to
   closing were dropped, although the PDO remained unchanged because any changes would have required
   the approval of Brazil’s Senate. As a result, US$2.025 million of the project funds were cancelled.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The World Bank Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for FY2012-FY2015 had objectives to increase the
efficiency of public and private investments, improve the provision of public services for low-income
households, promote regional economic development and improve sustainable natural resource
management and climate resilience. Except for component 1, the PDOs were broadly consistent with the
second and fourth of these objectives, and also partly with the third because of the focus on Rio de Janeiro,
Although component 1 was relevant to the objectives of the CAS and the CPF, it was not aimed at any
single sector, nor was is directly related to service delivery. At closing, the PDOs were consistent with the
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2018-FY2023, which had 3 focus areas: (i) fiscal consolidation
and government effectiveness; (ii) private sector investment and productivity; and (iii) equitable and
sustainable development. The ICR (p. 16) pointed out that the CPF maintains a focus on improved service
delivery that was the focus of the previous CAS. The World Bank Systematic Country Diagnostic (2016)
points out the importance of social inclusion and socially progressive allocations of government
expenditure, which is consistent with the PDO.

However, a weakness of the PDO was that its scope was so broad as to justify virtually any public sector
intervention in the areas of health, education, or environmental management. Furthermore, the way that the
PDO was presented, other public service delivery could be included, so that the PDOs were not effectively

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BR Rio de Janeiro Mun. Strengthening PSM (P127245)



               operationalizable or monitorable. Nevertheless, the loan was granted a Federal Guarantee indicating that
               the Federal Government approved the objectives of the project. The rating of relevance is therefore
               "substantial".




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Supporting institutional capacity strengthening of the Borrower to enhance public service delivery in health

                             Rationale
                             The focus of the PDO was institutional capacity strengthening for the enhancement of public service delivery.
                             Because the PDO statement was so broad, it is difficult to identify its exact focus. For example, the first
                             component focused on strengthening processes connected with public investment management, which does
                             not appear in the PDO. The second component focused on innovating service provision, but the PDO focused
                             on “supporting” the strengthening of service provision, and it is unclear whether the “innovations”
                             strengthened service provision, although the sub-components did focus on improving the delivery of health
                             services and improving education quality. The third component aimed to strengthen social governance,
                             defined as the integration of secured favelas, although exactly what this meant was unclear. The other goal of
                             component 3 was to strengthen M&E although how this related to improved service delivery was not
                             specified. The fourth component aimed to “innovate” environmental management, although it is unclear
                             whether this encompassed support for institutional capacity strengthening.


                              The ICR (p. 8) pointed out that the project was prepared under earlier guidelines that did not require an
                             articulation of a theory of change. The ICR therefore “retrofitted” a theory of change to the activities, outputs,
                             and outcomes of the project. The objective in the health area was to be achieved through technical
                             assistance that supported and implemented a series of outputs:

                             • Developing an effective referral system for managing access to specialists, hospitals, and diagnostic
                             services and for managing hospital beds;
                             • Reforms to expand primary care, 24-hour outpatient care, and emergency services and to evaluate the
                             hospital system in Health District 5.2;
                             • Pilot information and communications technology for the remote monitoring of patients with diabetes,
                             hypertension, and tuberculosis; and
                             • Progress in implementing the Family Health Clinic initiative.


                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Rio de Janeiro Mun. Strengthening PSM (P127245)




Outputs




Only the family health clinics were actually implemented.


Outcomes


 The efficacy section of the ICR did not discuss the achievement of public service delivery in health. The
Restructuring Document (p. 5) pointed out that delays in procurement processes and lack of ownership by the
municipality resulted in only the Family Health Clinics initiative being implemented through the use of
counterpart funding. However, the indicators (ICR p. 42) do not contain any measure of improvements in
public service delivery in health.


The achievement of this objective is therefore rated as Negligible.




Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Supporting institutional capacity strengthening of the Borrower to enhance public service delivery in education

Rationale
The objective in the education area was to be achieved through technical assistance supporting and
implementing a series of outputs that related to improved education outcomes and constituted a plausible
causal chain:
 • Enhancing capacity building activities for learning assessments;
• Establishing a new office for information management to track and utilize data assessments of students;
• Supporting the creche monitoring system;
• Monitoring early childhood development;
• Managing early childhood education through an integrated quality assurance system;
• Supporting the integration of early childhood services in education, health, and social systems; and
• Designing and implementing teacher training programs.




                                                                                                 Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Rio de Janeiro Mun. Strengthening PSM (P127245)




Outputs


Although not part of the project results indicators, the ICR (pp. 17-18) described “key outputs and results”:

• Provision of capacity building activities for learning assessments, which the ICR stated was fully achieved;
• The implementation of consistent writing test grading criteria, which was fully achieved;
• Support for the establishment of a new office of strategic management to track and analyze data from the
Ministry of Education’s comprehensive student assessments, which was partially achieved, although the
office employed only two specialists;
• The design and implementation of an integrated quality assurance system for early childhood education,
which was fully achieved; and
• The development of a new teacher training school that could deliver distance learning, which was fully
achieved.

However, these indicators were included in neither the project design nor in the monitoring and evaluation
framework, so it is difficult to consider them as being "key."

Outcomes


 The outcome indicator for this objective was the improvement in education results of Rio municipal students
as measured by the Rio de Janeiro Education Development Index. Initial grades improved from 5.4 at the
2012 baseline to 5.7 in 2018, not reaching the target of 6.0. Final grades improved from 4.4 at the 2012
baseline to 4.7 in 2018, not reaching the target of 5.0.



With neither outcome target reached, achievement of this objective is rated Modest.




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Supporting institutional capacity strengthening of the Borrower to enhance public service delivery in
environment management

Rationale


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Rio de Janeiro Mun. Strengthening PSM (P127245)



 This objective was meant to be achieved through developing a monitoring system for emissions, and
providing technical assistance to set up the system and training in how to operate it. The ICR (p. 21) stated
that no activities were implemented under this objective, although results were achieved under a different
project.


The rating for this objective is therefore Negligible.




Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Supporting institutional capacity strengthening of the Borrower to enhance public service delivery in other
areas

Rationale


The actions underlying this objective were to indirectly support sector policies through “cross sectoral
improvements in public-sector management as well as impact evaluation capacity" (ICR, p. 8). Under this
objective, anticipated outcomes included:


 • Improved fiscal and public investment management processes. This included improved collection times
for urban property taxes and an improved data warehouse system that integrated through digitization such
data as property taxes, urban maps, property sales data, and garbage collection routes, through real time
monitoring;
• Better coordination of the Social Police Peacekeeping Units (UPPs) in the Pacified Favelas. Social UPP is
the flagship program promoting the integration of the favelas with the rest of the City of Rio de Janeiro, with
the goal of eliminating the influence of criminal organizations;
• A strengthened program for managing the Social UPPs;
• Improved implementation of sectoral policies in the Pacified Favelas;
• Strengthening the Instituto Periera Passos, which collected household and survey data to improve service
delivery targeting and performance and conducted impact evaluations for evidence-based policy making.



The causal connections through the results chain for the achievement of this objective are hard to discern.
The theory of change articulated in the ICR is not convincing. While the outcomes undoubtedly are connected
to inputs for institutional capacity strengthening, the direct relationship with improved public service delivery is

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 16
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         BR Rio de Janeiro Mun. Strengthening PSM (P127245)



                      obscure. Presumably, the various capacity development interventions in the components would have led to
                      institutional capacity strengthening, but there are no specific actions that link the objective with the outcomes.

                      Outputs


                       • The number of users that are social organizations and firms/entrepreneurs registered in the Portal RCI –
                      Community Integrated Network (a community portal information site). The target was 200, compared with a
                      baseline of 0, and the actual achievement was 62.
                      • The number of users that are individuals registered in the Portal RCI – Community Integrated Network.
                      The target was 1500, compared with a baseline of 0, and the actual achievement was 920.
                      • The number of active users of the Armazem de Dados portal (Rio’s Data Warehouse), The target was
                      5500, compared with a baseline of 0, and the actual achievement was 5122.
                      • The number of impact evaluation concept notes produced and published by the Pereira Passos Institute.
                      The target was 6, compared with a baseline of 0, and the actual achievement was 6.

                      Outcomes


                       The number of ongoing impact evaluations implemented, with a target of three compared with a baseline of
                      zero. The actual number achieved was three.


                      • The average time of “solution for the payment of tributary (property) taxes" was targeted to decline from a
                      baseline of 129.2 days to 109.82 days. The actual figure achieved was 141.35 days. The ICR (p. 17) stated
                      that the increase in time was not due to problems with the digitization, but rather that because of greater
                      transparency, protests against increased property taxes rose.
                      • The number of page views on the Armazem de Dados portal was to increase from a baseline of zero to a
                      target of 9000 in 2012 by the end of the project. The actual number achieved was 27,744.


                       The project's stated outcome indicators all relate to inputs, without any measure of their effect on the quality
                      of public service. Page views by firms and citizens, the number of impact evaluations completed, or the
                      resolution of property tax disputes do not in themselves reflect improved provision of services. The same
                      reasoning applies to the improved implementation of sectoral policies in the favelas and to the actions of the
                      UPPs. There is no evidence presented to support the contention that services improved.



                      Rating
                      Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Rationale
With three of the objectives rated Negligible and one rated Modest, the overall efficacy rating is Negligible.



                                                                                                                          Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Rio de Janeiro Mun. Strengthening PSM (P127245)




Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary reason
Negligible                                                  Low achievement

5. Efficiency


The ICR contained an economic and financial analysis that attempted to evaluate the net benefits from the
investment of the project funds. The ICR pointed out (p. 46) that “the lack of a clearly defined causality chain of
project activities and expected outcomes made the efficiency analysis a very challenging exercise." As in the
efficacy analysis, the ICR focused on the components, rather than on the PDO. It is therefore questionable as to
whether the results of the estimates are relevant. However, a brief summary of the calculations is provided here.

The ICR adopted a cost effectiveness analysis (CEA) approach (although the PAD estimated efficiency based
on cost benefit analysis) because of the difficulties of placing a value on all of the outcomes. It identified the
quantifiable benefits as:


 • Higher property tax collections with a discounted present value of US$36.9 million over a 15-year period,
which the ICR estimated as providing a 99% internal rate of return (IRR) (ICR, p. 47);
• Indirect benefits arising from the health sector activities, including creating an information system for
epidemiology, a new regulatory system for prenatal care, and the support of family health, with coverage of
family health clinics rising to 70% of the municipal population compared with 30% in 2013. However, the ICR (p.
48) stated, “of the five health activities originally planned, only one...financed with the Municipality of Rio funds
was implemented – Bank financing did not have any direct impact” (ICR, p. 48), which would exclude it from
being included in the CEA for the project;;
• Innovation in the education sector sub-component, estimated to yield an IRR of 88%. The ICR stated that
this activity: (i) raised the quality of education throughout the system “through the focus on the definition of
results-based policies” (p. 49); (ii) extended the quality of education through the system by “the focus on the
definition of results-based policies"; and (iii) improved the effectiveness of teachers in the classroom ”through
training and support in the vocational training of the faculty of the municipality” (ICR, p. 49).


 Overall, the ICR pointed out (p. 23) that, while some sub-components registered highly satisfactory results,
overall efficiency was either below expectations or not rated at all because of lack of data or because activities
were dropped at the restructuring. The ICR went on, however, to say that all of the sub-components that were
analyzed had a positive net present value, based on the analysis described above. This analysis is not credible
because of the questionable indicators used as the basis for the IRR calculations. The indicators are poorly
defined, and the discussion in Appendix 4 of the ICR made little analytical sense. It appeared to be based on
expectations, rather than on hard evidence.

Implementation efficiency was negligible because of serious project delays (see ICR, p. 15, paras 39-40), a high
rate of personnel turnover, and low capacity. The project involved the expenditure of substantial amounts while
achieving very little.




                                                                                                       Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Rio de Janeiro Mun. Strengthening PSM (P127245)




Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)             *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                          0
 Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                           Not Applicable
                                                                                          0
 ICR Estimate                                                  0
                                                                                           Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

With a Modest rating for relevance of objectives, Negligible ratings for 3 of the 4 development objectives and an
overall rating of Negligible for efficacy, and a Negligible rating for efficiency, the outcome rating is Highly
Unsatisfactory. These ratings are consistent with severe shortcomings.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Factors that will likely contribute to the sustainability of the project (ICR, p. 33) were:



• The contribution of the Borrower to the project, amounting to more than 50% of the final cost, although
this is offset by the possibility that funding will not continue (see following paragraph);
• The anchoring of the project in Rio de Janeiro’s development objectives that included improving fiscal and
public management and improved service delivery;
• Learning from the World Bank with respect to improved technical and administrative procedures; and
• Improved coordination among the agencies.


However, there are several substantial risks related to the national economy: (i) uncertainty regarding
continued funding for the Municipality of Rio de Janeiro; (ii) fiscal constraints that will reduce the likelihood of

                                                                                                         Page 11 of 16
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         BR Rio de Janeiro Mun. Strengthening PSM (P127245)



continued funding because of expenditure increases and revenue uncertainties; (iii) a significant chance that
government commitment will wane and that political volatility will reduce the commitment to the program; and
(iv) some chance that staff turnover will reduce capacity to administer the program.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     Although the ICR (p. 26) stated that the project reflected the lessons learned from the prior DPL, the
     design of the program at entry did not recognize significant legal, capacity and institutional barriers to the
     effectiveness of the loan (ICR p. 32). In particular, there was a failure to identify the lack of readiness of
     the counterparts at entry, which adversely affected the implementation of policy actions as well as project
     implementation and led to serious delays. Furthermore, both the broad nature of development objective
     and the design of components that were not consonant with the PDO meant that much of the work of the
     Bank team did not directly map into the PDO. Furthermore, the ICR (p. 34) reported that the Municipality
     expressed low interest in the project during preparation and only agreed to it because of strong advocacy
     by the Bank team and management.



     .




     Quality-at-Entry Rating
     Highly Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 .

 The ICR reported (p. 32) that, although there were timely supervision missions and nine Implementation
 and Results Reports, the Bank team did not closely monitor and supervise implementation over the first
 three years of the project. In particular, the ICR reported that internal coordination among the Bank team
 during the initial phases of the project was weak. In addition, the fact that the TTL was located in
 Washington and could not communicate effectively with Brazilian counterparts because of a lack of fluency
 in Portuguese hampered the effectiveness of supervision. The ICR (p. 32) states “Having DC-based TTLs
 with no fluency in Portuguese limited the Bank team’s ability to have more frequent follow-ups with the
 Government to ensure that any issues causing implementation delays are addressed in a timely fashion.”
 Furthermore, there was also significant turnover of TTLs, which hampered the continuity of supervision and
 had a negative effect on project management even though there were 9 supervision missions during the


                                                                                                        Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Rio de Janeiro Mun. Strengthening PSM (P127245)



 project. These factors contributed to the failure to flag low government commitment to the project, which
 should have been identified at the outset.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Municipality of Rio de Janeiro was responsible for data collection and reporting and providing evidence
 for the M&E framework.


 The design of the M&E framework was inconsistent with the PDOs, which in turn were loosely defined. The
 design of monitoring and evaluation failed to include any outcome indicators for the health sub-component.
 While the education indicators were relatively precisely defined, others were not. The number of impact
 evaluations was an input into improvement in health and education, which would have required
 implementing their findings, but there was little evidence that this occurred. Solving tributary tax processes
 was not related to the PDOs, so the average time indicator was not relevant. Similarly, the number of page
 views on the Internet portals gives no indication of whether the PDO were being achieved. The
 environmental indicator regarding the monitoring of emissions was dropped.


 A major weakness of the design of the program and the M&E framework was that its scope was so broad
 as to justify virtually any public sector intervention in the areas of health, education, and environment
 management. Furthermore, the way that the PDO was presented, other public service delivery could be
 included, so that it was not effectively monitorable




b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (p. 30) reported that data regarding intermediate and outcome indicators was generally not
  available, particularly during the initial implementation phase. Delays in signing consulting contracts were
  at least partly the cause of evidence not being available. The Municipality of Rio de Janeiro was only able
  to track project indicators at the time the final supervision mission occurred. The ICR (p. 30) stated, “with
  the long delays in the project implementation, there were no products to be assessed in the World Bank's

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Rio de Janeiro Mun. Strengthening PSM (P127245)



  supervision missions, and it was not possible for the teams to track results during most of the ISR
  missions.”




c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p. 30) stated that although data on the intermediate and outcome indicators were not available,
  "overall M&E was carried out and monitoring reports were used appropriately for project management
  and to inform decision making by the agencies responsible for implementation of project activities."


   This statement is difficult to reconcile with the absence of M&E data. It suggests that the M&E
  framework was not relevant to the progress of the operation.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project had a category C rating for environment impact, which did not trigger an environmental
   analysis. The project did not trigger social safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The ICR reported (p. 31) that a comprehensive review of the Municipality’s public financial management
   uncovered no irregularities, although the lack of capacity in contract management was flagged as being an
   issue because of the management team’s lack of familiarity with World Bank procurement processes. At
   closing, project financial management was rated Satisfactory, and procurement was rated Moderately
   Satisfactory due to lack of capacity in contract management.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Rio de Janeiro Mun. Strengthening PSM (P127245)



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                  IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately                                     Severe shortcomings in efficacy
Outcome                                               Highly Unsatisfactory
                                  Unsatisfactory                                 and efficiency.
                                                                                 Severe shortcomings in quality
                                  Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Highly Unsatisfactory      at entry, and major shortcomings
                                  Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 in supervision.
                                                                                 The M&E framework was not
Quality of M&E                    Modest              Negligible                 used, and the choice of
                                                                                 indicators was weak.
                                                                                 The ICR did not evaluate the
Quality of ICR                    ---                 Modest
                                                                                 project against the PDOs.

12. Lessons

The following lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaption of language by IEG:



      Lack of strong ownership by government entities and implementing agencies compromises
       the potential success of a project. Considering not proceeding with a project under these
       circumstances is a viable option for the Bank. In this case, the ICR (p. 34) reported that the
       Municipality expressed low interest in the project during preparation and only agreed to it
       because of strong advocacy by the Bank team and management.
      Weak institutional capacity of counterparts compromises the potential success of a project
       and should be incorporated into design. In the case of this project, the ICR (p. 15) stated
       that “the Municipality showed low capacity to prepare and implement activities.”
      Implementation support, particularly when counterparts are not familiar with World Bank
       procurement practices, is a critical factor in determining the likelihood of success. In the case
       of this project, the ICR (p. 24) stated that shortcomings in procurement management
       jeopardized project implementation.


IEG adds the additional lesson:


Ensuring that the PDOs and the components of a project are consistent is a critical factor in project
design. In the case of this project, there were substantial gaps between the two.



13. Assessment Recommended?

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BR Rio de Janeiro Mun. Strengthening PSM (P127245)




  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR rated the project on the achievement of its components, rather than on the achievement of the PDO.
It did not attempt to parse the development objective to derive the outcome areas. As a result, much of the
information regarding outcomes was not easily accessible, since the ICR did not rate outcomes against the
PDO. The ICR also did not acknowledge the lack of consonance between the PDOs and the M&E outcome
indicators.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                Page 16 of 16
