     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)



                                                                                      Report Number: ICRR0021836

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P130819                                       HN Safer Municipalities

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Honduras                                      Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51920                                     31-Aug-2018                                              9,745,123.21

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Dec-2012                                   31-Dec-2018

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              15,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Revised Commitment                               12,700,000.00                                                  0.00

 Actual                                            9,774,638.22                                                  0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator             Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero          Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson           IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both the Financing Agreement (FA, p.5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph
   12), the Project Development Objectives (PDOs) of this project were: (a) to improve the capacity of national
   and local authorities in violence prevention; (b) to address risk factors of crime and violence in selected
   municipalities; and (c) to improve its capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.
   This review will assess the project's achievements against these objectives:

           to improve the capacity of national and local authorities in violence prevention;

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)



         to address risk factors of crime and violence in selected municipalities; and
         to improve its capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.

   According to the PAD (paragraph 15), the following were the key PDO outcome indicators:

         Violence prevention components of Municipal Coexistence and Citizen Security Plans
            (MCCSPs) designed and implemented following a cross-sectoral and evidence-informed approach;
           National and municipal authorities collected, analyzed, and used data on crime and violence
            perpetration and victimization (disaggregated by age and gender) for evidence-based policy making
            and actions;
           Percentage of residents in targeted neighborhoods who report collective efficacy (social
            cohesion/trust, and willingness to act collectively to prevent violence);
           Percentage of people that are victims of school-based violence in targeted schools. School-based
            violence was part of the violence prevention components of the municipal plans in the three selected
            municipalities (PAD, footnote 13); and
           Time taken to disburse funds requested by the Government for an eligible emergency.

   The MSCCPs are municipal initiatives funded by the Government's State and Peace Building Fund (SPF).
   The SPF provides TA grants to coordinate the violence prevention agenda across sectors through the
   National Citizen Security Council as well as mainstream violence prevention in the agenda of national
   government agencies and programs, support communications and capacity building strategy of the program,
   and promote south-south cooperation (PAD, footnote 14).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1: Strengthening of National Violence Prevention Institutions (appraisal cost US$2 million, actual cost
   US1.75 million). This component financed two subcomponents: the first one was to strengthen the capacity
   of the Secretaria de Estado en el Despacho de Seguridad (SEDS or Secretariat of Security) to guide,
   coordinate, and oversee violence prevention activities in selected communities. This financed (i) the
   systematization of good practices on violence preventions; (ii) assessment of violence prevention services
   available at the national level that may be offered in the selected municipalities; (iii) training SEDS staff to
   support selected municipalities in preparing and implementing Violence Prevention component of the
   respective Municipal Coexistence and Citizen Security Plans (MCCSPs); (iv) developing guidelines and
   protocols for preparing these plans; and (v) developing a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system for the
   implementation of these plans (PAD, paragraph 16). The second subcomponent strengthened the capacity
   of both SEDS and selected municipalities to collect and process violence data and use these as evidence to
   inform policy making. This capacity building financed (i) technical assistance and equipment to enhance the
   National Violence Observatory's capacity to validate crime and violence data; (ii) design and implement




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)



  victimization, attitude, and social cohesion surveys; and (iii) create and strengthen municipal crime and
  violence observatories in selected municipalities (PAD, paragraph 17).

  2: Investing in Integrated Crime and Violence Prevention at Municipal and Community Level
  (appraisal cost US$11 million, actual cost US$7.22 million). This component financed three
  subcomponents.

        The first subcomponent financed (i) training and technical assistance to personnel of the selected
         municipalities and members of violence prevention committees to prepare Violence Prevention
         components of the MCCSPs, including municipal subprojects; (ii) the establishing of municipal level
         mechanisms to handle complaints; (iii) developing and implementing communication and outreach to
         promote community participation (PAD, paragraph 18). These activities improved the capacity of
         selected municipalities to plan and manage violence preventions activities.
        The second subcomponent financed the design and implementation of community participation
         activities such as those related to identifying, prioritizing, implementing and supervising municipal
         subprojects (PAD, paragraph 19). These activities promoted collective efficacy. This is defined as
         the extent to which neighborhood residents trust each other and were willing to act together to
         prevent crime in their community (PAD, footnote 15).
        The third subcomponent financed grants to selected municipalities to implement subprojects in at
         least three "hotspot" neighborhoods in each target municipality and other municipal-wide strategic
         initiatives. These subprojects, identified in response to the prevention component of municipal plans,
         included (i) training in social prevention interventions such as those that were family- and youth-
         oriented, gender, or school-based; (ii) training in situational prevention interventions that financed
         construction of small-scale community infrastructure to create safe community spaces such as
         parks, gardens, playgrounds, street lighting, street paving; and the construction or rehabilitation of
         similar space to deliver services; (iii) access to basic urban upgrading services such as small
         diameter water and sewer connections, drainage, electricity connections, and access roads; and (iv)
         training in alternative conflict resolution measures, such as training municipal mediators,
         strengthening case registration systems, and expanding networks of women and youth volunteer
         mediators.

  3: Project Administration and Monitoring and Evaluation (appraisal cost US$2 million, actual cost
  US$2.38 million). This component financed training, workshops, and technical assistance to strengthen the
  Project Implementation Unit (PIU) as well as to carry out fiduciary obligations. This component also financed
  the establishing of systems for monitoring and evaluation of the project, as well as impact evaluations of at
  least two types of interventions (PAD, paragraph 22).

  4: Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) Contingency Emergency Component (appraisal cost US$0,
  actual cost US$0). This component would support a response to an eligible emergency. A specific IRM
  Operations Manual applied to this component.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total planned project cost at appraisal reached US$17 million, of these US$15 million
  were IDA funds and US$2 million was the Government contribution. This was revised to US$12 million (see



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)



   Dates below). The project disbursed US$11.35 million (ICR, Annex 3). The remainder was attributed to the
   undisbursed Borrower Contribution (see below).

   Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) financed this project.

   Borrower Contribution: The Government committed US$2.0 in counterpart financing. No contributions
   were disbursed (ICR, paragraph 17).

   Dates: The project was approved on December 13, 2012 and made effective March 15, 2013. The Mid
   Term Review (MTR) was completed on May 15, 2015. The project was scheduled to close on August 31,
   2018 but was extended through a restructuring to close 4 months later on December 31, 2018, for a total of
   20 month implementation period. There were 3 level 2 restructurings:

         On November 23, 2016 to cancel US$2.3 million in financing, reallocate US$0.45 million
          across components, amend the Results Framework, amend the institutional arrangements and the
          corresponding financial management (ICR, paragraph 17). The amendments to the Results
          Framework included the replacement of output indicators with more rigorous intermediate and
          outcome indicators that followed the ecological model method promoted by the World Health
          Organization (WHO, 2002). The epidemiological method identified risk factors for violence. These
          risk factors were conditions that cumulatively increased the probability for an individual or group to
          become victim and/or perpetrator of violence. The new RF captured the cumulative effects of the
          various interventions with target groups. PDO outcome indicators measured the increased
          perception of residents' safety, decrease in student absenteeism and drop out, improved self-
          esteem and increased participation in elaborating and monitoring community action plans for
          violence prevention.
         On June 14, 2018 to reallocate US$1.6 million between disbursement categories to enable the
          Government to pay selected consultancies and salaries of local teams implementing the project.
         On August 31, 2018 to extend the loan closing date by 4 months to December 31, 2018 to complete
          the remaining 3 contracted subprojects (kindergarten building in Palermo and an integral center and
          ditches in Choloma).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO was highly relevant to the country's national development plan embodied in the Vision de Pais
2010-- 2038 y Plan de Nacion (Country Vision 2010-2030 and National Plan). Of the four objectives in that
plan, Objective 2 aimed for a democratic Honduras, developed with safety and without violence. One of the
five goals to achieve this objective focused on reducing the level of criminality to a level below the
international average. The plan identified also identified the need to eliminate the social problems that
present true risks to the population such as violence, access health and education, as well as political,
social, and economic opportunities for the youth. This project directly contributes to achieving this objective.
The PDO directly supported the Government's 2011-2022 National Citizen Security and Coexistence Policy
(NCSP), which espoused crime control and violence prevention. According to the ICR (paragraph 7), the
policy led to the creation of the Sub-Secretariat of Prevention (SSP) in the Secretariat of Security (SEDS) to


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)



               lead the violence prevention agenda while the National Citizen Security Council (NCSC) was tasked with
               coordinating efforts in criminal justice and violence prevention. This policy coincided with the PDO by
               recognizing that incidence and drivers of crime and violence differed across locations and required
               customized response.

               The PDO was also relevant to the World Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY16-FY20.
               This project contributed to the first pillar of Fostering Inclusion as part of meeting the objective to expand
               coverage of social programs. Areas with the highest rates of poverty, malnutrition, vulnerability, violence
               and high child migration would be prioritized for expansion (CPF, paragraph 60). The project supported
               Pillar 3, Reducing Vulnerabilities by contributing to Objective 7 to build crime and violence prevention
               capacity of local governments. The CPF noted that an important source of vulnerability derived from the
               high levels of crime and violence, affecting growth and opportunity and the country's social fabric (CPF,
               paragraph 103). To reduce the country's vulnerabilities, the objective was to build crime and violence
               prevention capacity of local governments (CPF, paragraph 104).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the capacity of national and local authorities in violence prevention.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The PAD did not present a theory of change (ICR, paragraph 10). This PDO improved
                             municipal (local) capacity to manage citizen security interventions through activities such as training, technical
                             assistance, and collaboration with independent experts. These activities were to generate outputs that
                             strengthened the capacity of the national authorities to guide and oversee violence prevention activities,
                             improve the capacity of national and selected municipal authorities to collect and process data on violence.
                             Strengthened national and municipal violence observatories would provide the outputs - data - to design
                             outcomes that were evident in prevention components of municipal and citizen plans. These plans provided
                             the framework for community investments and social prevention interventions funded by this project. The
                             training and technical assistance led to outputs that supported the PDO. The logical chain is clear - that by
                             improving capacity to identify risk factors for violence, and use data as evidence, national and local authorities
                             could better understand how to combine interventions to mitigate risk actors in highly vulnerable communities.
                             The underlying assumptions were that support for the project would not be affected by change in government,
                             results at the community level would be appreciated at the higher levels of government, and that there will be
                             investments to sustain the results.

                             OUTPUTS:


                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)




      According to the ICR (paragraph 42), SEDS and municipalities produced 10 certified municipal
       violence prevention plans using evidence, data, and participatory approaches (no baseline in the ICR,
       original target 13, target almost achieved)
      100 percent of community leaders participated in updating the community action plans (baseline
       available but not reported in the ICR, original target 90 percent, target exceeded) as evidence of
       increased community empowerment. The ICR did not provide the number of community leaders. This
       indicator was expressed as a percentage following the introduction of the revised Results Framework
       during the November 2016 restructuring (see Dates above). This indicator followed the ecological
       model method promoted by the World Health Organization that captured cumulative effects of various
       interventions, such as this participation by community leaders in updating community plans. In
       addition, the Bank team noted that all data, baselines, and targets at closing were in the World Bank
       archives but not captured in this ICR (see Annex 1 Results Framework and Key Outputs Note at the
       beginning of the Table).

OUTCOMES:

      Percent of residents satisfied with local authorities' capacity to implement violence prevention
       community plans using participatory methods increased from 93.3 to 97.3 percent (no baseline in the
       ICR, original target 93 percent, target exceeded). The fully populated results framework with targets at
       closing was in the World Bank's document archives and not reported in the project portal nor the ICR
       (see also Section (8)(b) Quality of Bank Supervision below).
      The number of beneficiaries was expressed in the following manner: 900 persons benefited from
       temporary employment (original target 911, target almost achieved); and 3,775 residents from
       targeted neighborhoods who participated in social prevention programs (original target 13,004, target
       not achieved).



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To address risk factors of crime and violence in selected municipalities.


Rationale
Theory of Change: The PAD did not present a theory of change (ICR, paragraph 10). This PDO would
improve municipal capacity to manage citizen security interventions through training, technical assistance and
collaboration with independent experts. These prevention components of municipal and citizen plans provided
the framework for community investments and social prevention interventions funded by this project. Four
activities supported the achievement of this PDO for an integrated crime and violence prevention at municipal
and community levels. These were engaging residents of target neighborhoods in social prevention
programs, providing safe public spaces using the Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED),
building leadership and capacity for collective action, and developing and implementing instruments in target
municipalities. Outputs generated by these activities led to an understanding of the risk factors associated

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)



with crime and violence in selected municipalities. The CPTED used data on how lighting, barriers, and visual
or physical access elements exacerbate or discourage anti-social or violent behavior when developing
specifications for physical upgrading of built spaces (ICR, footnote 3). The outcome indicators do not appear
to directly measure the achievement of the PDO because the PDO would merely "address" rather than
"reduce" risk factors of crime and violence.

OUTPUTS:

      Geo-referenced community violence maps were produced (baseline 0, target 9 from the PAD, no
         information in the ICR on achievement)
        911 at-risk youth beneficiaries gained temporary employment (target 900, target achieved) paired with
         cognitive behavioral therapy programs. Annex 1 of the ICR reported this number at 300. Cognitive
         behavioral interventions paired with temporary employment created an entry point for working with
         young men who were overwhelmingly both perpetrators and victims of homicide. (ICR paragraph 41)
        13,004 residents (half of them female) from the target neighborhoods participated in social prevention
         programs (original target 3,775, target exceeded). These programs included school- and family-based
         (Mile de Manos, Familias Fuertes), community leadership, conflict resolution, countering gender
         based violence, violence interruption, situational prevention, sports and recreation, community arts,
         and beautification.
        68.42 percent of residents in target communities report willingness to help each other (target 62.20
         percent, target exceeded). This provided evidence of greater collective action and social capital.
        86.95 percent of mothers and fathers reported greater knowledge and attitude towards positive
         discipline and communication with children (baseline 60.70 percent, original target 84.98 percent,
         target exceeded). This indicator provided evidence of improved relations within the family.
        15.40 percent of residents showed lower tolerance toward gender based violence (target 15 percent,
         target achieved). This provided evidence of positive change in attitude towards gender based
         violence.
        100 percent of community leaders participated in updating the community action plans (original target
         90 percent, target exceeded) as evidence of increased community empowerment.

OUTCOMES:

      Percent of students (Grades 4-9) reporting improved school climate in target schools increased from
       42.5 (baseline) to 76.6 percent (original target 51 percent, target exceeded). This indicator referred to
       increased students' connectedness with the schools they attended.
      The percent of residents who perceived that safety in their communities improved were mixed (see
       Table below, replicated from Figure 2 of the ICR, target not achieved). Of the nine target communities,
       three communities showed an increase in their perception of safety in two, the decrease was slight but
       in four communities, residents showed that they significantly felt less safe (target not achieved). In
       those communities where residents perceived an increase in safety, there was evidence of a
       substantial reduction of various forms of crime and violence such as drug trafficking, homicide, theft,
       robbery, and rape in the target areas although causality or attribution coul not be established at project
       closing because security concerns delayed the conduct of a project impact evaluation. The ICR
       provided additional data from surveys conducted at closing (July 2018) and post project (April 2019),
       which reflected on outcomes outside the PDO indicators (see ICR, paragraphs 26 and 27, and
       Annexes 6A and 6E).
             o
                                                                                                   Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)




               Response on Perceived Safety                    (In Percent)
               Location - Community                           Baseline      Project End
               La Ceiba - Danto                               48            64
               La Ceiba - Melgar 1                            62            64
               La Ceiba - Melgar 2                            60            45
               El Progreso - Palermo                          51            73
               El Progreso - Policarpio                       69            27
               El Progreso - Fatima                           76            73
               Choloma - Ceden                                87            82
               Choloma - 11 de Abril                          54            36
               Choloma - Infon                                83            73
      Participant at-risk youth reported improved self-esteem after receiving temporary jobs and
       psychosocial support in selected communities (ICR, Annex 1). According to the ICR (paragraphs 29-
       31), there was no end-of-project data available for this indicator because the final round of the impact
       evaluation surveys covering this indicator was not completed because of the fall out caused by the
       non-payment of stipends of the participating youth (target not achieved).



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve its capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The PAD did not present a theory of change (ICR, paragraph 10). This particular
objective was a standby immediate response mechanism to access financial resources in case of an eligible
emergency. Approved rapid disbursement mechanisms needed to be in place and would be tested by its
implementation by the number of weeks a disbursement would take.

OUTPUT: An Operations Manual for contingent emergency response was approved, meeting target. This
Manual provided a mechanism for rapid disbursement if requested by the Government following an eligible
emergency (ICR, paragraph 33).

OUTCOMES: The Government adopted the Operations Manual for the Immediate Response Mechanism that
provided for rapid access to financial resources in case of an eligible emergency. The mechanism itself was
not activated during the project because there was no emergency but the outcome target indicator (the time
taken to disburse funds requested by Government of Honduras for an eligible emergency) was considered
substantially achieved.




                                                                                                  Page 8 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            There were five PDO outcome indicators. Two were achieved at project closing, another showed mixed
                            results, and the other had no available data to assess outcome at closing. While the fifth outcome was
                            contingent on activating the rapid response mechanism, the outcome remained substantial because the
                            Operations Manual governing the Immediate Response Mechanism in case of an eligible emergency was
                            adopted and in place. Nevertheless, the efficacy is rated modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                               Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                Insufficient evidence


    5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency: At appraisal, a benefit cost analysis used a discounted rate of 12 percent
   over a 10 year period and reached a benefit cost ratio of 1.28. Benefits were derived from monetary values of
   losses averted by the interventions both at individual and community levels. These were reduced victimization
   rates (homicides, sexual violence, injuries and thefts) with savings from reduced health related treatment
   (emergency, out-patient, in-patient), police, judicial, and prison costs, value of lost property saved (because of
   averted thefts and crime-related injuries); reduced public school dropout rates (reduced losses in investments in
   human capital by increasing investments in national public education, reduced losses in future employment
   earnings by showing returns from one additional year of education), and reduced demand for goods and
   services associated with a reduced loss in future employment earnings (ICR, Annex 4, paragraph 2). Costs were
   the direct expenses and investments for the interventions. At closing, benefit cost ration was at 1.59. This ratio
   was reached using the same methodology at appraisal (12 percent discount rate over a 10 year period) but
   limiting benefit estimates to the impact from reduced homicides. When the these benefit estimates were at
   combined with those from interventions addressing school dropouts, and only over a five year rather than a 10
   year period, the benefit cost ratio registered at 1.05.

   Administrative and Operational Efficiency: Slow disbursement and initial delays marked early
   implementation. A new Government took office in 2014, introduced reorganization, and reversed certain policies
   of the previous regime. The reorganization resulted in weakening project ownership by the Ministry of Security
   (Secretaria de Estado en el Despacho de Securidad or SEDS). A policy was reversed that transferred from the
   municipalities to the central government the managing and collecting of the security tax, eliminating a source
   of municipal financing for crime and violence prevention (ICR, paragraph 17). Fiscal constraints required a
   lowering of disbursement targets (ICR, paragraph 48). An audit uncovered a long standing procurement practice
   that was not eligible under the Financing Agreement leading to a fiduciary process just as the project was
   winding down (see Section (9)(b) below). Corrective measures led to delays in implementation, including the
   payment of stipends to at-risk youth participating in temporary work programs and cognitive behavioral training
   (ICR, paragraph 57). Incomplete documentation of safeguards compliance at the sub-project level were noted

                                                                                                                          Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)



(see Section (8)(b) above). Implementation risks were not adequately assessed. Mitigating action to address
risks that arose during implementation were not taken. Government commitment to provide counterpart
financing was not met. However, one outcome of the project was the robust participation by the beneficiaries in
the planning and implementation of interventions at the community level (ICR, paragraph 47). By 2016,
communities confidently recalibrated interventions to suit their specific needs. In some communities, they also
pursued accelerated disbursements to promote trust among beneficiaries.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       60.00
 Appraisal                                                   1.28
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       63.60
 ICR Estimate                                                1.59
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective is rated high. The efficacy of both objectives 1 and 2 are rated modest. The efficacy
of objective 3 is rated substantial. Efficiency is rated modest. Following the guidelines, the project outcome is
rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following, identified at appraisal and evident at closing, continue to pose risks to the sustainability of
project outcomes:

      Financial Viability Risk: There was risk that project interventions would not be sustained unless
        funds were made available through regular fund transfers to the implementing entities at the local
        level. This risk was mitigated by the expectation that receipts from the security tax would continue to
        funneled to the municipalities. The 2014 election of a new government reversed this policy. Funds
        from tason de seguridad were not transferred to the municipalities. This risk remained after project
        closing. However, in some cases, such as in the three communities in Choloma, residents built upon

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)



        the social cohesion introduced by the project by continuing to organize sports tournaments and
        festivals. These residents mobilized their own resources and tapped external support to complete the
        physical works that were unfinished by project closing.
       Institutional Support and Government Commitment Risk: There was a risk that staff from the
        Project Implementation Units who have been trained and who could be a resource to sustain efforts
        started under the project would not be retained. This risk was mitigated by the project design that
        called for the staff of the PIU to be absorbed by government institutions evidenced by adequate
        budget allocated for this purpose. The ICR reported that budgets were made available but only to
        cover the grace period after project closing and final disbursement. At the municipal level, those who
        have received training in conflict and violence prevention were also expected to be covered by
        municipal budgets. Without the fund transfers from the taxes noted above, this risk remained
        unaddressed. The ICR indicated that none of the experts were covered by the municipal budgets
        because of lack of funds.
       Other Stakeholder Ownership Risk: There was a risk that the planning for Operation and
        Maintenance (O&M) and the committees that support these at the sub-project levels may not remain
        after project closing. The ICR reported that all three communities - La Ceiba, El Progreso, and
        Choloma) have indeed put O&M plans in place and the committees remained functioning after project
        closing (ICR, Annex 6E). In addition, El Progreso hired the three SASA! staff (coordinator and two
        promotors) indicating continuing plans to continue the interventions introduced by the project in their
        three participating communities and roll out SASA! to the rest of the municipality. World Vision has
        also stepped up its support to participatory planning in El Progresso as part of the municipality's
        budgeting process.
       Security Risk: The security risk was noted during the stakeholder consultations following project
        closing, in April 2019. There was no further information in the ICR about this risk.
       Economic Risk: High unemployment and the resulting economic conditions this brings continue to
        challenge the communities that participated in this project even as they expressed interest in
        improving access to livelihoods and building skills using the community centers that were recovered
        or rehabilitated public space under the project. In the CEDEN neighborhood, in Choloma people
        conducted workshops to pass on the training they received in baking and haircutting to other
        residents. In La Ceiba, residents obtained USAID funding to continue to conduct livelihood
        workshops. Nevertheless, with a lack of stable employment residents continue to consider migration.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project components were designed to achieve the project objective. These components included
  capacity building at both the national and local levels in creating the violence and crime prevention
  framework; the grants directed at municipalities to implement a menu of social interventions at the
  community level, engaging recipients through participatory methods, and ensuring that data inform
  planning and decision making in customizing an approach to reduce crime and violence in the target
  neighborhoods. Coming from implementing the Barrio Ciudad project, the assessed capacity of the
  implementing entity rested on previous staff continuing into the project. Government committed
  counterpart resources based on an existing policy that receipts from taxes on security would reach the


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)



  municipality. Project design rested on five lessons from the Bank financed Barrio Ciudad project as well
  as global good practice on violence prevention. These five lessons (ICR, paragraph 45) were:

        (i) municipalities were in a position to lead customized crime and prevention efforts that respond
           to local conditions;
          (ii) social capital and cohesion were strengthened by engaging the community;
          (iii) sustainability of efforts rested on the availability of a national policy framework and support to
           quality control of local processes;
          (iv) Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED)-led infrastructure interventions
           provide credible entry points in target neighborhoods;
          (v) crucial types of violence in disadvantaged communities involved families, schools, and the
           community.

  New features were added to project design built on these lessons. These were (ICR, paragraph 9):

        (i) strengthening the capacity of the national government to coordinate violence prevention
           activities across ministries and local governments;
        (ii) enhancing the capacity of local governments by using geo-referenced data to prepare violence
           prevention components in their respective Municipal Coexistence and Citizen Security Plans;
        (iii) adding social interventions to strengthen the menu of subprojects eligible for financing. As a
           result, implementation shifted to the communities, accompanied by intensified support from the
           project teams.

  However, implementation risks were insufficiently assessed (ICR, paragraph 46). For example, the
  fiduciary staff from the Barrio Ciudad project who were expected to join this project did not do so. Staff
  profile of the project staff assigned to coordinate and provide technical quality control for civil works,
  social intervention, and policy coherence did not reflect the complexity of the services to be provided.
  Accountability mechanisms in procurement was flagged as a weakness at appraisal. This weakness
  would be mitigated by guidance from the project's operations manual. The overall risk rating did not
  include the possibility of a difference in approach to address controversy such as policy reversal, or a
  possible decline in the Bank's role in donor coordination or leading a policy dialogue (ICR, bullet 3,
  paragraph 46) (see Bank Supervision below). There were shortcomings in the M&E design (see Section
  (9)(a) below) as evident from a lack of a governing Theory of Change.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR, the Bank team did not adequately provide safeguard and fiduciary supervision.
 Documentation of Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental and Social
 Management Plans (ESMPs), and consultation processes at the sub-project level (ICR, paragraph 55)
 were lacking. Supervision inputs and processes were marked by semi annual missions and acknowledged
 to have provided robust technical support to specific violence prevention interventions. However,
 consistency in approach may have been adversely affected by having four different task team leaders

                                                                                                         Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)



 manage the project over the five year implementation period. The focus on development impact also
 appeared to be insufficient. Risks were not updated as was established as good practice when
 implementing projects in Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV) settings. The risks posed by the following
 events during implementation - (i) fiscal constraints reduced the project's disbursement target; (ii) a newly
 elected Government after the project was made effective reversed a policy decision to share with
 municipalities revenues from the security tax, a main source of funds for the violence prevention
 components of municipal plans; and (iii) complementary investments were reallocated (such as the
 integrated justice centers that was funded by the Inter American Development Bank and Switzerland's
 Agency for Development and Cooperation or COSUDE) or unsuccessfully implemented (the State and
 Peace Building Fund or SPF grant) - did not trigger a need to update mitigation mechanisms of risks that
 were not identified during preparation. Inadequate attention was paid to compliance with procurement
 mechanisms as evident of the continued practice of procuring goods by "shopping method" that was going
 on for years and only indirectly detected by an audit review and triggered extensive fiduciary review in
 2018, as the project was winding down (ICR, paragraphs 46 and 48). According to the ICR, there were
 significant shortcomings in engagement during the last year of implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Fondo Hondureno de Inversion Social (FHIS or Honduran Social Investment Fund) was the project
 implementing agency. At appraisal, M&E was designed with a rigorous impact evaluation developed in
 partnership with the World Bank's Development Impact Evaluation Initiative (DIME) together with the
 Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Honduras (UNAH or the National Autonomous University of Honduras)
 (PAD, paragraph 33). FHIS, IUDPAS and UNAH would collect quantitative and qualitative data from project
 reports, community perception and victimization surveys. Data would be be disaggregated by gender to the
 extent possible. Progress reports would be prepared for management use. Aside from capturing the
 outputs and changes in processes that accompanied the strengthening of institutional capacity, the M& E
 system also outlined a plan for impact evaluations - for the overall project and for specific
 interventions. The results framework was not accompanied by an explicit Theory of Change. The original
 outcome indicators were unclear and did not encompass all outcomes of the PDO. Intermediate results
 indicators inadequately captured its contributions to the PDO outcome indicators. These shortcomings
 were corrected during the 2016 restructuring, except for the second PDO wording regarding "addressing"
 rather than "reducing" risks.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)



b. M&E Implementation
  The project did not finance any impact evaluations (ICR, paragraph 16). Financing for impact evaluation
  was not in place before Board approval. Subsequently, the timing and scope of the impact evaluation was
  reduced in ambition. The only impact evaluation conducted financed separately, focused on one
  intervention (at-risk youth). An overall project impact evaluation was not completed as planned. During
  the 2016 restructuring, the Results Framework was revised to show a clear theory of change aligned with
  the global best practice Ecological Model for violence prevention. The World Health Organization
  established this model in 2002. The Government adopted this model as its organizing framework (ICR,
  paragraph 19). The revised PDO outcome indicators included the increased perception of residents'
  safety in target communities, decrease in student absenteeism and drop out rates, improved self-esteem
  for at-risk youth beneficiaries, and increased satisfaction with the implementation of community action
  plans for violence prevention (ICR, Annex 6A).

  The institutional relationships among FHIS, IUDPAS, and SEDS were not codified early resulting in a lack
  of shared timetable, causing data lags at key points of the project implementation. The weak quality of
  available firms that would conduct the type of survey work needed for the various elements of the M&E
  system contributed to the baselines not being completed early enough. Baselines were available for two
  of the four PDO indicators while one indicator's baseline was conducted during implementation to
  represent a mid-line rather than a baseline (ICR, paragraph 32). The Bank team also did not sufficiently
  engage with the PIU to capture methodological errors early on that would have averted the slow down in
  data collection and usage when other implementation disruptions competed for attention. These
  disruptions caused a ripple effect that made some communities inaccessible for surveys resulting in late
  or no end-of-project data (ICR, paragraph 50).

  A significant shortcoming in M&E implementation was the Bank team's failure, even after three
  restructuring and accompanying clearances, to update the internal Bank system with the PDO outcome
  indicator targets and intermediate results indicators that the implementing agency diligently monitored
  and reported on (ICR, paragraph 51).



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were communicated to the various stakeholders. The PIU used the M&E system as well as
  community engagement and social mobilization processes to generate information about project
  implementation. The project M&E system created capacity in municipal violence observatories,
  strengthened SEDS collaboration with IUDPAS, trained and supported community members and leaders
  to generate local violence maps. As a result, beneficiaries absorbed the capacity to use the evidence
  from the data on crime and violence the communities generated. The participatory nature of designing
  and implementing interventions in the target neighborhoods positively affected the shift in
  implementation. The ICR noted that the communities did not wait for restructuring to make changes to
  adapt interventions that suited local needs. Disbursements were even accelerated as communities
  became satisfied with initial investments as credible efforts to engage with them (ICR, paragraph 47).
  M&E data provided evidence of achievement of outcomes.

  The significant weaknesses in the design (unclear indicators) and implementation of the M&E system
  (lack of government counterpart to finance the impact evaluations), the lack of baseline surveys, made it
  difficult to assess the achievement of the stated objectives and test the links in the results chain.


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards: At appraisal, the project was assigned an Environmental
   Category B for the purposes of OP/BP4.01, which required a partial environmental assessment. At
   appraisal, the target communities and neighborhoods had not yet been identified. The project triggered two
   safeguard policies - OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples and OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. The Social
   Assessment found the presence of traditional Garifuna communities in La Ceiba. An Indigenous and Afro
   Descendant Peoples Planning Framework was prepared. Community works may require potential
   acquisition of empty plots. A Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared. At appraisal, there were no
   resettlement of households, businesses, or persons, nor restriction of access to natural resources. A strong
   community participation led to a successful grievance redress mechanism (GRM). At project closing, there
   was one outstanding complaint in the GRM system related to unpaid stipends for youth participants in the
   temporary employment activities. The ICR reported that the complaint was resolved by May 17, 2019 with
   the full payment of outstanding stipends. Compliance with environmental and social safeguards was rated
   satisfactory (ICR, paragraph 55).

   Two resettlements occurred during the construction of the El Mirador Recreational Plaza (in which
   community) - (i) a family of a water valve operator who was living in a water control station within the project
   site; and (ii) a structure used by a local church for its activities was lost. An abbreviated resettlement plan
   was prepared and caused implementation delays.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: Financial management concerns with regard to partial and poor audit delivery
   were raised by the time of the Mid Term Review in May 2015. In addition, the Bank found US$0.63 million
   ineligible for financing under the project because fiduciary processes did not comply with the Bank's
   Procurement and Consultant's Guidelines specified in the Financing Agreement. This resulted in delayed
   payments of stipends and project implementation (ICR, paragraph 57).

   Procurement: Appraisal noted a weakness in the lack of accountability mechanisms for procurement in
   the Fondo Hondureno de Inversion Social (FHIS or the Honduran Social Investment Fund). The project
   team planned mitigating measures to be included in the project's Operations Manual. Staff in FHIS and the
   municipalities involved in procurement would be guided by this manual. There was no mention of
   training since at appraisal, the FHIS extensive experience with Bank policies from implementing Barrio
   Ciudad were expected to transfer to this project. Appraisal noted the strategy to ring fence the PIU from
   the rest of FHIS to facilitate project implementation. However, the official Procurement Plan did not include
   the "shopping" mechanism used by a unit of FHIS that went on undetected until an audit review. US$0.63


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)



   million was found ineligible under the project because it did not use the Bank's Procurement and
   Consultant Guidelines specified under the Financing Agreement. Corrective measures were then
   implemented through a fiduciary process begun in 2018, as the project was closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presented nine lessons to consider at design stage that could help strengthen future similar
project interventions in Fragility, Conflict, and Violence settings. IEG added one more cited
elsewhere in the ICR but equally important (ICR, paragraph 31). Some of these lessons are
presented below:

      A robust Theory of Change may strengthen risk assessment. This project did not have
         an initial Theory of Change at design stage. One was established at restructuring. A robust
         Theory of Change would have provided a means to assess shocks during implementation
         such as the ones encountered in this project. For example, the reversal of policy regarding
         the source of municipal financing of its localized violence prevention interventions, loss of
         leadership in the country policy dialogue, and fiduciary issues may have triggered corrective
         measures or strategies to avoid slowing down implementation since these points were
         methodically monitored as part of Implementation Status Reporting. There could be early
         warning signals incorporated into the results framework that address compliance with Bank
         policies at the sub-project level (e.g., safeguards, procurement) to avoid disrupting the trust
         momentum established among project beneficiaries. In this project, the expenses associated
         with the ineligible procurement method resulted in a fiduciary process that delayed the
         release of stipends to at-risk youth who were participating in interventions designed to foster
         their return to the community. Beneficiaries were not mollified by promises to quickly resolve



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)



         this issue. Grievance Resolution Mechanisms could also be used to provide frequent
         feedback for better communication on how issues were being resolved.
        Periodic review of the country context in fragile, conflict, and violence settings may
         provide an opportunity to redouble efforts to achieve the PDO. This was the first World
         Bank funded standalone violence prevention project. The challenges it faced during
         implementation compounded its achieving the PDO. For example, a change in government
         would have triggered a lookout for any policy or incentive changes, or movements among
         alliances who have a stake in the outcome of the project to alert on possible implementation
         hiccups. Appropriate strategies could be adopted in a timely fashion to ensure the project
         achieved its intended results. In addition, periodic review could point to adding resources for
         staff support in communications and partnerships particularly when the project requires a
         multi-sector coordination.
        Limiting a menu of different kinds of interventions to balance cost effectiveness with
         community demand may lend to measurable impact on violence prevention. For
         example, to recover public space, options that use CPTED methodology could be limited to a
         few that directly provide causal relations with reduced violence in a target neighborhoods.
         Adding longer term elements to assisting at risk youth (e.g., credit, apprenticeships,
         internships) may provide greater impact. A social sense of belonging and agency are also
         important considerations in assisting at risk youth (ICR, paragraph 31).



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was concise and followed OPCS Guidelines. Analysis was based on available data. Evidence were
from credible surveys conducted at closing. Outcomes of these surveys were adequately presented in the
Annex (ICR, Annex 6). Reasons provided on the shortcomings of the M&E design and its implementation were
candid. The incomplete data in Annex 1 was sufficiently explained. There was internal consistency in the report,
pointing to the shortcomings in M&E design and implementation in places such as the Significant Changes
During Implementation, as well as the M&E section of the report and the section on Bank Quality at Entry and
Supervision. Lessons were derived mostly from the shortcomings in monitoring and evaluating the project
outcomes - from the lack of baselines, to establishing targets, to collecting data - as well as the experience from
implementation, including the continued use of stipends for at-risk youth as part of their reengagement in the
community. There was a general story line a reader could follow. The gaps to better understand the overall
impact of the project because of the sensitivity accompanying the fiduciary investigations, and the lack of
baselines were supplanted by the surveys conducted. These provided qualitative impact of project outcomes in
strengthening the social sense of belonging and agency (having a level of control) from the target beneficiaries.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
HN Safer Municipalities (P130819)




                                                                  Page 18 of 18
