     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Innovative Access to Finance (P147183)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021943

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P147183                                      Innovative Access to Finance

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Turkey                                       Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84090                                   31-Dec-2018                                        238,194,371.85

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Jul-2014                                  31-Dec-2018

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            250,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             250,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         238,194,371.85                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo          John R. Eriksson               Christopher David Nelson       IEGFP (Unit 3)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   "The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve access to longer term Islamic finance and to
   factoring for small and medium enterprises and export oriented enterprises" Loan agreement (LA), p.5. The
   statement of the project objective in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) on p.5 is identical, and remained
   unchanged throughout the period of project implementation.

   Islamic finance is a financial system that operates according to the Islamic law. The concept of Islamic
   finance is based on core tenets of Islam concerning property rights, social and economic justice, wealth

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Innovative Access to Finance (P147183)



   distribution, and governance. One of the key features of the system is the prohibition of interest and
   ambiguous contracts or deals. However, just like conventional financial systems, Islamic finance features
   banks, capital markets, fund managers, investment firms, and insurance companies (PAD, p. 26).

   Factoring helps small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in the financing of their production cycle, overcoming
   challenges raised by long payment delays imposed by buyers. Factoring allows SMEs to overcome
   constraints related to collateral and limited credit history, presenting an important alternative to traditional
   bank loans. Factoring is also particularly important for exporting enterprises, helping overcome challenges
   related to international trade.

   The credit line, guaranteed by the Government, was to be intermediated by Turkiye Sinai Kalkinma Bankasi
   A.$. (TSKB) that on-lent/financed factoring company Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs). TSKB selected
   PFIs pursuant to criteria agreed between TSKB and the World Bank, and subject to no objection by the World
   Bank. Subsidiary Financing Agreements were signed between TSKB and factoring company PFIs, and the
   PFIs in turn sub-financed private SMEs and EOEs, the final beneficiaries of the credit line (PAD, p. 25&32).




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Project Single Component: A credit line to Turkiye Sinai Kalkinma Bankasi A.$. (TSKB) to on-
   lend and finance intermediation through participation banks and factoring Participating Financial
   Institutions (PFIs) to Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) and Export Oriented Enterprises (EOEs).
   (Cost at appraisal of US$250,0 million, actual cost of US$238.2 million).

   This single-component project focused on Islamic finance (a tranche estimated at US$160 million) and
   on factoring (a tranche estimated at US$90 million). The choice of a single component provides re-
   allocation flexibility against a limited number of Participation banks and increased financial markets
   uncertainty. The credit line, guaranteed by the Turkish government, was to be intermediated by TSKB,
   which was the Borrower and implementing agency for this project. TSKB was in turn to on-lend/finance
   PFIs, which can be participation banks and factoring companies. TSKB was to select PFIs pursuant to
   criteria agreed between TSKB and the World Bank, and subject to no objection by the World Bank. The
   selected PFIs were in turn to finance private small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and export-oriented
   enterprises (EOEs), the final beneficiaries of the credit line. The PFIs intended to assume the risk of the
   sub-beneficiaries who were to be selected based on agreed upon selection criteria. TSKB was to have
   exposure only to the selected PFIs and to assume the risk for on-lending/financing PFIs. At least 15 percent
   of the loan amount used for SME sub-financing was to be utilized for SME sub-projects in underserved
   priority regions. The main business lines were corporate finance and project investment with a small
   percentage of the TSKB operation focusing on advisory services, ranging from strategic financial
   consultancy, real estate appraisals to sustainability and environmental consulting.


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Innovative Access to Finance (P147183)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost: The cost amount totaled the equivalent US$238.2 million. The final disbursed amount was lower than
   the approved amount, because the loan was disbursed in two currencies (Euro and US$) which fluctuated
   during the period of project implementation. For instance, an appreciation of the Euro or the US$ against
   the Turkish Lira (TL) would result in the disbursement of a lower amount in US$ or in Euros.

   Financing: The operation was financed by an IBRD loan in the amount of US$250,0 million equivalent.
   Disbursed amount was only US$238.2 million, reflecting the impact of the exchange rate
   fluctuations between the US$, the Euro, and the Turkish Lira.

   Borrower Contribution: There was no borrower contribution, but the loan amount was guaranteed by the
   Republic of Turkey.

   Dates: The project was approved on July 22, 2014, made effective on December 04, 2014, and closed on
   schedule on December 31, 2018




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objective of the current World Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period of FY18-
FY21 is to help Turkey achieve more sustainable and inclusive growth. The focus areas of engagement of
the new CPF reflects the priorities identified in the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD), which are i)
growth, ii) inclusion and iii) sustainability. The project under review falls under the first group of growth,
under interventions that aim to improve access to finance for underserved markets.

The CPF identified the underserved segment of the economy as composed of people, and micro, small and
medium enterprises (MSMEs) and exporters reached with financial services. The CPF stressed that the
World Bank will continue to work with state banks, development banks and other financial institutions to
support their countercyclical and market-gap-filling functions, especially through providing long-term
financial sources. This included diversification of financial sector products and instruments, including
leasing, factoring, Islamic finance and other. The project targeted SMEs and exporter beneficiaries,
supported the development of factoring and Islamic finance, and set provision of longer-term funding to the
target beneficiary groups as the development objective. The PDO therefore aligned well with the objectives
of the current CPF.

This operation builds on the positive results generated by 12 previous credit lines provided by the World
Bank to Turkey, and this relationship with the Borrower is a testimony that the project scope was
appropriate, and everything was in place to help the project achieve its identified outcomes and objective.
However, the scope of the project in comparison to the country's needs in access to finance in this area
was rather limited. Based on the congruence between this project and the CPF, and building on



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Innovative Access to Finance (P147183)



               previous World Bank successful credit lines in Turkey, the relevance of objective is rated as substantial,
               reflecting the limited scope of the beneficiaries compared to the enormity of the country's needs.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access to longer term Islamic finance and to factoring for small and medium enterprises and
                             export-oriented enterprises.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change:

                             The PAD did not have an explicit theory of change, but the ICR constructed one (p.6-7) whose features are
                             as follows:

                             i. The project's results chain was articulated on the assumption that providing longer-term funding to a
                             number of participating banks, and factoring companies at maturities these financial intermediaries can’t get
                             on their own would encourage the PFIs to increase longer term financing to SMEs and expand factoring
                             against export receivables;

                             ii. The key inputs were as follows: (a) an IBRD loan was provided to an apex bank (TSKB), the latter being
                             responsible to on-lend the loan proceeds to eligible participating financial intermediaries (PFIs) composed
                             of participation banks and factoring companies, and (b) a reflow of the IBRD funding by TSKB at the same
                             terms and conditions as the IBRD loan;

                             iii. Expected outcomes included (a) an increased average maturity of participation banks' sub-financing
                             portfolios, and (b) an increased average maturity of factoring companies' portfolios under the project.

                             While the theory of change constructed by the ICR was sound in terms of its linkages between inputs and
                             outcomes, it would have been more robust if it had clearly identified expected outputs and intermediate
                             outcomes.




                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Innovative Access to Finance (P147183)



This review summarizes below the performance of results indicators provided in the ICR at project completion
in terms of outputs, outcomes, and impact:

Outputs

      With the project's support, TSKB staff were trained about the features of the Islamic banking and
         the transactions with factoring companies. This exposure helped TSKB to gain knowledge needed to
         reach out to more diversified real sector borrowers;
        Seven PFIs were involved in transactions in the Islamic banking and with factoring companies,
         exceeding by 17 percent the target of 6 PFIs identified at appraisal;
        The number of new active export finance accounts (not cumulative) was 639 at completion, while the
         number of active SME finance accounts (not cumulative) reached the level of 47,876. The volume of
         outstanding export finance portfolio, and that of outstanding SME finance portfolio amounted
         respectively to US$710 million and US$3,702 million respectively, but there was no baseline and no
         target for these indicators;
        The portfolio quality improved as portfolio at risk decreased from a baseline of 0.4 percent to 0.2
         percent at completion, but there was no target;
        While the volume of World Bank's loan was almost fully utilized (US$238.2 million was disbursed,
         against a target of US$250,0 million), the target of World Bank's support in terms of lines of
         credit extended to SMEs was only US$71.40 million, missing the target of US$150,0 million;
        The financial sustainability was mixed as return on assets fell from 2.8 percent at end-2013 to 2.3
         percent at end-June 2018, while return on equity increased from 17.9 at end-2013 to 18.4 percent at
         end-June 2018. On the contrary, compliance with prudential regulation improved and the target
         of SME sub-finance financing SME sub-projects in priority regions was exceeded, reaching 29 percent
         against a target of 15 percent.

Outcomes

      The ratio of the average maturity of Islamic sub-financing under the project was over three
         times that of the average maturity of the Islamic finance PFI's portfolio not financed under the
         project (a ratio of 3.5 against an original target of >1). This illustrates that the project enabled longer
         term funding to Islamic financing new customers in comparison to existing customers.

      The ratio of export factoring sub-financing in the factoring portfolio financed under the project, over the
         export factoring finance in the factoring portfolio not financed under the project reached 13.4 against
         the original target of >1. Factoring PFIs were bank subsidiaries and used to get very short-term
         funding from their parent companies, and in Turkey there was no factoring against export receivables.
         The project provided these companies with steady and longer-term funding, enabling them to better
         manage their cash flows and expand their customer base in the export-oriented enterprise sector
         (ICR, p.12).

Impact

      The number of export-oriented enterprises (EOE) financed by PFIs under the project increased
         significantly, reaching 127 against an original target of 30. The involved PFIs improved their
         capabilities as they gained exposure to international practices in financial evaluation and credit risk


                                                                                                        Page 5 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Innovative Access to Finance (P147183)



                                   assessment of borrowers and investment projects, and this sent a positive signal about the
                                   factoring PFIs to the market.

                                  The target of the number of SME beneficiaries financed by PFIs under the project was missed, as the
                                   project reported a number of 203 SME beneficiaries financed, against a target of 300 SMEs by project
                                   closure. However, there was no systematic data on the business-level impact both during project
                                   implementation, and this important aspect of project impact might have been overlooked, making it
                                   difficult to verify and validate the reported impact. The following paragraph provides some information
                                   on business-level impact, but it is neither systematic nor quantitative.

                                  The project team reported in the ICR under review (ICR, para 25) that the project enabled the above-
                                   mentioned SMEs and EOEs to achieve the following business-level impacts: increased sales,
                                   diversified business, expanded production capacity, upgraded technologies, and/or improved financial
                                   status. Moreover, the above enterprises added 488 new jobs, and the aggregate net sales of the 330
                                   beneficiaries was Turkish Liras (TL) 13.6 billion, while the aggregate exports of these
                                   companies reached TL5.9 billion.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project enabled longer term funding to Islamic financing new customers in comparison to existing
                            customers. Moreover, the project provided factoring companies with steady and longer-term funding,
                            enabling them to better manage their cash flows and expand their customer base in the export-oriented
                            enterprise sector. While the number of export-oriented enterprises (EOEs) financed by PFIs under the
                            project increased significantly, the target of the number of SME beneficiaries financed by PFIs under the
                            project was missed. Finally, the project reportedly enabled the above SMEs and EOEs to achieve increased
                            sales, diversified business, expanded production capacity, upgraded technologies, and/or improved financial
                            status.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating



                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Innovative Access to Finance (P147183)



  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
There were no ex-ante cost-benefit or EIRR/FIRR analyses for the line of credit operation and these analyses
were not prepared at the ICR phase either. Instead, the ICR provided some qualitative
and aggragated information related to the impact of the loan and the reflows of the PFIs’ principal repayments
and to the priority regions supported. However, the above information was appropriate to the project's efficacy,
externalities and impact rather than to the project's efficiency.

Administrative and implementation efficiency was rather satisfactory as the total project amount was fully
disbursed, and no restructuring was conducted during the period of project implementation. This reflects the
experience and knowledge acquired by World Bank teams, because over the previous 10 years, the Bank
provided 12 credit lines to Turkey, with the TSKB being the key partner. In most cases, the key objective of the
projects was to provide medium and long term finance focusing on SMEs and exporters, and performance of
those operations was overall satisfactory. The World Bank teams have developed a good mastery of this
financial instrument, and the dialogue with the borrower related to the financial product of credit lines has been
sustained over a decade.

While implementation efficiency was under control, the overall project's efficiency is rated as modest, because of
the limited effort by the implementing agencies to assess the project's economic and financial costs and benefits
generated by the project on the final beneficiaries.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Overall outcome achievement of the operation was moderately satisfactory. The relevance of the objective was
substantial, based on the congruence between this project and the CPF, and as the project drew from the
experience of multiple identical credit lines. Efficacy was substantial, as the IBRD loan was fully disbursed,

                                                                                                      Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Innovative Access to Finance (P147183)



and on-lent to PFIs, and then to banks, and the latter provided loans to SMEs and EOEs, which benefited from
increased average of the maturity of the loans they received from the intermediary banks. The project enabled
more than 203 SMEs and 127 EOEs to benefit from longer term loans in order to expand production or improve
product quality, which resulted in increased sales or diversified business lines. Project's efficiency was modest,
because of the absence of a methodology to better capture economic and financial costs and
benefits generated by the project in favor of beneficiary SMEs and EOEs.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Macroeconomic risks: The ICR reported that the main risk to the sustainability of the outcomes might be
the significantly increased volatility of the economy but this is outside the control of the Bank and the
team. Because of the economic volatility and the heightened political stress, there were already signs of
lower desire to invest in capital goods and weakened demand for foreign-currency denominated loans (ICR.
para 75). The main negative factor was the macroeconomic fluctuations (high current account deficit, high
inflation, overheating economy) and the consequent heightened market volatility during the second part of
the project implementation period. Domestic economic imbalances coupled with a challenging external
environment led to a dent in investor confidence in Turkish financial assets and a sharp slowdown in capital
flows to Turkey in 2018. Although market volatility in Turkey subsided in August 2018, the economic situation
remained fragile. The turbulences dampened SME capital investment and weakened the demand for USD
denominated funding. (ICR para. 52)

Financial risks: The financial risk of the project outcome was reduced because of the quality of the project
design. The ICR indicated (para 78) that the line of credit’s eligibility criteria of PFIs, sub-borrowers and sub-
projects, as well as the terms and conditions of subsidiary and sub-loans were based on financial and
commercial viability presented in the projects submitted by the SMEs and EOEs.

Overall, the risk to development outcome is assessed as moderate, as risks outside the borrower control are
balanced by the rigor exerted in establishing the eligibility criteria to accessing the resources of the credit
line.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Ahead of project approval, studies were carried out on the role of Islamic banking and factoring in the
  development of the SMEs sector and growth of exports. Moreover, lessons were filtered from the Bank’s
  previous lines of credit operations, especially with regard to PFIs, sub-borrower and sub-project eligibility
  criteria and single-borrower exposure limits, and this helped in the design of a simple and flexible
  project. Based on the above studies and lessons, the Bank decided to expand the longer-term funding


                                                                                                        Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Innovative Access to Finance (P147183)



  support to islamic banking and factoring. The inclusion of the reflow requirement in the legal covenants
  aimed to increase sustainability by injecting longer-term funding into the targeted markets.

  Because of ground experience derived from past involvement in similar operations, implementation
  arrangements were adequate and included: (i) the apex financial institution (TSKB), which was
  responsible for project implementation and was selected based on its experience in on-lending
  structures and with the World Bank, (ii) the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in TSKB was staffed with
  qualified personnel, and (iii) the PFIs were to be selected by TSKB based on their financial health, their
  capacity to extend sub-financing, and the World bank's no objection. Finally, while overall risk to the
  project performance was rated moderate, most of the identified risks were found to be of low
  category, including the project design and Implementing Agency risks.

  The following weaknesses were identified at appraisal, but could not be mitigated: (i) there was no
  planning for achieving and evaluating the development impact of credit line operations, such as what
  could be realistically achieved and how to define and monitor them, (ii) there was limited effort spent on
  strengthening the design of the results chain in order to better monitor, evaluate and assess the
  implementation progress and the final results, and (iii) there were no efforts made to quantify economic
  and financial flows arising from the project in terms of gains by key project stakeholders and
  beneficiaries.

  Overall, quality-at-entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory, as the impact of studies, lessons and
  experience in project design was reduced by weaknesses in identifying appropriate yardsticks
  to adequately capture results, impact and efficiency of the lines of credit.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 During the second part of the project implementation period, macroeconomic fluctuations and challenging
 external environment affected the investor confidence in Turkish assets and there was a sharp slowdown in
 capital flows to Turkey. Although market volatility subsided by the end of 2018, the economic situation
 remained fragile. These economic turbulences and political tensions dampened the SME capital
 investment and affected the demand for US$-denominated funding. (ICR para. 52).

 While there were three TTLs in the four years of project implementation, a core team member was located
 permanently in the country office and maintained regular contact with all stakeholders, and this helped
 smoothen out the negative impact of TTLs reshuffle. In the first two years of project implementation, the
 Bank task team regularly reviewed the PFIs’ financials, the PFIs’ compliance with the project’s legal
 covenants, and the problems affecting the demand for sub-loans. Finally, the ICR reported that the Bank
 team always assisted TSKB as needed, and the Bank colleagues supported promptly the country-based
 staff (ICR, para 68).

 ISRs were regularly prepared and updated the status of the results framework. However, the 2016
 ISR indicated that the number of SME borrowers was short of the original estimate by a large margin owing
 to problems in signing in SME sub-borrowers, but no restructuring was undertaken to address the problem

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Innovative Access to Finance (P147183)



 to facilitate the achievement of the relevant PDO indicator. Moreover, the Bank team identified additional
 deficiencies of the results framework and the dual currency structure of the IBRD loan, but did not request
 a more comprehensive restructuring once economic conditions improved during project implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E framework was better described in the PAD than in the ICR, and the ICR's constructed theory of
 change had weaknesses. In particular, the columns of the theory of change table showing outputs and
 intermediate outcomes (ICR, p.7) did not reflect what is described under the efficacy section of this
 review. The PAD identified in Annex 1 the PDO and intermediate indicators, which included SME finance
 core indicators for Bank-wide monitoring, and were to be monitored by the TSKB's PIU. The four PDO
 outcome indicators were relevant benchmarks for monitoring and assessing the progress towards the
 PDOs. The identified PDO and intermediate indicators were adequate to assess project performance, as
 they primarily targeted the maturity of loans extended using the project resources, and the number of
 beneficiary SMEs and EOEs. These indicators were measurable and achievable. The M&E data and
 information were to be supplied by the TSKB’s internal reports and from reports provided by the PFIs on a
 quarterly, semiannual and yearly basis.




b. M&E Implementation
  Progress toward the PDO was monitored through the ISRs and the aide-memoires prepared after each
  supervision mission, including the December 2016 Medium-term Review (MTR mission). Several aide-
  memoires were prepared after key supervision missions and eight ISRs were duly filed. Data on the
  results indicators were regularly updated in the ISRs.

  However, the 2016 ISR indicated that there were problems in signing in SME sub-borrowers while the
  number of EOE sub-borrowers exceeded the original target by a large margin. There were no reported
  actions undertaken to facilitate the achievement of the relevant PDO indicator. A project restructuring
  could have modified the results framework design and facilitate the pursuit of realistic indicators toward
  the achievement of the project outcome and objective.




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Innovative Access to Finance (P147183)



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reported that the findings presented in the ISRs were not acted upon timely and conclusively.
  While all ISRs contained updated data on the progress towards achieving the results, there were
  indicators that were off-track. The ICR indicated that ISRs did not "describe in more detail why there was
  little progress under one indicator or why some indicator was exceeded. If better prepared, the ISRs
  would have been a more useful tool to provide key management information on the status, the pending
  issues and the proposed actions" (ICR, p. 59). Overall, M&E reports could have been better used to
  improve the project performance toward expected outcomes.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as a Financial Intermediary (FI) category, as this was a case of
   investments of World Bank funds through a financial intermediary, in subprojects that may result in adverse
   environmental or social impacts. However, two safeguards policies were triggered for precautionary
   reasons as follows: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), and (ii) Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP
   4.11)

   Environmental issues of sub-borrowers and their sub-projects were to be addressed through the sub-
   finance environmental eligibility assessments, which were carried out in accordance with both the
   Government of Turkey Environmental Assessment Regulation and the World Bank operational
   policies. While Turkish environmental safeguards requirements were relatively stringent, they differed from
   those of the World Bank, particularly for physical expansion, as Turkish legislation does not mandate the
   preparation of an environmental management plan. Under the project, this “discrepancy” required the
   preparation of an Environmental Review Framework for the purpose of clarification and the provision of
   guidance to TSKB, PFIs and sub-borrowers.

   The ICR's assessment of environmental issues was thorough (ICR, para 62). The project funded working
   capital or investment finance applications, which included machinery purchase and replacement or small-
   scale construction works. The environmental review framework also included evaluation forms for
   assessing the environmental due-diligence of the existing facilities (SMEs), which applied for working capital
   or investment loans. The environmental review framework was successfully implemented throughout the
   project implementation, and no major construction works were financed during the project
   implementation as the project mainly financed the purchase of machinery for existing facilities.

   Overall, safeguards compliance was satisfactory, as no social or environmental issues were pending at
   project closure.




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Innovative Access to Finance (P147183)




b. Fiduciary Compliance


   Procurement: The ICR was rather spare in assessing project performance in
   the procurement management of the project (ICR para. 63). The PIU had the necessary technical capacity
   to ensure compliance with Bank procurement guidelines and to provide guidance as needed throughout
   project implementation. The Procurement Performance Rating & Summary prepared in mid-2018 rated
   procurement as satisfactory and in compliance with the procurement procedures set out in the legal
   agreement.

   Financial management: The project's FM performance was rated as highly satisfactory in January 2016
   and throughout the end of the project, as the project fully complied with the FM covenants, and TSKB had
   satisfactory systems in place for its apex management from application, to verification of documents and all
   the internal controls in between. The project audit reports were timely, and the auditors always issued
   unqualified opinions,consistent with Bank policyes and procedures.

   Overall, fiduciary compliance was satisfactory, mainly because the IBRD resources were managed by
   financial institutions staffed by experts and equipped with systems experienced in handling the flow of
   financial resources.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR did not identify any unintended impacts



d. Other
   The ICR did not identify any other issue of interest.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                        IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Innovative Access to Finance (P147183)




This review agrees with the following three lessons identified in the ICR and rephrased
below regarding the design and supervision of a line of credit operation:

      To warrant long term sustainability of the line of credit's outcome, commercial and
        financial viability needs to be at the core of the criteria of allocating loans to final
        beneficiaries. Using the line of credit’s eligibility criteria of PFIs, sub-borrowers and sub-
        projects, as well as the terms and conditions of subsidiary and sub-loans, allocation of credits
        to final project beneficiaries were based on financial and commercial viability of their
        undertakings. The project’s legal covenants helped to ensure sustained application of the
        criteria and the terms and conditions throughout project implementation.

      Toward capturing the development impact of the Bank's line of credit operation, there
        is a need to incorporate in the operation design a better approach of assessing the
        economic and financial efficiency of the operation. The assessment on development
        grounds of a line of credit should not stop at pumping longer-term funding into apex banks
        and PFIs, it should ensure that there is a rigorous assessment of the economic and financial
        costs and benefits accruing to the key involved stakeholders. Previous similar projects and
        this one have overlooked this aspect, and this has led to the weakening of the project's
        results chain and its efficiency assessment.

      For a credit line to respond to the borrower's needs, its supervision must
        incorporate a regular monitoring system of the developments affecting the country's
        and international financial markets. Both national and international financial markets tend
        to be continuously volatile. The supervision of a line of credit needs to monitor market
        developments, the financial health and eligibility of PFIs, and the quality of Bank-funded
        portfolios and the resulting impact on end-borrowers, in order to take timely responses when
        needed. This requires follow-up meetings with PFIs and field visits of end borrowers, as well
        as timely reporting of the main issues found and their resolutions for better management
        information.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  This is the 13th IBRD credit line to Turkey during the last 10 years. A PPAR aimed at assessing the impact of
  these operations on the Turkish financial sector in general, and the SMEs in particular is more than warranted.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Innovative Access to Finance (P147183)



The ICR provides a fair and concise picture of the operation's design and implementation. The ICR also
provides factual evidence of the project's efficacy, which is articulated around (i) the theory of change
constructed by the ICR, and (ii) the achieved targets of the PDO and intermediate indicators. Both the theory of
change and the achievements of the results framework indicators are the key elements illustrating the use
of IBRD loans to achieve outcomes in terms of loans maturity and access. The identified lessons are sound
and were derived from the experience of project implementation. The ICR under review drew from the
Borrower's ICR, whose a summary was included in Annex 5, which highlighted (i) the PIU work completed in
the areas of data collection and consolidation, (ii) the TSKB organization, and (iii) the assessment of the
borrower's performance.

The ICR had the following weaknesses: (i) the constructed theory of change could have been improved by
harmonizing the identified outputs and intermediate outcomes with those identified under the efficacy section of
this review (Section 4), (ii) Annex 1 on the results on intermediate outcome targets lacked the needed
comments and comparison between the achieved results and the targets, and (iii) the Annex 3 on the project
cost by component was not updated. Upon request by IEG, the two annexes were updated and finalized by the
ICR team and shared with IEG.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
