     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0021930

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P096021                                     IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                       Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-77920                                  30-Jun-2015                                           191,534,537.66

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Oct-2009                                 31-Mar-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            320,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                             191,534,537.66                                                 0.00

 Actual                                         191,534,537.66                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero         Peter Nigel Freeman          Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p.5), and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 17),
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) of this project was "to provide better quality, capacity, and safe
   roads to users in a sustainable manner through enhanced institutional capacity of the Andhra Pradesh
   government in the road sector." This review will assess the achievements of the following objectives:

           to provide better quality, capacity, and safe roads to users in a sustainable manner


                                                                                                      Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)



          to enhance institutional capacity of the provincial government in the road sector

   The following were the original key PDO outcome indicators (PAD, paragraph 18):

          improvement in the share of the Core Road Network (CRN) in good condition,
          reduction in vehicle operating costs, travel time, and fatality rates per vehicle km travelled.
          full operationalization of the Road Development Corporation (RDC) with adequate financial and human
           resources to manage the CRN, and
          ability to launch PPP projects was added as a key outcome indicator



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Road Improvement (US$606.79 million at appraisal, US$526.20 million actual) This component was to
   finance two activities to upgrade and maintain the Core Road Network (CRN) by: (i) upgrading about 429
   km of priority state highways (284 km in Phase I and 145 km in Phase II) using public sector financing, and
   (ii) funding the Long-term Performance-based Maintenance Contract (LTPBMC) to conduct maintenance of
   6,241 km of the CRN.

   2. PPP Facilitation Support (US$3.07 million at appraisal, US$1.20 million actual) This component
   financed activities to strengthen the capacity of Andhra Pradesh Road Development Corporation (APRDC)
   to attract private sector participation in financing, development, and management of selected high traffic
   density corridors. This component financed the costs of transaction advisers to assist APRDC to carry out
   feasibility studies and to develop and transact selected PPP roads and (b) capacity building of APRDC to
   better identify, structure, award, and monitor PPP projects.

   3. Institutional Strengthening (US$16.54 million at appraisal, US$9.60 million actual) This component
   financed targeted technical assistance, training, and advisory services to (i) operationalize APRDC with
   requisite capacity to manage the CRN and PPP projects and (b) various aspects of project implementation
   management including the Asset Management Program, Governance and Accountability Action Plan
   (GAAP), and Institutional Strengthening Action Plan (ISAP).

   4. Road Safety. (US$18.65 million at appraisal, US$12.00 million actual) This component financed two
   activities to help the Government of Andhra Pradesh provide safer road corridors by assisting the
   concerned agencies to initiate road accidents reduction measures: (i) institutional and policy action plans for
   improving responsibility and capacities, and (ii) demonstration projects on selected CRN corridors including
   the implementation of a black spot improvement program. A black spot referred to sites where road traffic
   accidents were historically concentrated.




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost at appraisal was US$645.06 million. Disbursements reached
  US$549.00 million.

  Financing: The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) financed this project with
  a loan of US$320 million of which US$191.5 million was disbursed.US$56 million was cancelled in March
  2014 and another US$25 million in April 2017 (see Dates below). The balance of the loan was cancelled.

  Borrower Contribution: The Government committed and disbursed counterpart funds of US$325.86
  million

  Dates: The project was approved on October 15, 2009 and made effective March 23, 2010. The Mid Term
  Review (MTR) was conducted on October 8, 2012. The original closing date was June 30, 2015. The
  project was extended by 45 months and closed on March 31, 2019. There were six (6) level 2
  restructurings:

        On March 3, 2014 to cancel US$56 million in savings due to exchange rate gains.
        On February 26, 2015 to reallocate funds between disbursement categories. In March, 2014, Andhra
           Pradesh was divided into two - Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. Funds were reallocated to
           accommodate the implementation of the project in two distinct states. In December 16, 2014, the
           borrower informed the World Bank of the enactment of Andhra Pradesh’s Reorganization Act 2014,
           thus carving out Telangana State (Telangana) from Andhra Pradesh. Consequently the activities
           and the outcomes remained unchanged, but indicators were divided for Components 1 and 2 and
           duplicated for Components 3 and 4 between the two states.
          On April 7, 2017 to amend the results framework, revise components, reallocate among
           disbursement categories and cancel financing. The project was adversely affected by (a) political
           uncertainties of the Bifurcation Act, (b) adoption of a new Land Acquisition and Resettlement Act, (c)
           inferior performance of some road upgrading packages leading to the termination and/or rebidding of
           three of the nine packages, and (d) lagging progress for Components 3 and 4.10 Restructuring
           included (a) adding a new implementation agency for the new state of Telangana; (b) deleting the
           Kakinada-Rajahmundry upgrading package (KR-07) from the scope of the project (62 km) because
           of prolonged land acquisition; (c) cancelling the corresponding US$25 million; and (d) extending the
           project closing date by 23 months, from June 30, 2015 to May 31, 2017. The restructuring led to
           changes in the RF and legal covenants: (a) revision of intermediate outcome and core indicators for
           Component 1 and (b) reduction of the target indicator number of PPP roads from three to two as one
           of the roads was reclassified from a state to a national highway.
          On May 25, 2017 to At the request of the GOAP and the Government of Telangana (GOT)—and
           following the satisfactory fulfillment of long outstanding environmental and safeguard issues—the
           World Bank granted the subject project an additional extension to December 31, 2018, which was
           needed to allow for the completion of project activities
          On July 28, 2017, the project was extended to December 31, 2018, to change targets in the results
           framework and complete project activities.
          On November 29, 2018 to extend to March 31, 2019 and reallocate funds between disbursement
           categories to complete activities under Components 1, 3, and 4.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The transport sector in the state of Andhra Pradesh, together with telecommunication and tourism form
close to half of the state's gross domestic product. The state has 188,568 km of roads. The Roads and
Building Department (RBD) managed 68,510 km of these. Municipalities managed the rest . About 41,000
km of the RBD-managed roads were state highways and major district roads. In 1997, the state designated
its Road Development Corporation to manage a Core Road Network consisting of 10,000 km of the 41,000
km. In 2001, Andhra Pradesh ratified the 2001 Infrastructure Act to define areas of cooperation between the
government (public sector) and the private sector through public private partnerships (PPPs). Andhra
Pradesh undertook improvements in the road network using its own resources, accessed the Central Road
Fund of the Government of India, as well as domestic and international borrowings. In this regard, the PDO
was relevant to the sector and the state's efforts at providing better quality, improved capacity in the sector
and safer roads.

Meanwhile, the RDC lacked capacity to develop, manage, and maintain capital improvements and PPP
projects. Road safety was becoming a burgeoning concern as more vehicles were now on the road, bad
driving behavior such as speeding was on the rise, and coordination among the various road safety
agencies at the local, state, and national levels was wanting. The PDO was relevant to the state's efforts to
increase investments, promote safety, and coordinate among the various transport agencies to achieve an
efficient transport sector that would be contribute to economic growth.

The PDO was relevant to the Government's implementation of its Governance and Accountability Action
Plan (GAAP) and Institutional Strengthening Action Plan (ISAP) designed to enhance systems, procedures,
and processes before, during, and after project implementation. GAAP and ISAP were designed to help
Road Development Corporations to improve information disclosure and transparency in project
implementation, better quality control measures, third party monitoring, and include citizens inputs and
complaints using mandatory user satisfaction surveys.

The PDO remained relevant to the country's development program (12th Five Year Development Plan,
2012-2017) to achieve faster, sustainable, and more inclusive growth. The PDO contributed to the
Government's strategic objectives of improved transport connectivity in targeted states. These
improvements included connecting all villages with all weather roads and upgrading national and state
highways to the minimum two lane standard (indicator 16 of 25 core indicators of the plan).

The PDO was also relevant to the World Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2018-2022, which
promoted three focus areas: (i) promoting resource efficient growth, (ii) enhancing competitiveness and
enabling job creation, and (iii) investing in human capital. Under the second focus area, the PDO was
relevant to item 2.3 to improve connectivity and logistics. This focus area stipulated that the Government
continue to pursue policies aimed at strengthening public sector institutions, improve implementation
capabilities, target connectivity constraints by supporting road development and maintenance, and
strengthen private sector participation.

The PDO remained relevant even as the state was divided into Andhra Pradesh and Telangana in 2014.
The new state of Telangana mirrored the institutional set up of Andhra Pradesh in the road sector and the
project components were spread between the two states. In sum, the problem being addressed was clearly
identified in the state's transport sector strategy, the PDO provided an adequate response to that problem

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)



               even as the transport sector issues were spread across two different states. There was only with minor
               misalignments with regard to the capacity of the new state of Telangana.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             - to provide better quality, capacity, and safe roads to users in a sustainable manner

                             Rationale
                             The Theory of Change was premised on using two activities - road improvement and road safety - to achieve
                             better quality, better capacity, and safer roads. Road improvements would be achieved by upgrading priority
                             state highways and maintenance of the core road network using Long Term Performance and Maintenance
                             Contracts (LTPRMCs). Road safety would include demonstration projects showcasing measures that would
                             reduce road accidents, adoption of road safety action plans, and initiation of a black spot improvement
                             program. These outputs would lead to declines in the cost of vehicle maintenance, reduce travel time for
                             passengers, and reduce the number of fatalities from road accidents in the demonstration corridors.

                             OUTPUTS:

                                        274 km of roads were efficiently upgraded
                                        Of the 10,820 km of total classified network 6,800 km in Andhra Pradesh and 4,020 km in Telangana,
                                           88 percent of the roads were in good and fair condition (baseline 40 percent, original target 80
                                           percent, target exceeded). Actual achieved percentage was calculated based on weighted average of
                                           actual value for Andhra Pradesh (90 percent) and Telangana (80 percent).
                                          328 km of roads (218 in Andhra Pradesh and 110 in Telangana) were upgraded efficiently and in an
                                           environmental and socially sustainable manner (baseline was 0, original target 429 km, revised target
                                           340 km, of which 230 km was in Andhra Pradesh, and 110 km in Telangana, combined target mostly
                                           achieved).
                                          6,018 km of roads under Long Term Performance Based Maintenance Contract (baseline 0, revised
                                           target 6,018 km of which 4,300 km in Andhra Pradesh, and 1,718 km in Telangana, target achieved)
                                          95 percent of the land was acquired and 59 percent of project affected persons were resettled and
                                           rehabilitated (baseline 0, target for land acquisition in Andhra Pradesh was 384 acres and 106.16
                                           acres in Telangana, target mostly achieved; baseline for resettlement and rehabilitation was 1, target
                                           for Andhra Pradesh was 2,792 persons and in Telangana was 310 persons, target not achieved)
                                          Improved 36 black spots in the Andhra Pradesh core road network and 8 black spots in Telangana
                                           core road network (baseline data collected and black spots identified, revised target was phase II


                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)



       implementation and evaluation, revised targets of 36 black spots in Andhra Pradesh and 10 black
       spots in Telangana, targets achieved for Andhra Pradesh and mostly achieved in Telangana).

OUTCOMES:

      Vehicle Operating Costs (VOC) was reduced for cars to INR 4.88 per vehicle km relative to the
       "without project" scenario or 8 percent reduction (baseline for cars, INR 5.41 per vehicle km, original
       target INR 4.76 per vehicle km or 12 percent reduction, target mostly achieved). For trucks, VOC
       was reduced to INR 9.59 per vehicle km or 8 percent reduction (baseline INR 11.85 per vehicle km
       and original target was INR 10.9 per vehicle km or 8 percent reduction, target achieved).
      Reduced travel time for bus passengers reduced by 23 percent to 8.30 hours (baseline 10.60 hours,
       original target 7.80 hours, or 26 percent reduction, target mostly achieved)
      The number of road accident fatalities per vehicle km traveled on demonstration corridors was
       reduced to 1.56 fatalities, in Andhra Pradesh 0.57 per km, in Telangana at 0.99 per km (baseline 2.08
       with Andhra Pradesh at 0.6 fatalities per km, Telangana at 1.48 fatalities per km, target 0.83 fatality
       per km, Andhra Pradesh at 0.47,Telangana at 0.36, target mostly achieved)
      80 percent of the core road networks were upgraded and maintained (baseline 40 percent, target 80
       percent, 92 percent in Andhra Pradesh and 80 percent in Telangana, achieving target)

With most of the outcome indicators for achieving better roads and safer roads, achieved or mostly achieved,
the efficacy under this objective was substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
• to enhance institutional capacity of the provincial government in the road sector.

Rationale
The Theory of Change was premised on implementing two activities to build institutional capacity in the road
sector. These were facilitating Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) and the institutional strengthening
components. PPP facilitation included activities that would strengthen the capacity of the government of
Andhra Pradesh to develop selected high density traffic corridors using PPP arrangement via toll revenues
and viability gap support from the central and state governments. PPP facilitation included (i) transaction
advisors to help carry out feasibility studies and develop and transact selected road projects as PPPs; (ii)
build capacity of the RDCs to identify, structure, award, and monitor PPP projects. Institutional strengthening
activities would provide technical assistance, training and advisory services to operationalize the Andhra
Pradesh Road Development Corporation, project implementation support to preparing and implementing an
Asset Management Program (AMP), a Government and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP), and Institutional
Strengthening Action Plan (ISAP). These outputs would lead to the RDC being fully operational with financial,
technical, and administrative resources to manage the Core Road Network and with the capacity to engage
the private sector to develop, finance, and manage road concessions.



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)



                            OUTPUTS:

                                  selected 2 roads for PPP transactions (baseline 0, original target 3, revised target 2, one each in
                                     Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, target achieved)
                                    Institutional Strengthening Action Plan (ISAP) studies and training needs assessment completed as
                                     targeted but only in Andhra Pradesh. The IT- Management Information System, Human Resource
                                     plan, environmental and social management plans were fully operational in Andhra Pradesh but not in
                                     Telangana.
                                    Government and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP) studies completed for Andhra Pradesh, as
                                     targeted but not achieved in Telangana (baseline, none, revised target disclosure and complaints
                                     handling operational, target achieved for Andhra Pradesh but not in Telangana).
                                    Annual maintenance plans were completed through the Road Management System (RMS), achieving
                                     target in Andhra Pradesh but not in Telangana.
                                    Demonstration projects were carried out in at least two road corridors achieving targets in both Andhra
                                     Pradesh and Telangana (one each) (baseline, 0)
                                    Comprehensive road safety functions, capacity, and action plans were in place (baseline, road safety
                                     lead agency established, formally revised target included new safety policy approved, institutional
                                     arrangements in place, and action plan implemented, target fully achieved in Andhra Pradesh and
                                     substantially achieved in Telangana).

                            OUTCOMES:

                                  Andhra Pradesh Road Development Corporation RDC was substantially operational with adequate
                                   financial and human resources to manage its Core Road Network (baseline, RDC not operational,
                                   original target RDC has its own staffing and adequate sources of revenue for CRN, target achieved),
                                  Telangana RDC was formed in 2017 following the division of Andhra Pradesh into two provinces -
                                   Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. At project closing, the Telangana RDC organizational structure and
                                   financing arrangements were still under examination (target partially achieved).

                            While outcome indicators were achieved for Andhra Pradesh, those that related to Telangana were mostly not
                            achieved, leading to a modest rating for efficacy of this objective. Targets were doubled to accommodate the
                            location of the projects after 2014 when the State of Andhra Pradesh became two separate states - Andhra
                            Pradesh and Telangana. No additional resources were provided.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale



                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)



  Most of the outcome targets for Andhra Pradesh were achieved or mostly achieved. However, most of the
  outcome targets for Telangana were not achieved or at best, mostly achieved.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency. At appraisal, economic cost-benefit analyses were carried out for both the road
upgrading package and the LTPBMC maintenance works. The net present value (NPV) and economic internal
rate of return (EIRR) of each road upgrading package used the Highway Development and Management (HDM
4) model. Each periodic maintenance package used the Road Economic Design model. Net benefits were
discounted over the life of the investments at 12 percent as the required economic opportunity cost of capital
(EOCC). The ICR did not define which institution determined this EOCC.

At closing, the ex-post economic analysis for the roads’ upgrade and the LTPBMC maintenance subcomponent
(over 90 percent of total project cost) indicated favorable EIRRs and NPVs (ICR, Table 3). At closing, due to (i)
implementation period overruns ranging from 6 months to 4 years, (ii) an average of 24 percent increase in
construction costs, and (iii) lower-than-anticipated traffic growth led to a low EIRR but still greater than the 12
percent cost of capital justifying its viability (ICR, paragraph 34).

                            Road Upgrade          LTPBMC in AP only
                            Appraisal  Completion Appraisal Completion
EIRR (%)                    21.4       17.6       58.5      32.7
Net Present Value ((US$
                            412           76           277        42
million)

Operational and Administrative Efficiency: The project was designed to be implemented over a 5 year period.
A total of 45 month extension was provided to complete a project that cancelled US$56 million in 2014 due to
exchange rate gains (INR49 = US$1 at appraisal and INR62 = US$1 by December 2013), and again US$25
million in 2017 because a contract package was cancelled due to protracted land acquisition process and
project scope was reduced. Operational efficiency was negatively affected by the slow progress on institutional
reform, lack of coordination with Revenue Department as part of land acquisition, and limited capacity of staff,
consultants and contractors (ICR, paragraph 47). There were unforeseen technical difficulties brought by the
Bifurcation Act which required the replication of outcome indicators in the new state of Telangana and the
attribution of outcome indicators for components across the two states. The new Land Acquisition and
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Act also led to delays manifested in delays in payment compensation and
prolonged litigation by landowners.

Conclusion: Time overruns, reduced scope, quality of financial management, and suboptimal
procurement processes reduced overall project efficiency. Telangana did not achieve some institutional
development and road safety activities under Components 3 and 4. The project’s overall efficiency is rated
modest



                                                                                                       Page 8 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       94.10
 Appraisal                                                 21.40
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       95.80
 ICR Estimate                                              17.60
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

On April 7, 2017, the project was restructured, the scope reduced, and US$25 million was cancelled. Two key
performance indicators were amended : (i) the reduced scope due to the exclusion of the Kakinada
Rajahmundry package from the project revised component 1 target from 427 km to 340 km (230 km in Andhra
Pradesh and 110 km in Telangana); and (ii) from 3 to 2 PPP transactions (from two to one for Andhra Pradesh
because the third road was reclassified as a national highway and removed from PPP consideration). The
reduced scope led to a split rating.

Overall Outcome Ratings
Rating Dimension                      Original Objectives                     Objectives after Restructuring
Relevance of Objectives               Substantial
Efficacy
Objective 1-better quality, capacity,
and safe roads to users                                                       Substantial
                                      Substantial
                                                                              for both CRN increase and mostly achieved
      CRN increased                 reduced road fatalities was not
                                                                              targets in reduced road fatalities for both
      Road fatalities reduced       calculated till project closing.
                                                                              Andhra Pradesh and Telangana

Objective 2 -enhance institutional                                            Modest
capacity of the provincial           Substantial
government                                                                          1 PPP in Andhra Pradesh
                                           1 PPP in Andhra Pradesh                 1 PPP in Telangana
      RDC ability to engage               RDC fully operational in                RDC fully operational in Andhra
       private sector                        Andhra Pradesh                          Pradesh
      RDC fully operational                                                        RDC not operational in Telangana

Overall Efficacy                     Substantial                              Modest

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)



Efficiency                          Modest                                 Modest
Outcome Rating                      Moderately Satisfactory                Moderately Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                4                                      4
Amount Disbursed (US$ million)      110.8                                  80.6
Disbursement Rate (%)               110.8/191 = 58                         80.6/191 = 42
Weight Value                        4*.58 = 2.32                           4*.42 = 1.68
Total Weights                       2.32 + 1.68 = 4
Overall Outcome Rating                                                     4




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following posed risks to development outcome:

     Technical Risks. The software systems introduced under the RAMS, and MIS in Andhra Pradesh
      would require updating and maintenance. To mitigate this risk, Andhra Pradesh has created a Road
      Fund and reportedly pursuing institutional strengthening of its road authority. Andhra Pradesh has
      issued decrees and ratified bills creating this mechanism.
     Financial Risks. The pavement conditions of the two road safety pilot corridors deteriorated due to
      the overloading of freight trucks and lack of proper maintenance. To mitigate this risk, a long-term
      contract for road maintenance, including the upkeep of roads’ safety features (for example,
      guardrails, jersey barrier, marking, signs), and a proper overloading control policy need to be in
      place. In Andhra Pradesh, the Road Building Department has included a long term performance
      based management contract model for the strategic maintenance of the 4,600 km of state highways it
      managed. RBD revised the state's maintenance contracts to follow this model.
     Institutional Support Risks. The road safety agencies in both Andhra Pradesh and Telangana were
      established to deliver integrated road safety. Activities covered transport, health, and police. There is
      a risk that coordination may not continue without sustainable funding sources. To mitigate this risk,
      Andhra Pradesh created an initial fund while Telangana was in advanced stages of enacting the
      legislation that would establish this fund.
     Risk from unmitigated overloaded freight trucks on the roads. Overloaded freight trucks were
      observed to have caused the deterioration of the pavements of the two road corridors where road
      safety measures were piloted (one in each state). To mitigate the risk of further deterioration of road
      pavements, an appropriate overloading control system using electronic weighbridges needs to be
      adopted in both states.




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Lessons learned from the preceding road sector operation in the state of Andhra Pradesh informed
  project design. Among lessons learned was avoiding delays for land acquisition, and obtaining
  clearances from various government departments by undertaking these activities before work
  commenced; and ensuring an adequate and assured flow of maintenance funding and developing
  capacities for systemic network planning and management for sector sustainability (PAD, paragraph 26).
  The project was supported by strategic relevance to the country's development plans. The components
  were realistic and designed to achieve project objectives. The capacity of the implementing agency did
  not pose risks to implementation.

  Risks were generously assessed (ICR, paragraph 46) but for two elements that adversely affected the
  project: land acquisition and the capacities of project contractors and consultants. This was evidenced by
  changing risk categories for both elements from Moderate to Substantial as mitigation measures
  proposed for both were simplified and did not adequately consider administrative complexities and
  landscape of the local road construction industry. In addition, financial management assessment and
  procurement assessment also appeared to have been generous since implementation resulted in
  significant delays arising from these two factors (see Quality of Supervision below and Section 10. Other
  Issues, (b) Fiduciary Compliance). The moderate shortcomings in preparation resulted in the rating
  below.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team carried out twice a year supervision missions between 2010 to 2012 and three in
 2013, followed by 4 supervision mission in 2014 and another 3 in 2015. All in all there were 23 supervision
 missions over the almost 10 year implementation period. The Bank team proactively identified and resolved
 threats to achieving the PDO. as evident in the frequency of the supervision missions, and in particular
 after the state of Andhra Pradesh was divided into Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. This division led to
 technical difficulties for which the project was unprepared.

 Andhra Pradesh showed its commitment to the project through the appointment of its key staff, while
 Telangana took some time to address project needs. The government fully disbursed its counterpart
 financing. According to the ICR, the World Bank’s Aide Memoires were candid pointing out reasons for its
 sluggish performance, and offered actionable corrective measures to address those areas with an eye to
 achieving the PDO outcome indicators.

 The sector's inherent complexities such as poor interagency coordination, contractor performance (such as
 aggressive bidding, dubious joint ventures), and high personnel attrition rates negatively affected
 performance. Bank missions diligently offered measures and action plans to rectify problem areas (ICR,
 paragraph 68). However, fiduciary risk continued to be an issue even as the Bank team offered corrective
 measures. Procurement and contracting issues were addressed through intensified training and follow up

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)



 (of the eight work packages released, 4 were terminated and rebid (ICR, paragraph 50) and a contract was
 cancelled because of land acquisition issues in 2017).

 Transition arrangements after loan closing were evident in the actions taken by Andhra Pradesh on its own
 initiative. Andhra Pradesh has mandated that multi-year rolling investment and maintenance plans for
 roads use RAMS and MIS to prioritize activities and allocate maintenance funds. Andhra Pradesh also
 developed a command and control center integrating RAMS, MIS, and web- and GIS based maps (ICR,
 paragraph 73). Its Road and Building Department (RBD) also used the long term performance based
 maintenance contracting model to bid and contract documents for a strategic maintenance plan for 4,600
 km of state highways (ICR, paragraph 74). Recall that the RBD managed 68,510 km of state highways and
 major district roads (60 percent of total roads in Andhra Pradesh) while RDC managed the designated
 10,000 km of state highways and major district roads under its core road network. In the case of
 Telangana, its state Road Development Corporation was established in February 2017 to oversee flagship
 road development programs but its version of RAMS and MIS were not in place nor was the Road Fund
 established yet (ICR, paragraph 29). Telangana is also in advanced stages of enacting legislation to
 ensure funds for its road safety agencies to deliver integrated road safety activities (ICR, paragraph 72).

 However, there was a lack of realism and unrealistic expectations about the capacity of the newly created
 state administration in Telangana following the Bifurcation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The design of the M&E framework included clear and measurable indicators, including length of upgraded
 and maintained roads and savings in VOC and travel time. The theory of change was sound and reflected
 in the results framework, including the ability to launch PPP projects and the operationalization of the Road
 Development Corporation. Intermediate results indicators captured the contribution of the activities toward
 achieving the outcomes. Indicators were specific, measurable, achievable, and time bound. Baselines and
 targets were available for all indicators (except for the two intermediate outcome indicators added during
 restructuring - see Implementation below). According to the PAD, Road Users Satisfaction Surveys would
 be carried out at the start (baseline) mid-term, and near closure of the project to assess the Road
 Development Corporation's ability to provide effective road services to users (PAD, paragraph 41).

 A minor shortcoming in design was the indicator used for road safety. M&E design did not anticipate that
 the project would enhance road design, control road access, and improve intersections. Thus, the indicator
 for road safety (number of fatalities per vehicle kilometer) was deemed better expressed in the number of
 fatalities per 100 vehicle kilometer travelled. The M&E design was originally embedded with the
 implementing agency but the Bifurcation Act of 2014 dividing Andhra Pradesh into Andhra Pradesh and

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)



 Telangana, required the addition of an implementing entity from the state of Telangana. The M&E
 framework was revisited with regard to enhancing institutional capacity as a result of this 2014 Bifurcation
 Act. The Telangana road authority was formed in July 2017 leading to project restructuring, revisiting target
 indicators, revising the results framework.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E system was implemented by the Andhra Pradesh Road Development Corporation
  (RDC). Third-party consultancies collected, reported, and analyzed data and developed in-house M&E
  capacities by developing and implementing the Road Asset Management System and Management
  Information System. The Road Users Satisfaction Surveys were reported as completed as part of
  acheiving the Governance Accountability Action Plan but no details were reported in the ICR. Other
  M&E measures were introduced later including percentage of land acquired for the project and
  percentage of resettled and rehabilitated project affected persons in response to concerns over the
  progress of both items and its negative impact on the project progress. However, these two indicators did
  not have any targets. The reference Implementation Status and Results Report in the footnote (ISR 14,
  April 28, 2015) provided targets for land acquired in Andhra Pradesh (384 acres) and Telangana (106.16)
  and the number of project affected people resettled and rehabilitated (2,792 in Andhra Pradesh and 210
  in Telangana). Three indicators—VOC, time savings, and accident reduction—were deferred until the
  project closed.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data on performance and results progress informed the World Bank’s supervision missions. Data
  was also used in restructuring the project, adjusted activities during implementation, identified slow-
  moving road upgrading packages for termination and rebidding, adjusted target road lengths following
  difficulties in land acquisition and site access issues, and revised the number of PPP indicators, among
  adjustments made. M&E data was used to provide evidence of achievement of outcomes. M&E data
  was also used to inform the lessons learned from the project operations.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. The project received a category A and triggered the following
   environmental safeguards:OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats, OP/BP
   4.36, Forests, OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples, OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources, and OP/BP 4.12
   Involuntary Resettlement. During implementation OP/BP 4.10 was not applied. None of the upgraded roads
   passed through tribal areas. Compliance with the other safeguards were not reported in the ICR but the
   Operations Portal reported an unsatisfactory overall safeguards compliance, a moderately satisfactory
   compliance with OP/BP 4.01 and 4.36; satisfactory compliance with OP/BPs 4.04 and 4.11, and

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)



unsatisfactory compliance with OP/BP 4.12. The ICR reported that OP 4.12 remained unsatisfactory or
moderately unsatisfactory until project closing (ICR, paragraph 60).

The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was revised in 2015 to reflect the new Land Acquisition Act and
Resettlement Act of January 2014, including retroactive provisions if payments were not dispensed by its
due date. The new Act disrupted the payment of compensation and resettlement assistance to project
affected persons (PAPs). Overall unsatisfactory safeguards compliance was reported in the Operations
Portal.

Four hundred twenty (420) acres were acquired from 2,200 private landowners. There were 1,400 families
displaced and 1,100 of them were informal settlers who lost their small businesses. Resettlement costs
reached about US$19 million (ICR, Annex 5) distributed to about 2,000 untitled holders to maintain their
pre-displacement conditions, reestablish their livelihoods, and housing. Requirements of environmental and
social safeguards were integrated in engineering design to ensure compliance during implementation. The
Andhra Pradesh Road Development Corporation retained and mainstreamed these measures into its
contract documents and project processes. The implementing agency engaged seven local nongovernment
organizations, a sociologist, and a Deputy Collector to provide land acquisition and resettlement support
and coordinate implementation with the state governments. At the district level, monitoring committees
headed by joint collectors, oversaw grievances and individual complaints.

A ‘Disclosure and Complaint Handling’ mechanism was operated by the Andhra Pradesh Road
Development Corporation (RDC) website. There were 341 grievances received, 184 (54 percent) were
related to discrepancies in resettlement and rehabilitation entitlements, eligibility for these benefits, changes
in eligibility lists, and demands for higher compensation. 166 (48 percent) of these grievances were
resolved. The Grievance and Redress Mechanism (GRM) dealt with land acquisition and resettlement
related complaints while the Labor Commissioner dealt with labor related complaints. The Labor Association
filed a case in the High Court. The Contractor was instructed to pay outstanding labor payments before
pending bills were approved.

A few outstanding land acquisition and resettlement activities emerged early in the project - from year 1
when there was substantial delay in initiating the land acquisition process; year 2: disclosure of the
Resettlement Policy Framework in Andhra Pradesh in 2017 and payment of balance compensation to all
vulnerable land losers in Chittur-Puttur Road. There was also outstanding action related to non-payment of
wages to 70 unskilled workers in Kurnool-Devananda road in Andhra Pradesh (INR 2.50 Million). According
to the ICR, the Bank would follow-up with the implementing agency until these outstanding actions were
resolved.

Andhra Pradesh did not undertake independent resettlement impact studies to evaluate the effect of
resettlement activities while Telangana initiated one in August 2019. Preliminary findings in Telangana
indicated that (i) land acquisition took an average of two years, (ii) a portion of non-agricultural families
affected by the project, housing conditions and household assets improved over the baseline; (iii) pending
issues remained with land acquisition such as payments due to 11 land owners and resettlement support
payments due to 33 vulnerable farmers who became landless. Overall compliance with resettlement
safeguards was unsatisfactory according to the Operations Portal and reported Moderately Unsatisfactory
and Unsatisfactory in the ICR (paragraph 61). Overall safeguards compliance was also reported as
unsatisfactory in the Operations Portal but not in the ICR.




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. Financial management was rated Moderately Satisfactory during most of the life
  of the project. Reports were submitted on time or with modest delays and provided information on project
  progress and expenditure patterns. Availability of funds for project payment was generally adequate, with
  one exception for Telangana in August 2018, which was eventually resolved, and adequate funds were
  provided to RDC. Internal audits (ICR, paragraph 65) reports were delayed, and when received,
  observations replicated those in preceding reports. These observations indicated that no follow up actions
  were taken on the previous internal audit findings. External audit reports showed disallowances, which
  reached nearly INR 1,020 million (approximately US$14.8 million) by December 2015. Disallowances were
  related to mobilization advances and technical aspects. The audit process and the team of auditors were
  not given the required documentation at the time of the visit. The project team met with the Accountant
  General to ensure that auditors were provided the needed information and to break the cycle of
  disallowances. In July 2016, a workshop was conducted to clear the disallowances backlog. A significant
  part of the disallowances was settled in subsequent years. However, the May 2019 Certification Audit of
  Expenditure report cited unresolved disallowances.

  Procurement. Procurement had coordination challenges and suboptimal contractor performance (ICR,
  paragraph 78). During post procurement review, delays in payments to contractors were noted due to
  administrative delays in approving and clearing payments. Contract modifications (e.g., extension of time)
  were executed before obtaining prior Bank approval as requested by the Bank team. Site work packages
  (road upgrade, road maintenance, civil works for road safety) that required close coordination with multiple
  agencies (e.g., Irrigation, Forest, and Revenue Departments) were negatively affected by the impact of the
  Bifurcation Act because of a lack of clarity in contract administration. In addition, interagency coordination
  among Transport, Health, and Police Departments was also a challenge in procuring road safety
  packages. In addition to coordination, the contractors' performance was slowed by aggressive bidding and
  pricing. This led to cashflow problems and failure to meet contract obligations. There was a general sense
  of poor planning and mobilization handicaps by contractors.

  The implementation of the new Land Acquisition and Resettlement Act resulted in a lack of access to
  project sites. There were delays in clearing forest trees. These factors led to termination and rebidding of
  4 of the 8 work packages that covered the road upgrading, leading to cost overruns and significant time
  delays. In some cases, due to the complex procurement arrangements contained in contract packages,
  the implementing agency took up to 3-4 years to terminate and rebid (ICR, paragraph 51). One road
  improvement package contract was dropped/cancelled because it was too far behind to be completed by
  project close. Corrective measures were suggested for future consideration: (i) ensuring a stricter
  qualification process for contractors (technical, financial, prior experience, personnel, equipment) to ensure
  adequate performance and acceptable quality; (ii) using weighted criteria and combined technical and
  financial scores to mitigate aggressive bidding; (iii) revisiting current procurement guidelines and contract
  documents to enforce punitive provisions in case of contractors’ underperformance, including if needed,
  the exclusion from opportunities to bid on future projects; and (iv) moving away from the traditional
  contracting process and opting for Engineering, Procurement, and Construction/PPP type modalities that
  were implemented in other states (ICR, paragraph 78).


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                No disagreement. Both the ICR
                                                                                and this review concluded MS
Outcome                          Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   outcome after the split rating.
                                                                                The Data Sheet erronously
                                                                                noted Satisfactory outcome.
                                                                                Risk factors at entry were not
                                                                                adequately addressed.
                                                                                Contracting, procurement issues
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   and issues associated with
                                                                                compliance with safeguards
                                                                                remained throughout
                                                                                supervision.
Quality of M&E                   Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presented a few lessons and recommendations from this operation that may benefit future
similar operations. Some of these are noted below:

      Establishing forward and backward linkages to existing systems may better sustain
         project outcomes. In this project, the Road Asset Management System (RAMS) and
         management information system (MIS) replaced the ad hoc decision making of Andhra
         Pradesh in prioritizing budget allocations for investment planning and road maintenance. The
         RAMS and MIS allowed the state to use a rolling, multi-year planning strategy using
         evidence from the reports generated by the systems to justify priorities. Andhra Pradesh also
         established a command and control center that integrated RAMS and MIS with web- and
         GIS-based maps and linked other systems, such as contract administration and decision
         support tools for its Road Development Corporation (RDC) and Roads and Building
         Department (RBD). For example, the RDB in Andhra Pradesh used a long term performance
         based management contract worth INR3,000 million (equivalent to US$42 million) for a new
         maintenance plan covering 4,600 km of state highways. This contract was linked to the MIS
         system to monitor physical and financial progress. The lesson from this project was that the

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)



           capacity of an implementing agency capacity to plan investments and budget for road
           maintenance may be improved by providing forward and backward linkages to existing
           systems.
          Having a focal point for road safety management at the state level may be useful to
           achieve efficiencies. In this project, Andhra Pradesh established a cell in the state's
           transport department tasked with planning and monitoring the impact of road
           safety initiatives, managing data for road safety indicators, and coordinating with other
           agencies and constituents. This one-stop shop for road safety measures made
           available credible data and fostered coordination. The lesson learned from this project was
           that by creating a focal point for road and safety management, the state achieved better
           coordination and efficiency in delivering relevant, credible data to end users.
          Ensuring fair compensation in land acquisition, resettlement, and rehabilitation avoids
           implementation delays. In this project, in Andhra Pradesh, by January 2014, only 55
           percent of land acquisition was completed, with 24 percent of project affected families
           receiving resettlement and rehabilitation assistance. By March 2015, a reported three year
           delay in payment to land owners; and payment of cash assistance to vulnerable families
           remained outstanding. By June 2019, after the project closed, there were reports in Andhra
           Pradesh of outstanding compensations to 65 landowners, partial resettlement assistance to
           363 project affected persons and additional compensation to 542 landowners who became
           landless. In Telangana, partial land acquisition compensation to 10 landowners and
           additional compensation to 33 landowners who became landless remained pending. The
           Bifurcation Act followed by the implementation of a new Land Acquisition and Resettlement
           Act, also contributed to the delays in releasing compensation. In some cases, landowners
           litigated even after being compensated. The lesson from this project was that by adjusting for
           inflation, fair compensation for land acquisition, resettlement, and rehabilitation for project
           affected persons fosters confidence in the government's intention to be fair, avoid prolonged
           litigation to settle differences, and overcome implementation delays.
          Continuous capacity building efforts helps new institutions. In this project, the 2014
           Bifurcation Act introduced a new implementing entity in the new state of Telangana to
           replicate the sector in Andhra Pradesh. Resources were allocated to Telangana with little
           support for capacity building. The unbalanced attention to building the capacity of Telangana
           was evident in the unmet project targets. The lesson learned from this project was that when
           new government entities are formed continuous technical assistance and training help build
           adequate institutional capacity.
          Appropriate data should be generated to inform adequate response to road safety
           issues. In this project, overloading was a leading cause of road accidents involving trucks.
           To check the overloading violations, electronic weigh bridges were proposed on the
           demonstration corridors. According to the task team, the two states planned and budgeted
           for these weigh bridges to support their road safety programs. The lesson learned from this
           project was that credible data could be used to justify investments in infrastructure such as
           weigh bridges to optimize road safety.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

                                                                                                      Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: AP and Telangana Road Sector Project (P096021)




14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a comprehensive narrative of the project. The theory of change was expressed in the results
framework. The report was focused on results with a verifiable accounting of the difficulties encountered.
Evidence of outcomes was robust, pointing to the impact of the systems installed under the project. Annexes in
the ICR supported results claimed by the project. Sections were mutually reinforcing. A minor shortcoming was
in lessons learned. There were no lessons from the private sector's participation in the road sector or other
possible private sector engagements beyond intercity highways. In addition, the data sheet reported the
outcome as satisfactory but the text supported a moderately satisfactory outcome.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 18 of 18
