     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj (P092217)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021874

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P092217                                      IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                        Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-47720,IDA-54130                          30-Apr-2015                                        284,882,334.99

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Jun-2010                                  31-Dec-2018

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            255,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             312,552,031.53                                               0.00

 Actual                                         284,882,334.99                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl               J. W. van Holst               Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                              Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 3) and the Financing Agreement of January 14, 2011,
   the objective of the project was “to reduce the vulnerability of coastal communities to cyclone and other hydro
   meteorological hazards”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj (P092217)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   A. Early Warning Dissemination System (EWDS) and Capacity Building for Coastal Communities
   (appraisal estimate US$15.0 million, actual US$16.45 million): This component was to finance the
   Installation and operation of EWDS allowing the state and/or district/sub-district level control center to send
   communication directly to the villages using Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM)/Code
   Division Multiple Access (CDMA) based technology including strengthening emergency operation centers to
   channelize the warning through different communication modes. This component was also to finance the
   purchase of satellite phones to key officials to fail proof the EWDS and pilot new radio based wireless
   communication technology in one block in each state. Furthermore, this component was to strengthen
   capacity in operating, maintaining and regular use of the EWDS equipment by officials and village
   representatives, and of communities in disaster preparedness and response by preparing disaster
   management plans and arranging mock drills etc.

   B. Cyclone Risk Mitigation Infrastructure (appraisal estimate US$250 million, Additional Financing
   US$128 million, actual US$331.29 million): This component was to finance improving the access to
   emergency shelter, evacuation and protection against cyclone and other hydro meteorological hazards such
   as wind storms, flooding and storm surge in high risk areas. Each of the states reviewed the existing system
   and gaps and developed risk mitigation infrastructure portfolio. For emergency shelters, identification
   mechanism included assessment of total requirement, available shelters including other government and
   private buildings and the gap. This component was to finance a portfolio including a broad set of measures
   such as investments in multipurpose emergency shelters, up-grading of existing roads and providing
   bridges suitable for evacuation, drainage improvement measures and repair and up-grading of existing
   embankments, and creation of corpus funds for operation and maintenance of cyclone shelters.

   During the Additional Financing the target for the construction of Multipurpose Cyclone Shelters (MPCSs)
   was increased by 86 percent and the target on access roads by 25 percent. The targets on the length of
   embarkments was reduced by 50 percent (due to the improved designs, environmental sensitivity, and
   revised costing). Also, the target on proportion of people having access to emergency shelters in Andhra
   Pradesh was reduced by 10 percent considering the updated baseline that was lower than the original
   estimate and the revised design capacity of MPCSs.

   C. Technical Assistance for National and State Level Capacity Building and Knowledge Creation
   (appraisal estimate US$6.0 million, actual US$3.07 million): This component was to support the
   preparation of key institutions for addressing risks and vulnerabilities effectively across all coastal states
   and Union Territories (UTs). This component was to finance the development of studies, assessments,
   training and capacity building activities related to risk and damage assessments, development of training
   modules and action plans and implementing them through identified partner agencies.

   D. Project Management and Implementation Support (appraisal estimate US$20.7 million, Additional
   Financing US$8.7 million, actual US$18.27 million): This component was to finance support for project
   management by financing incremental operating costs for Project Management Units (PMU), Project

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj (P092217)



   Implementation Units (PIUs), nodal units in line departments and National Institute of Disaster Management
   (NIDM), office equipment, training and exposure visits and consulting services for specialist activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$423.0 million. The actual cost was US$370.1 million.

   Financing: The project was financed by a US$255.0 million credit by the Bank of which US$221.5 million
   was disbursed and, following an Additional Financing credit by the Bank of US$104.0 million, a total of
   US$284.8 million was finally disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$64.0 million, but the actual contribution was
   US$85.2 million.

   Dates: The project was restructured four times:

         On March 25, 2014 the project received Additional Financing in the amount of US$104 million to
          scale up the the construction of multi-purpose shelters and its related evacuation
          infrastructure following the extremely severe Cyclonic Storm Phailin in October 2013. The target for
          the construction of Multi-purpose Cyclone Shelters (MPCSs) was increased by 86 percent and the
          target for access roads by 25 percent. The targets on the length of embankments was reduced by
          50 percent (due to the improved designs, environmental sensitivity, and revised costing). Also, the
          target for the proportion of people having access to emergency shelters in Andhra Pradesh was
          reduced by 10 percent considering the updated baseline that was lower than the original estimate
          and the revised design capacity of MPCSs. None of these revisions in PDO indicators (as listed in
          Table 1 in the ICR) justified a split rating of the project's outcomes.
         On May 21, 2015 the project was restructured to extend the closing date from April 30, 2015 to
          October 31, 2015 to extend the timeline for the submission of annual audit reports.
         On October 19, 2015 the project was restructured to extend the closing date of the original financing
          by 23 months to October 2, 2017 to accommodate (i) the delay in obtaining environmental
          clearances; (ii) challenges in identifying appropriate land for some works; (iii) the need to re-tender
          some works due to lack of bids; (iv) state bifurcation process in Andhra Pradesh; and (v) disruptions
          caused by Cyclone Phailin and very severe Cyclonic Storm Hudhud of 2014.
         On October 3, 2017 the closing date of the original and Additional Financing was extended to
          December 31, 2018 to allow for the completion of delayed activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (para 1) India is highly vulnerable to natural hazards, especially earthquakes, flood,
drought, cyclone and landslides. Approximately, 40 percent of the population lives within 100 kilometers of
the coastline and exposed to severe cyclones. Studies indicate that natural disaster losses equate up to 2
percent of India’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and up to 12 percent of federal government revenues.

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj (P092217)



               India has lost many lives through natural hazards. Especially, two eastern coastal states, Andhra Pradesh
               and Odisha are exposed to cyclones. At the time of appraisal, neither of the states had any comprehensive
               early warning system in place which did not allow for an evacuation to safe shelters before the landfall of
               cyclones.



               The Bank and the government collaborated closely on defining the objective for this project (see the PAD,
               para 22). A number of options for the project's objective were considered as explained in Section 8 (a) of
               this review. Among the agreements between the Bank and the government on the objective was that the
               project should avoid being overly complex, that there should be a sharp focus on cyclone risk mitigation in
               two highly vulnerable state and early warning systems for vulnerable coastal village communities, and that
               there should be a programmatic approach to lending for the multi-hazard resistant infrastructure
               investment. This was a sophisticated but straightforward framework to address climatic hazards and highly
               relevant to reducing the vulnerability of coastal communities in AP and Odisha to cyclones.



               The agreed objective of the project, to reduce the vulnerability of coastal communities to cyclone and other
               hydro meteorological hazards, supported India’s plan to move away from reactive post-disaster response to
               a proactive disaster risk reduction approach. In 2005, the government implemented the Disaster
               Management Act which established the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), the State
               Disaster Management Authorities (SDMAs), and the District Disaster Management Authorities
               (DDMAs). Also, the project’s objective supported the National Disaster Management Plan (NDMP) which
               the government developed in 2016 and which is consistent with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
               Reduction 2015-2030 endorsed by the United Nations’ General Assembly and was adopted by the
               government. In addition, the project’s objective was in line with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership
               Framework (FY18 to FY22) which stresses the importance of “promoting resource-efficient growth and
               poverty reduction” which is one of the three focus areas of the Bank’s engagement with India and arguably
               also partly the focus of this project.



               This review rates the relevance of the project's objective as High


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                                                                                                                         Page 4 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj (P092217)



To reduce the vulnerability of coastal communities to cyclone and other hydro meteorological hazards

Rationale
Theory of Change. The project’s theory of change was that the installation of an early warning
dissemination system (EWDS) and the construction and maintenance by multi-purpose cyclone shelters
(MPCS) in vulnerable communities which allowed the evacuation of coastal communities in Andhra Pradesh
(AP) and Odisha to these shelters before the cyclones or other hydro-meteorological hazards made landfall
would lead to the reduction of deaths from the destructive force of these events. In addition, the project's
investment in the construction of roads in areas vulnerable to cyclones, the development of a cyclone risk
atlas and post disaster needs assessment (PDNA) tools, the preparation of a multi-sectoral disaster risk
management (DRM) capacity as well as the training of officials on risk reduction, emergency
preparedness and response would all be expected to have an impact on minimizing damage to life and
property and more rapid recovery from the effects of cyclones in the two states and their population. The
construction of embankment and maintenance by surveillance committees was expected to minimize damage
to agricultural land and reduce the consequent loss of livelihoods. Finally, assisting 13 other vulnerable
states and territories to improve their understanding of natural disaster risks and vulnerabilities, strengthening
the capacity and supporting pilot activities to address them were included as a small element in the project.



Outputs (based on paragraphs 20 through 36 and Annex 1 in the ICR):

      A comprehensive Early Warning Dissemination System (EWDS) was built, providing last-mile
         connectivity to 1,055 coastal villages in AP and Odisha and covering approximately 4.2 million people,
         achieving the target of the targeted coastal population being covered. In addition, the Odisha Project
         Implementation Unit (PIU) integrated the location-based alerting system (LBAS) with Bharat Sanchar
         Nigam Limited (BSNL) - India’s state-owned telecommunications company. Approximately 3.75
         million BSNL subscribers in Odisha can receive warnings via a short message service (SMS),
         including about 80 percent (928,700 people) of coastal residents
        275 alert sirens with an area of influence of 1.5 to 2 kilometers radius each in AP and Odisha,
         covering all of the 1,740 vulnerable coastal villages.
        413 towers and poles for mounting alert sirens were built. This output did not have a target.
        219 Multipurpose Cyclone Shelters (MPCS) were constructed in AP and 316 MPCS were constructed
         in Odisha, totaling 535 MPCSs, surpassing the revised target of 532 MPCSs.
        1,087 kilometers of rural roads were constructed in AP and Odisha, falling short of the revised target
         of 1,310 kilometers. According to the ICR (p. 36) PIUs constructed 12 bridges in addition to the
         planned 23 bridges.
        88.12 kilometers of embankments were completed, achieving the revised target of 90 kilometers. The
         area of land and number of people protected by 180 kilometers long embankments was not
         established at appraisal since detailed studies and final site selections had not been finalized.
        535 village-level emergency task forces and 535 MPCS committees from the local communities
         received training in the use of early warning and evacuation, achieving the target of all targeted people
         being trained.
        Embankment Surveillance Committees were established in both states to increase community
         ownership and timely identification of needed repairs and report damages to the State Department of
         Water Resources.


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj (P092217)




     86 percent of government officials were trained on specific disaster management skills, not achieving
        the target of 100 percent.
       A long-term training and capacity building strategy was developed by the National Institute of Disaster
        Management (NIDM) based on an institutional SWOT analysis and a survey of over 18,000
        community members from across six states, achieving the target.
       All studies required for developing a Composite Risk Atlas were launched and completed, achieving
        the target. The atlas provides: i) the cyclone risk status associated to each state; ii) historical cyclones;
        iii) exposure distribution risk, and expected loss details for residential, industrial, and commercial
        buildings; and iv) population distribution details and the associated risk and loss with respect to
        cyclones.
       7 multi-hazard training modules were prepared by the NIDM focusing on mainstreaming disaster risk
        reduction and climate change adaptation in Panchayat Raj institutions, rural development, ULBs, city
        planning and education and disaster management planning for hospitals and cities.
       476 digital mobile radios and 34 Satellite-based Mobile Voice Terminal (SBMDVTs) in the MPCSs and
        Emergency Operation Centers



Outcomes (based on paragraphs 23 through 35 and Annex 1 in the ICR)

     1.55 million coastal residents during the extremely severe cyclonic storm Fani, which hit Odisha in
        May 2019, were evacuated. The Odisha State Disaster Management Authority (OSDMA) was able to
        efficiently provide early warnings to the coastal communities by remotely operating alert sirens 36 to
        48 hours before the landfall and sending 18 million SMS to BSNL subscribers through LBAS. This
        resulted in one of the largest emergency evacuations in a record time frame, reducing fatalities to 64
        people.
       A baseline survey, which was conducted in 2010, interviewed 2,000 households in AP and Odisha in
        terms of awareness about cyclone warnings and emergency response and established a baseline at
        30 percent. A beneficiary survey, conducted in December 2017, found that all interviewed households
        received warnings through alert sirens before a cyclone hit the coastal areas, achieving the target of
        100 percent.
       The proportion of the coastal communities in the two states having access to emergency shelters
        increased from 61 percent in 2010 to 87 percent in 2018, surpassing the target of 78 percent. In AP
        the proportion of coastal communities having access to emergency shelters increased from 78 percent
        in 2010 to 90 percent in 2018, not achieving the original target of 98 percent but achieving the revised
        target of 88 percent. In Odisha the proportion of communities having access to emergency shelters
        increased from 30 percent in 2010 to 82 percent in 2018, surpassing both the original target of 60
        percent and the revised target of 80 percent.
       1.86 million of coastal people have been protected by strengthened/improved embankments, almost
        achieving the target of 1.9 million. According to the beneficiary survey, which was conducted in 2017,
        about 79 percent of respondents in AP and 84 respondents in Odisha stated that the loss of
        agricultural land has been minimized during the last cyclone in comparison to before project
        implementation.
       29,525 hectares of agricultural land were protected by strengthened/improved embankments, almost
        achieving the target of 30,000 hectares of agricultural land.



                                                                                                      Page 6 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj (P092217)




                            This review concluded that the efficacy of the project'a achievements was substantial




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of this project's achievements was substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency:

   The PAD included an economic and financial analysis by establishing cyclone hazard intensity and frequency
   discharge relation in selected local districts, then building the vulnerability function, and finally estimating the
   cost and benefit under scenarios with and without project and calculates the economic rate of return (ERR).

   According to the PAD (p. 12) the scenarios were selected based on the investment proposals prepared by the
   states financing under the project, and on the data availability. Three districts were selected: Kendrapara in
   Orissa, Jamanagar in Gujarat, and Vishakhapatnam in AP. Using a discount rate of 12 percent over a time
   period of 10 years and the value of a statistical life at US$150,000 the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) for the
   embankment component was estimated at 31 percent with a benefit-cost ratio between 1.7 and 2 percent. The
   ERR for a shelter forest component was 29 percent with a benefit-cost ratio of 3 percent. Finally, the estimated
   ERR for the cyclone shelter component was 73 percent in Kendrapara, 15 percent in Jamanagar and 28 percent
   in Vishakhapatnam with a benefit-cost ratio between 1.9 and 4 percent.



   When the project received Additional Financing a benefit-cost analysis was conducted to assess avoided
   damage cost due to the scaled-up project activities. The damage assessment from cyclone Phailin was used as
   the baseline estimate. The analysis estimated with a discount rate of 5 percent the benefit-cost ratio for the
   MPCS at 6.4 percent and at 3.9 percent with a discount rate of 10 percent. For roads and bridges, the benefit-

                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj (P092217)



cost ratio was 15.6 percent (discount rate of 5 percent) and 12.4 percent (discount rate of 10 percent). The
analysis did not calculate an ERR.



With respect to the analysis of efficiency at appraisal and at the time of the additional financing the ICR
observed that at appraisal the analysis was for only three districts which did not adequately cover the project’s
scope. Regarding the analysis of the likely efficiency of the additional financing the ICR commented, without
evidence, that it did not “adequately substantiate its claims”. The ICR also noted that neither of the two
analyses made reference to the vulnerable population in terms of number of persons likely to be affected.



To provide a more comprehensive analysis of the project's efficiency benefit and cost streams over 20 years
were estimated for the two dominant groups of investments. One was made up of the EWDS, roads, the
MPCSs, and facilities whereby people were being warned about a cyclone and then moved to the MPCSs
(together labeled as block 1 in the analysis). The other was the embankments assessed by land saved from
salinization or submergence and therefore preserving agricultural livelihoods (labeled as block 2 in the
analysis). For block 1 the internal rate of return (IRR) was calculated at 53 percent, the net present value (NPV)
at US$1.09 billion at a 6 percent discount rate, and a benefit-cost ratio at 5.28 (ICR, Annex 4, para 21 and Table
4.3). For block 2 the IRR was calculated at 13 percent, the NPV at US$17.2 million at a discount rate of 6
percent, and an assumed benefit-cost ratio of 1.5 because (in the absence of any direct measure of
embankment benefits but with known costs) this was the basis for estimating the benefits from block 2
investments. When combining the results of the analyses for blocks 1 and 2 the IRR was 48 percent and the
NPV was US$1.1 billion (ICR, Annex 4, para 28, Table 4.7).



These analyses indicate that the project's economic efficiency was substantial.



Operational Efficiency:

The ICR (para 61) stated that the signing of the original financing agreement and the additional financing was
delayed due to political and administrative issues. Frequent disasters and the bifurcation of AP impacted project
implementation. Procurement related and technical issues also caused additional delays in project
implementation. As a result, the project's closing date was extended by 3.7 years. However, despite these
delays, the project’s management cost was only 5 percent of the total actual project cost suggesting operational
efficiency.



According to the ICR (para 41) the actual unit costs of MPCSs, road, bridges, and embankments increased by
59 percent, 47 percent, 87 percent, and 109 percent, respectively (in Indian rupees (INR)) compared to the
appraisal estimates. The increase in costs resulted from the remoteness of project sites and small civil contracts
which resulted in less competition and higher costs. Also, increased cost of labor and materials over time and



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj (P092217)



the difficulty of sourcing materials near the project sites also pushed costs higher than anticipated. There were
also other issues that reduced procurement efficiency which are detailed below in Section 10 of this review.



Summary of efficiency estimates. This review concluded that, considering the geographical spread of
investments and institutional development and despite some operational inefficiencies, the overall efficiency with
which this project was implemented was Substantial. This was based on an estimated consolidated IRR for the
entire project (based on well justified and plausible assumptions in the ICR) of 48 percent (Annex 4, para
28). This compares with the rating of efficiency of Modest in the ICR without an explicit rationale, but an implicit
rationale that the IRR calculations were based on estimates, as well as shortcomings in operational efficiency
(paras 38 to 47).




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                               48.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Relevance of the objective is rated High given its close alignment with the Bank’s most recent Country
Partnership Framework (FY18 to FY22) and its high relevance to reducing the vulnerability of coastal
communities in Andhra Pradesh and Odisha to the damaging effects of cyclones. The Efficacy with which the
project's objectives were achieved was rated Substantial because during the project's implementation it was
successful in evacuating 1.55 million people to shelters in advance of a severe cyclone and the project also
achieved most of its targets. The ICR estimated high rates of return from the project's investments leading this
review to conclude that, despite some operational inefficiencies, the project's overall efficiency was



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj (P092217)



substantial. This project had minor shortcomings in its relevance, its achievements and its efficiency and
therefore its overall outcome is rated Satisfactory. .




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR (para 90), strengthening the robustness of power and telecommunication infrastructure
will be critical for ensuring uninterrupted use of emergency operation centres (EOCs) and EWDS equipment
due to power outages and limited telecommunication coverage. Also, climate change related high intensity
hydro meteorological hazards might pose a threat to the infrastructure built under the project. Even though
the project ensured the establishment of community-based infrastructure maintenance through "corpus
funds", infrastructure will require proper inspections, rehabilitation and upgrades which will have to be
budgeted for by the line government departments which have the technical expertise and knowledge (ICR,
para 91)

The ICR did not, however, provide any information on whether the federal and state governments continue to
be committed to the project's objective and to the future financial support for inspections of community-
managed maintenance of the infrastructure built by the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The PAD (para 5) stated that the project was part of a broader national hazard mitigation program taken
  up by NDMA that included programs on earthquakes, flood, landslides and establishment of a
  National Disaster Management Communication Network.

  It was also noted in the PAD (para 22) that the Bank and government teams considered different options
  for interventions and assessed each carefully. The options considered were:

  (a) Multi-disaster risk vs. cyclone risk. In order to avoid an overly complex project; the Bank and the
  government decided to focus on cyclone risk mitigation and look into institutional response systems and
  create multi-hazard resistant infrastructure.

  (b) All vulnerable states vs. limited number of highly vulnerable states. In the interest of simplicity
  of management, readiness of the investment proposals in various states and variable degree of


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj (P092217)



  vulnerability of the various states towards cyclones, it was decided to start with risk mitigation
  investments in the two highly vulnerable states and later expand to other states:

  (c) Hi-tech disaster warning and response systems vs. reaching coastal communities. Since the
  government was financing a program to augment the India Meteorological Department's forecasting
  capacity, this project’s focus was shifted towards ensuring that early warnings reach vulnerable coastal
  village communities.

  (d) Investment lending vs. programmatic lending. It was concluded that as the project’s M&E
  capacity gets established program lending would be more suitable than the normal investment
  lending. A programmatic option to provide support to government and the states, where the new states
  come into the project as they become ready with investment proposals and detailed studies was
  therefore preferred.

  In addition, a number of studies informed the project's design.



  In summary the project's design was based on not being overly complex, have a sharp focus on cyclone
  risk mitigation in two highly vulnerable state, early warnings systems for vulnerable coastal village
  communities, and a programmatic approach to lending for multi-hazard resistant infrastructure.



  The Bank team identified relevant risk factors such as a change in government priorities. However, all
  identified risks were rated as Moderate or Low. This review assessed the risk mitigation measures
  proposed in the PAD as adequate.



  The project’s M&E framework was also assessed as adequate.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (para 86) supervision missions identified and resolved technical challenges to ensure
 development impact. After Cyclone Phailin hit India in 2013 the Bank improved the Multi-Purpose Cyclone
 Shelters (MPCS) designs to ensure that open spaces on the ground floor would remain dry during cyclone
 events and using continuous eaves to protect walls and openings during heavy rains. The ICR (para 88)
 stated that the Bank provided training to the PIUs on a regular basis and reviewed the safeguard and
 fiduciary aspects of the project. During the Mid-Term Review in May 2013, the Bank worked with the PMU
 and PIUs to develop an action plan to speed up implementation and address procurement issues.




                                                                                                       Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj (P092217)




 Since India was experiencing an increasing amount of lightning incidents, the Bank supported the Bank in
 installing lightning arresters in every MPCS (ICR, para 86). Also, the Bank formed a task team specialized
 in civil, hydraulic, and architectural engineering to ensure that the civil works were designed and
 constructed appropriately.



 The ICR (para 87) stated that even though there were several gaps between Implementation Status
 Reports (ISRs) and the Bank prepared four Aide Memoires based on field visits without accompanying
 ISRs. The Bank also participated in Project Steering Committee meetings and field visits on a regular
 basis (ICR, para 57). The Bank also provided technical assistance to the National Disaster Management
 Authority (NDMA) and the National Institute for Disaster Management (NIDM) on developing a cyclone risk
 assessment model and standardizing the post-disaster needs assessment (ICR, para 87).



 There were, however, some moderate shortcomings in the Bank's supervision capacity and
 performance. According to the ICR (para 86) the Bank team did not have the internal expertise on EWDS
 to expedite the implementation of component A and relied on the knowledge partner which was appointed
 by the PMU. In addition it was noted in the ICR that "there was a discrepancy between the target values
 adopted in ISRs and the Results Framework. Also, intermediate results indicators for
 Components A and C were not measured and reported in the ISRs. At the time of the third restructuring,
 the project could have updated the intermediate results indicators on: (i) the EWDS as the target
 value became irrelevant to the corresponding PDO indicator with the advancement of technology; (ii) the
 road length considering the additional bridges constructed; and (iii) the bridges as they were not included
 in the results framework but constituted 14 percent of the total actual costs at closing" (para 73). Finally, as
 noted in section 10 (b) of this review, there were a number of significant procurement delays.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The extent to which the project’s activities and outputs would lead to the intended outcomes was soundly
 reflected in the Results Framework. The selected indicators encompassed all outcomes of the PDO
 statement and the intermediate outcome indicators were adequate for measuring the contribution of the




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj (P092217)



 project’s activities and outputs towards achieving the PDO. The indicators were sufficiently specific and
 relevant.

 The PDO statement would have benefited from including a definition for the term “vulnerability”. Also,
 according to the ICR (p. 24) the project did not establish the baseline and target value for the PDO
 indicators on strengthened embankments and the level of awareness about warnings and emergency
 response since the feasibility studies, designs, costings, and household surveys had not been completed
 by the time the project was appraised.

 The project designed a benefit monitoring and evaluation (BME) study under component D to establish the
 baselines for MPCS accessibility and awareness. Each survey covered 5 percent of the total coastal
 residents. The same residents were interviewed at mid-term and end-term.

 According to the ICR (para 69) the project’s Management Information System (MIS) which covered
 procurement, financial management, physical progress, the grievance redress mechanism and key
 information on environmental and social aspects functioned well. The PMU was to prepare regular
 progress reports to be submitted to the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Bank



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para 70) the project’s MIS and monitoring arrangements were well embedded in
  the PMU and PIUs. The PIU submitted progress reports to the PMU on a monthly basis and the results
  were presented at the project steering committee meetings. The planned baseline data collection was
  conducted in 2010 and 2014 by an external consultant.

  The ICR (para 73) stated that while the PDO indicators were reported in the ISRs, the intermediate
  indicators for components A and C were not measured and reported in the ISRs. Also, there was a
  discrepancy between the target values included in the ISRs and the Results Framework which were not
  updated in any of the project restructurings.

  A shortcoming of the benefit monitoring and evaluation (BME) study was that it focused on the
  household’s perception of project activities and did not conduct a quantitative analysis of the outputs and
  outcomes the project produced.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para 74) the monitored data was shared with various stakeholders. Also, the data
  was used to inform project management and decision making. From November 2012 the PMU and
  PIUs held 20 project steering committee meetings to discuss the project's performance and key
  implementation bottlenecks. The monitoring information was publicly disclosed on the project’s website.
  Data from the BME’s survey was used to inform the design of the Additional Financing in 2014 . On the
  other hand, the ICR (para 76) noted that the project "could have improved the M&E methodology and
  analysis to provide evidence of achievement of outcomes".




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj (P092217)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category A for safeguard issues and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies
   OP/BP 4.10 (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), OP/BP 4.12
   (Involuntary Resettlement) and OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous People). According to the ICR (para 77) the project
   prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy
   Framework, and an Indigenous People’s Instrument. The environmental impacts resulted from the
   construction of buildings, roads and repairs of the existing embankment and the installation of towers and
   poles for mounting alert sirens. The ICR (para 77) stated that the project’s overall safeguards performance
   was rated Moderately Satisfactory to Satisfactory.



   According to the ICR (para 79) the implementation of the project’s civil works complied with the Indigenous
   People’s Instrument and OP/BP 4.10. The project did not cause any involuntary resettlement. According to
   the ICR (para 80) land was purchased only from one household for the construction of a bridge in AP. A
   Resettlement Action Plan was prepared and the affected household was compensated in accordance to
   OP/BP 4.12. Small strips of land were donated by the community to enhance the community’s resilience to
   natural hazards.



   The ICR (para 81) stated that a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was built on existing systems in
   both states and was in accordance with OP/BP 4.01. The PIU trained approximately 40 community
   mobilizers for stakeholder engagement and consultations. This had a positive impact on timely information
   sharing which promptly addressed grievances.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement:



   The ICR (para 82) stated that the project’s procurement plans were in accordance with the procurement
   manual and were updated and published every 12 to 18 months. However, according to the ICR the
   Bank’s procurement policies and AP’s state procurement regulations were different which resulted in
   extensive rebidding and delays in awarding contracts. Also, the ICR (para 62) stated that in AP the project
   faced several challenges such as: (i) lacking market appetite for small civil works in remote areas; (ii) high
   bid prices due to remoteness; and (iii) transition to e-procurement system of the National Informatics
   Center (NIC) in 2013 which required training of the contractors and line departments. Furthermore, the

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj (P092217)



   completion of the Early Warning Dissemination System (EWDS) was delayed due to procurement and
   technical challenges. The terms of reference for the supply and installation of the EWDS did not sufficiently
   define the necessary associated infrastructure and equipment required, resulting in installation delays of
   the EWDS. The ICR did not state how the project or the Bank addressed these delays.

   According to the ICR (para 82) the project’s procurement performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory
   to Satisfactory throughout implementation.



   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (para 83) the project’s institutional financial management arrangements and control
   procedures were adequate. The PMU and PIUs had financial specialists and internal and external auditors
   to support the project. External audits were prepared in a timely manner and had several qualified
   opinions. For example, in AP, the Odisha PIU had questionable payments of approximately US$5.5 million
   in the financial statements of FY10-11 and FY16-17. The ICR (p. 27) stated that the Odisha PIU rectified
   these issues, however, the corrective actions by the AP PIU were still pending by project closure. The ICR
   did not state how the Bank addressed these issues.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                    This review rated the project's
                                                                                    efficiency as Substantial,
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                   Satisfactory              whereas the ICR rated efficiency
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                    as Modest. This resulted in the
                                                                                    different overall outcome ratings.
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                          Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons


                                                                                                      Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj (P092217)



The ICR (paras 92-96) included several lessons learned. Two that stand out and have general
application were as follows:

        Engaging with communities in infrastructure management is important for ensuring a
         sense of ownership and vulnerability preparedness This project involved local
         communities from the start by establishing village-level emergency task forces and MPCS
         committees. The successful mock drills within communities to make people aware of early
         cyclone warnings and the actions to take to gain shelter were associated with the successful
         operation of the early warning system and the utility of the community shelters during
         cyclones that actually occurred during project implementation. The lesson is that the
         continued engagement of communities in disaster risk management was important for the
         success of the project in addressing cyclones during implementation and will be an
         important necessary condition for the future success of the infrastructure established by this
         project
        Regularly assessing available technology during implementation is essential for
         maintaining reliability and efficiency. During this project’s implementation the level of
         EWDS technology advanced increasing the population coverage of the Remote Public
         Alerting and Communication System (R-PACS). The project team was sufficiently flexible to
         adapt the indicator for the measurement of the achievement of the EWDS in the Results
         Framework accordingly. The lesson is that for the early warning system to be sustained in
         future the technology on which it is based can be upgraded and make the system more
         reliable and efficient.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a good overview of project preparation and implementation and was "outcome driven". On
the whole, the ICR was sufficiently clear and candid. It was also internally consistent. The lessons learned
included in the ICR were generally useful and two stood out as being important. However, the ICR lacked
conciseness in some areas and also did not provide enough information on what type of risks might be a threat
to development outcomes. One area in which the ICR was not concise was in its rating of efficiency. Despite
an elaborate and well crafted analysis of the project's efficiency, the conclusions behind its final rating of the
project's efficiency as modest was unclear and not concise. With respect to a lack of information on threats to
development outcomes, the ICR rarely referred to these threats directly or analyzed an issue such as “reducing
the vulnerability of coastal communities”, which was a critical aspect for this project's objective. Nevertheless,
on the whole this review rated the ICR's quality as Substantial.




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj (P092217)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                    Page 17 of 17
