     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia-Transport Sector Project (P117731)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021923

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P117731                                     Ethiopia-Transport Sector Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Ethiopia                                    Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51550                                   30-Apr-2019                                       262,666,330.62

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Sep-2012                                 26-Oct-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               415,000,000.00                                          0.00

 Revised Commitment                                290,905,980.56                                          0.00

 Actual                                            262,666,330.62                                          0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Kavita Mathur                  Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Credit Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 4) was "to improve the condition of priority regional corridors
   and link roads, being upgraded under the project".



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
                                                                                                  Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia-Transport Sector Project (P117731)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were two components (PAD, page 6).

   1. Upgrading of Regional and Link Roads. The cost at appraisal was US$374.02 million (US$336.6
   million from IDA financing and US$37.4 million from counterpart funding); actual cost was US$259.7 million.
   (The actual cost was lower for reasons discussed below in section e). This component provided financing
   for upgrading five selected regional and link roads, for a total length of 434.5 kilometers (Km). The roads
   were: (a) Ambo - Weliso, 63.8 km to Asphalt Concrete (AC) standard; (b) Debre Birhan - Ankober, 42.0 km
   to AC standard;(c) Kombolcha - Bati - Mille, 130 km to AC standard;(d) Mizan - Dima, 91.6 km to AC
   standard; and (e) Konso - Yabelo, 107.1 km to AC standard.

   2. Support to modernize the Ethiopian Roads Authority (hereafter referred to as the ERA). The cost at
   appraisal was US$10.0 million (US$9.0 million from IDA financing and US$1.0 million from counterpart
   funding); actual cost was US$3.0 million. This component aimed at strengthening ERA's implementation
   capacity in following areas: contract management, audits, asset management through output and
   performance-based contracting and support for preparing follow-on projects, including environmental and
   social impact assessments.

   The project also included physical contingencies (US$38.4 million) and price contingencies (US$ 38.9
   million).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$461.1 million. Revised estimate was US$290.9
   million. The reasons for the revision are provided below. The actual project cost was US$262.7 million.

   Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA grant of US$415.0 million. About 25% of the
   grant (US$103.2) was cancelled. Revised estimate of the grant was US$290.9 million. The amount
   disbursed was US$262.6 million. The reason for the discrepancy between the revised estimate and actual
   disbursement was due to significant exchange rate changes during implementation.

   Borrower contribution. Counterpart funding was estimated at US$46.1 million. According to the
   clarifications provided by the team, the Borrower contributed US$13.3 million during implementation for
   activities pertaining to resettlement.

   Dates. The project was approved on September 25, 2012, became effective four months later on January
   25, 2013 and was scheduled to close on April 30, 2019. The project closed six months earlier than the
   scheduled closing date on October 26, 2018.

   Other changes.These changes were made through a Level 2 restructuring on October 24, 2018.




                                                                                                  Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia-Transport Sector Project (P117731)



   (i) There were major environmental and social safeguards issues with the road upgrading activities on
   a road segment - Mizan-Dima road (discussed in section 10a). The ERA prepared a new environmental and
   social safeguards plan, that was approved by the Bank. Due to delays in implementing the plan, the Bank in
   January 2018, suspended disbursements on the grant. This resulted in the cancellation of 25% of the grant.

   (ii) The poor performance of the contractors led to the termination of the contract on the Ambo- Wolliso
   road. Following this termination, the ERA decided to procure new contracts and complete the activity using
   its own resources.

   (iii) The closing date for the project was preponed by six months, at government request.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Ethiopia, a landlocked country in the Horn of Africa, with a per capita income of
US$377.0 in 2009/2010, is one of the poorest countries in the world. Ethiopia's economy is mainly agrarian
and 80% of its export earnings come from the agricultural sector. Given its geographical location, road
sector investments were a crucial component of the government's program for sustained poverty reduction
at the household, regional and national levels.

Government strategy. The PDO was well aligned with the government's five-year plan, articulated in the "
The Growth and Transformation Plan " for 2010-2015. The plan highlighted the need for expanding the road
network, as central to the growth agenda. The PDO was consistent with the government's Road Sector
Development Program (RSDP). This program identified the priority investments in the road sector and
highlighted the need for reforms to modernize the sector.

Bank strategy. The PDO continues to be relevant to the Bank’s strategy. The first pillar of the Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2013-2016, highlighted the need for fostering competitiveness and
employment, through increasing and improving delivery of infrastructure (CPS, page iii).The PDO was also
consistent with the Bank's New Africa Strategy issued on February 2011. A pillar of the strategy highlighted
the need for improving competitiveness and employment at the regional level by improving the key
transport and trade corridors. The First Focus Area of the Bank's current Country Partnership Framework
(CPF) for the 2018-2022 period, underscored the need for boosting productivity and private sector
development for structural transformation, through improving spatial connectivity and through connecting
production centers to markets and connecting secondary cities (CPF, page 30).

Previous Sector Experience. The Bank has a long history of engagement with Ethiopia, including through
financing five road sector projects. The prior road projects financed by the Bank and other donors primarily
focused on rehabilitating federal roads. This project focused on the government's priorities of improving
regional arterial and link roads, including through the trade corridors. This project was built on the Bank’s
long-standing partnership with Ethiopia in the transport sector and intended to form an integral part of the
Bank’s assistance program to continue progress made under the preceding APL series and to support the
Roads Sector Development Program in its fourth stage (ICR para 2).



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Ethiopia-Transport Sector Project (P117731)



               Although the project activities were relevant to the government and Bank strategy, the PDO did not capture
               activities associated with the institutional strengthening of the project. There were no key outcome
               indicators for activities pertaining to modernization of the Ethiopian Roads Authority. Because of this
               shortcoming, the relevance of PDO is rated as substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the condition of priority regional corridors and link roads, being upgraded under the project.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The project activities combined civil works activities (upgrading regional and link roads)
                             with institutional strengthening activities (modernizing the ERA). The causal links between the project
                             activities, their outputs and outcomes were logical. Upgrading regional and link roads along with capacity
                             building of ERA, were likely to improve the condition of priority regional trade corridors and link roads and
                             thereby contribute to the long-term development outcome of improving connectivity to the secondary cities
                             and enhancing regional growth. One shortcoming in design was the lack of key outcome indicators
                             associated with the institutional dimension of the project.

                             Outputs (ICR, page10-11 and 24-29).

                                        320 kilometers (km) of roads in total were upgraded to date. This represented 73% of the target of
                                          434.5 km. Of the five road segments one segment - the Kombolcha - Burka - Millie road (133 km)
                                          was fully completed; and two were partly completed. These were: Mizan-Dima road (77 km against
                                          the target of 92 km) and Konso -Yabello road (95 km against the target of 105 km). The contracts for
                                          the remaining two segments - the Ambo-Wolliso and the Debre Birhan - Ankober roads - were
                                          terminated. The ICR reports that the contracts for these roads were re-bid and are expected to be
                                          completed using government funding.

                                        Five supervision contracts were awarded as targeted and all contracts were delivered within 25% of
                                          the originally estimated time and cost.

                                        These technical assistance activities were delivered as targeted: (i) Manual of quality assurance and
                                          supervision services; (ii) Guidelines of risk management, price adjustment, gap analysis and works
                                          contract management; (iii) Manuals of claim and dispute management; (iv) Guidelines of work
                                          program evaluation and monitoring; (v) Report on technical auditing of selected design and
                                          construction projects; (vi) Report on review of design documents and identifying major gaps; (vii)


                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 13
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Ethiopia-Transport Sector Project (P117731)



                                     Procurement manual and guidelines; and (viii) Report on review of the current quality of design and
                                     accountability of the systems for the completed works. The outputs of these technical assistance
                                     activities were used for re-contracting the works following the termination of the previous contractors.

                                  Four contracts for the repair and maintenance of four roads using the output and performance based
                                     road contract, were not implemented using Bank financing as envisioned. These activities are
                                     expected to be completed using government financing.

                                  Feasibility studies and designs for follow-on projects (including environmental and social impact
                                     assessments) were not implemented, due to the delays in identifying priority projects.

                                  18 people were trained at project closure, slightly short of the target of 20.

                            Outcomes

                                  As a result of institutional strengthening and project investments, the rural accessibility index
                                     increased from 17.8% (baseline) to 37% at project closure, sightly short of the target of 40%.
                                    1,983,357 people benefited from project activities at closure, slightly above the baseline of 1,943,400
                                     and short of the target of 2,325,900 (beneficiaries were mostly rural population, and to a limited extent,
                                     urban population in the vicinity of the road corridors). About 50% of beneficiaries were women.
                                    The target for “travel and turnaround time of heavy goods vehicle on the Addis-Mille Djibouti trade
                                     route” was not achieved, despite improvements on this road segment. The ICR (paragraph 22) notes
                                     that other parts of the Addis-Djibouti corridor (in the territory of Djibouti) had deteriorated during the
                                     project period, and hence there was no reduction on the total travel and turnaround time on this route.
                                    Average travel speed measured on the completed road sections (excluding the two roads terminated
                                     at closing), improved from 23 km per hour at the baseline to 70 km/hour, short of the target of target of
                                     80 km/hour.
                                    As indicated above, there were no key outcome indicators associated with the institutional
                                     strengthening dimension of the project.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            At project closure, given that three of the five road segments were not fully completed and the works on the
                            fifth one had not begun, most of the original targets were not realized. The unfinished work on two corridors
                            were expected to be completed by the ERA.




                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ethiopia-Transport Sector Project (P117731)




  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. At appraisal, a cost-benefit analysis was conducted for the five road segments, using the
Highway Design Model (HDM-4). These segments accounted for 81% of the appraisal estimate and 99% of the
actual cost. The expected economic benefits were assumed to come from savings in vehicle operating costs
and travel time savings on the Addis-Djibouti corridor route. The ex-ante Economic Rate of Return (ERR) was
14.2% for asphalt concrete option and 15.9% for surface treatment option (PAD Annex 6, page 80). The PAD
noted that despite the higher economic justification of the surface treatment option, the project would finance an
asphalt concrete pavement on these roads because the project roads were in areas with long wet seasons and
some stretches of expansive soil. Hence, there is higher tendency for surface water to percolate into the
pavement structure leading to earlier deterioration of the road. The ex-post ERR for the three completed road
segments (the Kombolcha-Burke- Mille Road, the Mizan-Dima road and the Konso-Yabello road), were 29%,
32% and 45%, as compared to their ex ante EIRR of 15%. While the efficiency was higher on the completed
roads, the other roads were not complete when the project closed, undermining the efficiency of the entire
project.

Administrative and Operational inefficiencies. Although the project was prepared in short time (project
concept note in January 2012, appraisal in July and Bank approval in September), there were major delays with
all five contracts in the initial years. The delays were due to a combination of factors, including poor contractor
performance, environmental issues, safeguards compliance issues at a quarry site which caused a partial
suspension of the credit in January 2018 and this continued till the project closed. The delays contributed to the
termination of contracts for two of the five road segments, which are now expected to be completed using
government funds. These delays contributed to the cancellation of part of the Bank credit and non-realization of
outcomes. According to the clarifications provided by the team, about 98% of the Debre-Birhan-Ankober road
and 52% of the Ambo-Wolliso road has been completed to date. There were pending issues when the project
closed, such as compensation to the family of victims of fatal accidents (discussed in section 10a).

In sum efficiency is rated as modest, mainly on account of the administrative and operational inefficiencies,
which contributed to the non-completion of activities and partial achievement of all the PDO indicators.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      81.00
 Appraisal                                                  15.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable



                                                                                                      Page 6 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ethiopia-Transport Sector Project (P117731)



                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                35.30
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the government and Bank strategy is rated as substantial. Efficacy of the single
objective - “to improve the condition of priority regional corridors and link roads, being upgraded under
the project “is rated as modest, given that only 73% of the targeted length of roads at appraisal were improved,
and partial achievement of all the PDO indicators. Efficiency is rated as modest, given the administrative and
operational inefficiencies during implementation. Taking these ratings into account, outcome is rated as
moderately unsatisfactory, reflecting significant shortcomings in the project's achievement of its objectives and
in its efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There are three key risks to development outcome:

Technical risk. Although performance-based maintenance contract was not signed under this project, the
Ethiopian Roads Authority (ERA) has prepared and awarded four contracts in 2016 for the repair and
maintenance of four roads using an output and performance based roads contracts, from another project
supported by the Bank (RSSP – P13118). However, although the technical consultants had delivered a
number of reports to enhance the capacity of ERA with respect to contract and project management
practices, technical audits and quality management, it is not evident that the capacity of ERA has been
enhanced.

Institutional risk. There is ongoing risk to project activities, given that two of the five road segments were
terminated. This risk is rated as moderate, given that the contracts were rebid and awarded and are to be
completed with funding from the Ethiopian Roads Authority.

Government ownership and commitment. There are risks associated with the sustainability of the
improved road network, as it is not clear if there are appropriate arrangements for maintenance of the
rehabilitated road network.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

                                                                                                      Page 7 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia-Transport Sector Project (P117731)



  This project was prepared based on the lessons from the prior five Bank-financed Road Sector
  Development projects (including three stand-alone Investment Financing Projects and two stages of
  Adaptable Program Lending in 2012). Lessons incorporated at design, included addressing issues
  associated with a frequent staff turnover of ERA, through outsourcing more services to external
  consultants with technical expertise. Several risks were identified at appraisal, including substantial
  risks associated with design (prior projects had cost overruns) and compliance with environmental and
  social safeguards. The Ethiopian Roads Authority (ERA), a legally autonomous federal road agency, was
  in charge of implementing the project (PAD, paragraph 26). This arrangement was appropriate, given
  ERA's good track record of implementing Bank-financed projects. Appropriate arrangements were made
  at appraisal for fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10b).

  There were major shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. One, as discussed in Section three, although support
  to modernization of the ERA was an integral project component, the PDO statement “to improve the
  condition of the priority regional trade corridors and link roads, being upgraded under this project”, was
  not outcome-oriented but output-based. There were no key outcome indicators aimed at monitoring the
  institutional dimension of the project. Two, there were other shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in
  section 9a). and Three, several roads projects financed by the Bank in the past In Ethiopia, had revealed
  gaps in Environmental and Social (E&S) safeguards management due to a combination of factors,
  including delays and shortcomings in the adequacy and quality of compliance in civil works
  contracts, weakness in contractor's organizations and quality of supervision. These risks were sought to
  be mitigated in this project through mitigation measures such as, early preparation of safeguard
  documents during implementation and technical assistance for enhancing ERA's capacity for monitoring
  compliance with E&S safeguards. These measures proved to be inadequate and compliance with
  E&S safeguards was a major issue during implementation. Environmental issues during
  implementation, led to complaints from a nearby village on resettlement compensation
  values about excessive dust emissions, blasting impacts from a quarry site and physical loss to
  properties during November 2015 to April 2016 and issues relating to occupational health and safety,
  some of which resulted in fatal accidents The delay in the completion of the Action Plan requested by the
  Bank to address these critical issues eventually led the Bank's decision to partially suspend
  disbursements on January 2018 (also discussed in detail in section 10a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 There was regular supervision during implementation. The location of the supervision team in Addis
 Ababa allowed the team to follow up on safeguards issues (regarding Mizan-Dima contract) and conduct
 safeguards training and diagnostic reviews. The ICR notes that the team spent substantial time reporting
 and discussing with Bank Management to advise ERA on how to address the issues (ICR para 61). The
 supervision team supported the ERA in addressing technical issues and monitoring fiduciary and
 safeguards aspects throughout implementation.

 However, there were significant shortcomings in supervision associated with procedural issues: (i) During
 the six years of implementation, there were only five aide-memoires and mission records, and there was no
 record of discussions of the team since the last aide-memoire in December 2016, until project closing in

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia-Transport Sector Project (P117731)



 October 2018. This timing (late 2016) coincides with time that the key project ratings (PDO and
 Implementation Progress) had started to be downgraded to show warning signs about the project, at which
 time the supervision records of the project activities should have been strengthened, rather than loosened.
 According to the clarifications provided by the team, although Implementation Status Results Reports were
 not recorded frequently, supervision missions were held in January 2017, October 2017, February 2018
 and June 2018) with correspondence and meetings with the client, and further technical site visits
 associated with the Mizan-Dima road; (ii) The scheduled Mid-Term Review was not conducted, and this
 precluded the scope for addressing critical issues and taking corrective action during implementation: and
 (iii) Despite the Bank taking actions for correcting the environmental issues in the Mizan-Dima quarry site,
 these were not fully resolved when the project closed (discussed in section 10a).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Of the five key outcome indicators associated with monitoring performance of the civil works aspects of the
 project, four were appropriate. This included three core indicators - the percentage of population within two
 kilometers of an all reason road, direct project beneficiaries disaggregated by gender and the indicator for
 measuring the average travel time on subject roads at completion compared with pre-construction baseline.

 The indicator "reduction in the travel and turnaround time of heavy goods on the Addis-Mille-Djibouti trade
 route" was inappropriate, given that the reduction would also depend on the condition of the road network
 on the other part of the corridor which was in Djibouti. There were no key outcome indicators (such as
 a beneficiary survey) for monitoring activities associated with strengthening the capacity of ERA.

 The PAD (paragraph 32) notes that with finance from the European Commission and from the Government,
 ERA had engaged a consultant to update the Road Sector Development Program (RSDP) performance
 and Millennium Development Goals transport indicators and that total of 47 indicators were now monitored
 annually.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project team clarified that ERA produced Annual reports that monitored the overall performance of
  the RDSP. The ICR (paragraph 50) notes that although the data collected by the ERA were deemed to
  be adequate, lack of a clearly defined methodology undermined the reliability of the data.




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia-Transport Sector Project (P117731)



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (paragraph 50) notes that the M&E data utilization for assessing the intermediate performance
  and results was not effective as most of the indicators were associated with the final outputs (that is,
  road improvements) and could not capture the outcome.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category A project for the World Bank's safeguard policies; Five safeguard
   policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Natural Habitats (OP/BP
   4.04): Forests (OP/BP 4.36): Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): and Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.11). Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAP)
   was prepared for each of the road segments and publicly-disclosed at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 58).

   Environmental Safeguards. The ICR (paragraph 52) notes that the environmental and social management
   was deemed to be unsatisfactory. The ICR (paragraph 42) notes that there were major environmental
   aspects related to the crusher plant at the quarry site of Biftu. Complaints were received from the nearby
   village on resettlement compensation values, the impact of excessive dust emissions, and damages to
   properties during November 2015- April 2016. The Bank, following the complaints, requested for a full
   assessment and a time-bound Action Plan to address the issues. The ICR (paragraph 53) notes that some
   of the critical actions of the plan were not implemented and this eventually led to the partial suspension of
   disbursements in January 2018 and this suspension continued until the closing of the credit in October
   2018.

   There were several issues in other contracts relating to occupational health and safety, some of which
   resulted in fatal accidents. The ICR (page 19) notes that there were 19 fatal accidents during the
   construction period (2 fatalities under Kombolcha-Mille, 4 fatalities under Konso-Yabello, 7 fatalities under
   Mizan-Dima, 6 fatalities under Ambo-wolliso during the construction periods). A Health and Safety Action
   Plan was prepared to improve the situation. The ICR (paragraph 45) notes that the implementation of the
   plan was expected to be completed by the end of March 2019.

   Involuntary resettlement. The ICR (paragraph 42) notes that following the complaints by the nearby
   village, more that 95% of the complainants obtained appropriate compensation for the damages.

   The ICR does not report on implementation status of other safeguards such as Natural Habitats (OP/BP
   4.04); Forests (OP/BP 4.36): ); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11).




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia-Transport Sector Project (P117731)



   Financial management. An assessment of ERA's financial management capacity was conducted at
   appraisal (PAD, paragraph 29). ERA had prior experience with implementing Bank-financed projects. The
   assessment concluded that the financial management arrangements of ERA were deemed to be
   satisfactory.

   The ICR (paragraph 58) notes that financial management was satisfactory. The ICR (paragraph 58) notes
   that the financial management system provided reasonable assurance that the credit proceeds were
   properly recorded, although there were some issues during implementation, such as: (i) maintaining
   expenditure budget in addition to cash budget; (ii) financial reporting with budget variances in the
   statement of budget versus uses of funds; and (iii) closure of entity audit issues.

   Procurement. An assessment of the ERA's procurement capacity was conducted at appraisal. This
   assessment concluded that the procurement risk was substantial, and a procurement plan was prepared at
   appraisal (paragraph 70 and 71.

   The ICR (paragraph 56) notes that procurement performance was satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                 IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately         Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory     Unsatisfactory
Bank Performance                 Unsatisfactory     Unsatisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Modest             Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

(1) The civil works contracts, pertaining to social safeguards (such as land
acquisition, resettlements and compensation), and utility relocation timeframe and
arrangements need to be thoroughly assessed at preparation, to avoid suspension of works
during implementation. At the time of appraisal, the three contracts were ready for implementation.
However, there were delays in executing all contracts for different reasons such as environmental

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Ethiopia-Transport Sector Project (P117731)



issues at the quarry site and delays due to right of way issues. These factors eventually led to the
termination of contracts and cancellation of the part of the credit.

(2) Opportunities for partial cancellation/extension need to be carefully considered, in case of
"multi-packaged independent road sub-projects”. This project entailed rehabilitation of
five independent road segments. When some of the sub-projects caused delays or serious problems
to the whole project, the possibility of a partial cancellation needs to be considered before closing
the entire project. This project was closed six months earlier than the original closing date due to the
substantial delays and terminations of contracts for two road segments. Partial cancellation for these
sections, would have enabled financing for the rest of the project roads toward the original closing
date.

(3) The PDO indicators need to be designed to reflect only the achievements under control of
the project. One of the key indicators in this project “travel and turnaround time of heavy goods on
Addis-Mille Djibouti trade route” was clearly outside the project scope (in the territory of Djibouti).
The results indicator should be designed to reflect the intervention under the project’s control.

(4) The institutional strengthening aspect of the project should be captured in the PDO. In
this project, there were no key indicators for monitoring the project activities associated with
strengthening the ERA's institutional capacity.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise and well-written. The ICR candidly discusses the issues associated with safeguards
compliance and the failure to follow procedural aspects during supervision. It also acknowledges that this was a
serious shortcoming, given the experience of prior Bank-financed road sector projects in Ethiopia. The various
parts of the report are well integrated. The lessons are based on clear analysis and drawn from the specific
experiences of the project. The ICR is consistent with the guidelines, both with respect to ratings and the
performance narrative.

On the other hand, the details provided in the ICR on M&E implementation and fiduciary management is very
sparse. More details on these aspects would have contributed to a better and comprehensive ICR. The ICR
does not report on implementation status of other safeguards such as Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Forests
(OP/BP 4.36); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 13
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Ethiopia-Transport Sector Project (P117731)




                                                                           Page 13 of 13
