     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Low-Income Housing Finance (P119039)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0021924

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P119039                                  IN: Low-Income Housing Finance

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                    Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52830                                31-Dec-2018                                          93,050,362.23

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 14-May-2013                              31-Dec-2018

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                             100,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                          93,050,362.23                                            0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Fernando Manibog             Christopher David Nelson       IEGFP (Unit 3)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 6) is:




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Low-Income Housing Finance (P119039)



   "To provide access to sustainable housing finance for low income households, to purchase, build or
   upgrade their dwellings".




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   A Financial Intermediary Loan (FIL) was used as the lending instrument for this project, with
   three components (PAD, pages 7 -9).

   1. Capacity Building. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$2.00 million (US$1.32 million through IDA
   Credit and the balance through counterpart funding). There was no IDA financing for this component at
   closure, as the IDA financing for this component was reallocated to component two activities (discussed in
   section 2e). This component was eventually financed completely through counterpart funding. This
   component aimed at strengthening the capacities of the National Housing Bank (NHB - an apex institution
   established by an Act of Parliament in 1988, for providing housing finance) and the Qualified Intermediary
   and Primary Lending Institutions, for developing new financial products, loan standards, and risk
   management tools for catering to the needs of low-income households. This component also envisioned
   financing an impact assessment for assessing the social and household level impacts of housing finance
   for low-income households.

   2. Financial Support for Sustainable and Affordable Housing. The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$97.00 million (to be financed by the IDA grant). The actual IDA financing for this component
   was US$100.00 million. The actual financing was higher than appraised, due to the reallocation of funding
   between components. This component provided a liquidity facility to the NHB for refinancing (either directly
   or indirectly through Qualified Intermediary and Primary Lending Institutions), affordable housing loans for
   purchasing/building/upgrading the dwellings of low-income households.

   3. Project Implementation. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.00 million, to be funded by
   IDA. There was no IDA funding for this component at closure, as Bank financing for this component was
   reallocated to component two activities. This component was financed through counterpart funding. This
   component provided financing for setting a Project Implementation Unit (PMU) within NHB, to assist
   in implementation, monitoring and evaluation, grievance redressal and overseeing social and environmental
   aspects.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Low-Income Housing Finance (P119039)



   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$100.00 million. The actual cost was US$93.05
   million.

   Project financing. An IDA credit of US$100.00 million was approved for the project. Amount
   disbursed US$93.05 million. According to the information provided by the team, due to exchange rate
   fluctuations, the value of the credit of US$100.00 was reduced to US$93.05 million in US$ terms and the
   IDA credit was fully disbursed in SDR terms.

   Borrower contribution. Counterpart funding from NHB was estimated at US$3.00 million at appraisal. The
   team clarified that counterpart funding from NHB was approximately US$0.19 million - about 13
   million Indian Rupees (INR).

   Dates. The project was approved on May 14, 2013, became effective on November 2013, and closed as
   scheduled on December 31, 2018.

   Other changes. The proposed IDA grant for components one and three activities were reallocated to
   component two activities through a Level 2 restructuring on December 3, 2018. With this, the IDA grant was
   entirely used for funding component two activities and components one and three activities were financed
   by the NHB.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


Country context. Urban population in India was estimated at 377 million in 2011. This represented an
increase of 91 million between 2001 and 2011, and was projected to increase to 600 million by 2031. There
was a severe shortage of urban housing, particularly for low-income households in the informal sector, with
a third of them living in slums. The lack of access to housing finance for low-income households from the
formal banking sector, disincentivized the developers from building affordable "decent" housing (defined as
housing that met the requirements of the United Nations Habitat Guidelines, in terms of structural quality
and basic services- such as availability of water, sanitation and electricity). Developing customized
financing instruments tailored to the needs of low-income households in urban areas, was important to the
government strategy.

Government strategy. The PDOs were consistent with the twelfth Five Year Plan for 2012-2017. The plan
highlighted the need for financial inclusion and addressing urbanization issues. The PDO was well-aligned
with the National Housing for All initiative launched in 2015. This initiative aimed at providing affordable
housing to low-income urban population (defined as those with income below 600,000 Indian Rupees per
annum). The initiative had four components: (i) slum development; (ii) providing affordable housing through
credit-linked subsidies: (iii) providing affordable housing in partnership with the private sector; and (iv)
subsidies for beneficiary-led housing construction.

Bank strategy. The PDOs are well-aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal, the PDO was consistent
with two of the three strategic engagement areas of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2013-2017:

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IN: Low-Income Housing Finance (P119039)



               Transformation and inclusion. The inclusion area specifically highlighted the need for financial inclusion,
               through facilitating access to credit for low-income households (CPS, paragraph 30, page 9). The PDOs
               are well-aligned with two of the three key focus areas of the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
               for 2018-2022. The first focus area underscored the need for "promoting resource efficient growth" through
               among other things, "improving the livability and sustainability of cities". The second focus area highlighted
               the need for "enhancing competitiveness and enabling job creation" through among other things,
               "increasing resiliency of the financial sector and financial inclusion" and supporting development of credit
               products for facilitating long-term housing finance to low-income households (CPF, paragraph 31. page 14).

               Within the context of the Bank's long history of engagement with India, this project was designed as a pilot
               to address the market failure caused by the exclusion of low-income households from the housing finance
               market, due to the lack of access to finance under reasonable terms from the banking system. Although
               untested in India, this review rates the relevance of objective of this project as substantial, given the strong
               developmental impact associated with providing affordable housing finance to low-income households.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             To provide access to sustainable housing finance for low income households, to purchase, build or upgrade
                             their dwellings

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The causal links between activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and the intended
                             outcomes were measurable. Capacity building of the NHB and Primary Lending Institutions (PLIs),
                             was expected to improve their ability to develop new customized financing instruments tailored for the needs
                             of low-income households. Providing housing finance through a dedicated credit line to the NHB for onward
                             lending to low-income households, was expected to improve access to affordable finance for the low-income
                             segment of the population. The outcomes were expected to address the long-term development challenges
                             of financial inclusion of low-income households from the banking sector.

                             Outputs (ICR, pages 12-19 and pages 33-36)

                                        With the IDA credit, the NHB set up a Special Refinance Scheme for providing housing finance for low
                                         income households. The main features of the scheme were: (a) providing long-term housing finance
                                         to low-income households through the PLIs (including state-owned commercial banks, Household
                                         Finance Companies, and other institutions that provide housing finance such as, urban cooperative
                                         banks, regional rural banks and microfinance institutions); (b) Unlike other housing

                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
IN: Low-Income Housing Finance (P119039)



     schemes, there was no interest rate cap in the scheme, to incentivize the PLIs to assume the price
     and credit risk and provide housing finance for low-income households, through new appraisal
     methods. Flexibility to set interest rates was expected to help the PLIs assume the inherently greater
     risk in lending to informal sector households; (c) Under the scheme, the PLIs received funding from
     NHB, against secured mortgages. The PLIs bore the risk on retail mortgages and provided part of
     their mortgage loan as collateral for the NHB loan. If any of the loans provided by the Qualified
     Primary Lending Institutions (QPLIs) were to become delinquent, the PLIs were required to replace
     these loans with a performing loan. This ensured that the NHB minimized its credit risk to the
     mortgage market; (d) The refinance interest rate of the NHB at 8.50 - 8.95% was higher than the rates
     of other NHB schemes at 6.50 - 7.00%, to reflect the higher risk of lending to the low-income
     segment; (e) The eligible income threshold for loans to low-income households at INR 300,000
     was lower than loans from other NHB schemes (such as the Urban Housing Fund Scheme, which had
     an income threshold of INR 600,000); (f) The scheme extended refinancing not only for loans secured
     through property collateral, but also alternatively secured loans. The NHB issued one lending
     guideline for Housing Loans with alternative security arrangements, as compared to the target of two.
    15,541 informal and low-income households secured housing loans across 17 states under
     the scheme. 45% of the loan by QPLIs went to low-income households with informal property lines
     (lack of records) and 95% of the loans went to low-income households with informal income
     (economic activities that met one of the three criteria: (i) self-employment in a low-income business,
     profession or occupation: (ii) households with casual, temporary, or multiple jobs: and (iii) households
     employed in the unorganized sector). The average annual household income of beneficiaries
     at INR 196,700 was below the project's targeted income threshold INR 300,000. The average loan
     size INR 435,200 was 2.2 times the average household income, to ensure that the house loans did
     not push the households into over-indebtedness. The average interest rate for loans under
     the scheme was 15%, as compared to the average of 27% before the project. Unlike other schemes,
     the average tenor (the amount of time left for repayment of a loan) was 128 months, or more than ten
     years.
    Four pilots were launched under the NHB's special refinance scheme as targeted.
    The Social and Environment Due Diligence (SEDD) framework was developed, which set specific
     requirements for consumer safety of the financed properties, as targeted. The NHB institutionalized
     the SEDD framework and conducted training and sample-based loan level monitoring as targeted.
    The NHB carried out other reforms for facilitating the PLIs to operate in the informal segment such as,
     through conducting market-based pilots with the Housing Finance Companies, defining the concept of
     informal income for the first time in India and providing capacity building activities on risk management
     and the SEDD framework for lending to informal and low-income households, as targeted.
    Since the traditional credit appraisal techniques were deemed to be inadequate for targeting informal
     beneficiaries, the Household Finance Companies made upfront investments to upgrade technology for
     the new lending tools. The ICR (paragraph 19, page 14) notes that one lender, which used the Special
     Refinance Scheme, invested an amount equal to 0.2% of its asset base in lending technology (a
     considerably higher amount than other comparable lenders) , in order to have a fully scalable platform
     with a reduction in customer acquisition and service costs, which facilitated its lending to informal and
     low-income households through funds from other sources (other than the special refinancing
     scheme). Field based verification method was adopted by the PLIs (Under this method, lenders send
     their employees to observe the borrowers on-site, to collect more information about the borrowers'
     income status and borrowing capacity. This allowed the lenders to more efficiently identify qualified
     borrowers. According to the information provided by the team, based on field-level data points, an
     application scorecard and credit risk underwriting model was developed for each beneficiary

                                                                                                Page 5 of 14
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  IN: Low-Income Housing Finance (P119039)



     occupational profile. This credit model served as a guiding mechanism for underwriters to undertake
     better risk assessment and thereby obtain optimal pricing for the assumed risk of lending to low-
     income households with informal incomes. The team also clarified that without such field-based
     income verification, credit institutions could only rely on credit history or payment stubs, which the
     informal low-income households lacked.
    Digital technology was used to store identity information, collect and consolidate borrower data by the
     PLIs.
    The loans made to low-income households were used by the borrowers for purposes ranging from
     minor repairs and upgrades (costing INR 300,000) to multi-story room new construction (costing INR
     600,000).



Outcomes

    The number of primary lenders providing housing finance to the Economically Weaker Section (EWS)
       and Low-Income Group (LIG) segment of the population, increased from 25 at the baseline in 2013 to
       almost double (52), exceeding the target of 35.
      The financing provided by the Housing Financing Companies (HFCs), increased from INR 10 billion in
       2013 to INR 270 billion in December 2017, with an average loan size of INR 930,000. This facilitated
       the ownership of 230,000 affordable homes by low-income households.
      The total volume of loans made by HFCs, with an individual loan size below INR 1,500,000 ( loans
       categorized by the HFB as loans for the EWS and LIG segments), increased from INR 268 billion in
       2013 to INR 489 billion in 2018, showing a compounded annual growth rate of 13%.
      The total volume of housing loans made by HFCs with individual loan size below INR 500,000,
       increased from INR 25 billion in 2013 to INR 56 billion in 2018, showing a compounded annual growth
       rate of 17%.
      Small loans below INR 300,000 to low-income informal households, increased from INR 8.8 billion in
       2013 to INR 29 billion in 2018, showing a compounded annual growth rate of 27%.
      The total number of low-income borrowers, with individual loan size below INR 300,000 increased
       from 105,001 in 2013 to 240,913 in 2018, reflecting a compounded annual growth rate of 18%.
      The total amount of housing loans made for very low-income households with an annual income
       below INR 120,000, increased from INR 2.6 billion in 2013 to INR 4.1 billion in 2018, showing an
       annual compounded growth rate of 10%.
      The volume of lending by the PLIs to the EWS and the Low-Income Group (LIG) segments, refinanced
       by the NHB, increased to INR 98.40 billion, short of the target of INR 155.40 billion. The EWS and LIG
       segments received loans of INR 127,484 from the PLIs that were refinanced by the NHB, short of the
       target of INR 759,452. The ICR (paragraph 21) notes that lending by PLIs, refinanced by NHB, grew
       during the project period, albeit at a slower pace than the broad housing market. The ICR notes that
       NHB in India plays a catalytic role in providing housing finance, and that most of the funding for
       housing finance is from private sources, including banks and capital markets.
      The percentage of Non-Performing Loans (NPLs) that were replaced with performing loans by PLIs in
       the NHB -- a proxy for the NPL ratio of lending to the EWS and LIG segments -- was reduced
       to 0.86% in 2018 as compared to the target of 1.50%.




                                                                                               Page 6 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                IN: Low-Income Housing Finance (P119039)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                            The project directly provided housing loans to low-income households at lower cost and longer tenor and
                            indirectly supported mobilizing financing for development by crowding-in private sector financing for low-
                            income households and households with informal income. Given that the outcomes were for the most
                            part realized, this review concludes that the project’s activities substantially contributed to achieving the PDO.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency


   Economic benefits. An economic rate of return was not calculated either at appraisal or at closure. The PAD
   (paragraph 53) notes that the expected benefits of the project were assumed to come from three sources: (1)
   The macroeconomic impacts were assumed to come from the demonstration effect, from increasing the size of
   the mortgage market and making mortgage loans to households who hitherto lacked access to housing credit:
   (2) The financial benefits were assumed to come from strengthening the balance sheets of the qualified primary
   lending institutions and allowing the lenders to increase the orientation of their portfolio towards mortgage loans
   to previously underserved households (informal and low-income households); and (3) The microeconomic
   impact at the household level was assumed to come from improvements in welfare of households who
   obtain mortgages for affordable houses from qualified primary lending institutions at relatively low interest
   rates and of those who may benefit from improved access to credit in the future through the project's
   demonstration effects.

   The IDA credit line, supporting the NHB's refinance scheme, focused on serving low-income households and
   through addressing a market failure caused by informality (ICR, paragraph 25). Before the project, many
   informal and low-income households were completely excluded from the housing finance market and had to rely
   on informal money lenders with exorbitant interest rates (around 27%). In contrast, the informal and low-income
   borrowers under the IDA credit line paid an average interest rate of 15%, for loans with an average maturity rate
   of over ten years. This meant that the IDA credit line of US$100 million managed to achieve a reduction of at
   least 12 percentage points in the interest rate paid by the targeted households. The credit line also served



                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Low-Income Housing Finance (P119039)



households who were not able to obtain financing from the formal banking sector before the project was in
place.

The IDA credit line also had a multiplier effect on financing for low-income households. The US$100 million IDA
credit for the project, leveraged substantial amount of private sector financing for serving the targeted
households, at lower cost and longer tenor. The volume of lending disbursed by the Household Financing
Companies for individual loan size below INR 500,000, increased almost double (from INR 25.3 billion in 2013 to
INR 55.6 billion in 2018). The ICR (page 41) notes that even assuming that 10% of the total increased
disbursement from 2014 to 2018 were mobilized by this project to finance the informal and low-income
households, this would amount to INR 81.4 billion (about US$1.2 billion). This conservative estimate meant that
an additional US$1.2 billion of affordable housing loans were mobilized by this US$100 million credit to provide
financing to households who either were not able to receive financing or had to pay high interest rates for
financing before the project was in place.

Administrative and Operational Issues. The ratio of the project preparation staff cost to supervision cost
at 0.94 was quite high. However, this was due to the strong preparation work needed by this project and the
long timespan of project preparation, given that the project aimed at improving access to finance of low-income
households was untested in India and in low-income markets in general. Initial disbursements under the project
were slow due to the government's budgetary requirements and procedural issues. These were however
rectified by the project midterm and the credit was fully disbursed at closure. Frequent changes in the Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) team and NHB management caused delays during implementation. Some activities
such as a final impact evaluation and third-party audit of the Environment and Social Due Diligence Framework
were delayed and not implemented when the project closed, due to a combination of factors including PIU
changes and NHB's preference to complete these activities using internal resources.

On balance, this review concludes that the positive impacts of the project outweigh the implementation
shortcomings and rates efficiency as substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Low-Income Housing Finance (P119039)




Relevance of the PDO to the government and Bank strategy is substantial. Efficacy of the single objective - to
provide access to sustainable housing finance for low income households, to purchase, build or upgrade their
dwellings - is substantial, given that the outcomes were for the most part realized. Efficiency is Substantial.
Taking these ratings into account, the project's overall outcome is satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government ownership/commitment. The project activities aimed at addressing the demand side
constraints of the low-income housing market (such as improving access to affordable finance from
the financial sector). These activities need to be accompanied by activities aimed at addressing the supply-
side constraints (such as dearth of land serviced by utilities). The ICR notes that the Government's National
Housing for all Initiative includes a comprehensive set of interventions, aimed at addressing supply side
constraints. However, the ICR (paragraph 50) notes that addressing supply-side constraints are
challenging, given that land governance is under the mandate of state governments in India.

Financial risk. There is financial risk, given the overall increase in Non-Performing Loans (NPLs) in the
financial sector (with the overall level of NPLs rising almost three times (from 4.3% in 2015 to 11.2% in
2018). The ICR (paragraph 51) notes that the government is taking steps to improve asset quality of banks
and strengthen the balance sheets of financial institutions. There is a risk that if this issue is not properly
managed, fast-rising NPLs and financial system instability could significantly reduce the amount of credit in
circulation, thereby undermining financing for the nascent low-income housing finance market.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project -- providing Bank financing to primary borrowers belonging to low-income households
  through a financial intermediary -- was untested, in the country context and other low-income markets.
  Given this, the project preparation took a long time and the Bank eventually approved the project based
  on its strong development impact in potentially creating a new market for low income housing finance.
  The project was prepared based on the lessons from the experience of incumbent primary lending
  institutions, which were lending to low-income households in India. Lessons incorporated at design,
  included introducing pilots initially to test lending products (to address issues pertaining to over-
  indebtedness of borrowers), consultations with potential primary lenders for stronger stakeholder
  ownership and combining financing to the financial intermediary with technical assistance activities to
  the NHB and QPLIs. (PAD, paragraphs 38,39 and 40).

  Preparatory studies were used for the choice of income threshold for project intervention. The project was
  prepared in close engagement with NHB, given its strategic role in the housing market in India and the

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Low-Income Housing Finance (P119039)



  fact that this was the first time the NHB operated a lending project with Bank financing. Several risks
  were identified at appraisal, including risks associated with over-indebtedness of primary borrowers
  and moral hazard issues (middle income borrowers concealing income from QPLIs to qualify for financing
  at better rates).

  Mitigation measures incorporated at design, included linkages with credit bureaus and financial literacy
  campaign for longer term debt obligations and establishing a grievance redressal mechanism for
  beneficiaries. The implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the PMU housed in the NHB - the
  implementing agency. (PAD, paragraph 11). The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and
  fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  There were minor shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in Section 9a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Twelve Implementation Status Results Reports were filed over the project lifetime of five and a half years
 (averaging two supervision missions a year). The team was proactive in adjusting the income threshold of
 market-based lending to informal households. The team, with strong support from World Bank
 management, the country management unit, collaborated closely with the NHB and other stakeholders
 during implementation. The supervision missions included engagement with lenders in different states
 (Nagpur, Delhi, Bangalore, Bhopal, Jaipur and Ahmedabad). These visits were coordinated with the NHB's
 state-level representatives. The supervision team worked closely with the NHB's refinance and credit
 departments to design the criteria for the Special Refinance Scheme and aided in resolving the issues
 associated with slow disbursements of funds due to procedural issues, during the initial years of the
 project. The World Bank team worked closely with International Finance Corporation (IFC) for
 complementary activities. The IFC complemented the Bank project with capacity building activities for the
 credit bureau and the mortgage asset registry system. The team also aided in M&E, including by collecting
 data outside the results framework, and conducting frequent field visits to PLIs and end-beneficiaries.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization




                                                                                                Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Low-Income Housing Finance (P119039)



a. M&E Design
 The key outcome indicators - the increased number of PLIs providing loans to the economically weaker
 section and low-income segments, the increased volume of lending by PLIs which were refinanced by the
 NHB, the number of borrowers in the low-income group receiving loans from PLIs refinanced by NHBs and
 the percentage of replacements of non-performing loans with performing loans by PLIs - were appropriate
 for monitoring project performance.

 A significant shortcoming was that -- given the expectation of the project was to encourage lending to low-
 income segments from the formal banking system -- it would have been appropriate to add indicators on
 the total volume of lending and number of loans from PLIs to the informal and low-income households, not
 necessarily refinanced by the NHB.

 The Project Management Unit oversaw monitoring and evaluation, using the National Housing
 Bank's monitoring systems (PAD, paragraph 44). The project also envisioned an impact evaluation for
 determining whether the low-income households who borrow from the Qualified Primary Lending
 Institutions are better off due to the access to finance under the project (and are not worse off due to over-
 indebtedness),compared to similar households who had no access to formal low-income housing finance
 (PAD, paragraph 45).



b. M&E Implementation


  The ICR (paragraph 41) notes that key project data were regularly reported by the NHB during
  implementation. The Bank team and NHB made an effort to collect performance indicators that were not
  included in the results framework, such as the interest rate charged by the PLIs on loans to low-income
  households and the tenor profile of loans, to better inform the progress of the project. The Bank
  supervision team also conducted frequent field visits to the PLIs and end-beneficiaries to better
  understand the mechanics of the low-income housing market.

  A significant shortcoming was that the final impact evaluation and third-party audit of the Environmental
  and Social Due Diligence Framework were subject to delays during implementation and not completed
  when the project closed. The ICR (paragraph 41) notes that NHB remained committed to completing
  these activities using its internal resources, when the project closed. According to the information
  provided subsequently by the team, NHB has initiated the procurement process for the impact evaluation
  and substantially advance, if not complete, the contracting process by the end of December 2019.



c. M&E Utilization
  The monitoring data were used to track performance and identify problems in implementation. The Bank
  also made a video to capture important lessons from the project. This video was widely disseminated
  internally within the Bank and externally to the general public.

  Given the significant shortcomings cited above, M&E quality is rated modest.



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Low-Income Housing Finance (P119039)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


   The project was classified as a F1 project (refers to a project where the World Bank finances the financial
   institutions). One safeguard policy was triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). An
   Environmental Assessment was conducted at appraisal to address possible adverse environmental issues
   (such as housing safety measures). A Social and Environmental Due Diligence (SEDD) framework was
   developed by the NHB for the QPLIs and publicly-disclosed on the NHB's website, at appraisal. The
   framework covered: (i) a negative list of locations that were to be excluded: (ii) requirements of basic water
   supply and sanitation at houses: (iii) exclusion of households involved in negative list of activities; and (iv)
   positive list of requirements deemed necessary for ensuring structural safety in houses (PAD, paragraph
   91).

   The qualified primary lending institutions complied with environmental safeguards during implementation,
   according to the periodic internal audits conducted by NHB. (ICR, paragraph 44). The ICR notes that third-
   party audit of the SEDD framework was not done, in view of the relatively small size of the audit job.
   However, audit aspects of the SEDD framework were integrated by the NHB as part of their internal audit,
   which is to be finalized by the end of the calendar year in 2019. The ICR (paragraph 45) notes that NHB
   had an institutional mechanism for grievance redressal (Grievance Registration and Information Database
   System) and a Fair Practice Code for the Household Finance Companies. The companies complied with
   the mechanisms, according to the NHB's Department of Regulation and Supervision.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


   Financial management. A financial management assessment of NHB was conducted at appraisal. The
   NHB had a robust system for financial management and the assessment concluded that NHB's financial
   arrangements were satisfactory (PAD, paragraph 76). There was compliance with financial management
   during implementation (ICR, paragraph 46). Although there were some financial issues in the initial years
   (such as, non-availability of budget funds to the NHB from the government, disbursement delays due to
   administrative and procedural bottlenecks of the Department of Financial Services of the Ministry of
   Finance, non-submission of the first-year audit report), these issues were rectified by December 2015.
   There were no financial issues since then and most of the audits were submitted ahead of the due date,
   with no issues raised by the auditors.

   Procurement management. An assessment of the procurement management capacity of the
   NHB conducted at appraisal, concluded that the procurement risk was High, in view of the limited
   experience of the NHB with donor funded projects. Mitigation measures included hiring an external

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Low-Income Housing Finance (P119039)



   procurement professional in the Project Management Unit. With mitigation measures, procurement risk
   was rated as moderate and a procurement plan was prepared at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 83 and 84).
   The ICR does not report any procurement issues during implementation. The ICR (paragraph 46) states
   that NHB used in-house capacity for capacity building activities and not external consultants, as per the
   agreed implementation arrangements at appraisal.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


   Several Household Financing Companies included women as co-borrowers or guarantors to secure credit
   risks (ICR, paragraph 30). Some qualified primary lending institutions offered a discount of 0.5% on the
   interest rate, if a woman was on the title for the property, due to their improved risk profile and better
   payment record.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

(1) The Bank should encourage innovation and take calculated risks in order to create new
markets such as housing finance for informal and low-income households. The approach of
this project was untested in India and other low-income markets and the Bank assumed a calculated
risk in approving the project as a pilot for providing housing finance for informal and low-income
households.

2) Addressing demand side constraints is necessary but needs to be complemented with
supply-side reforms for low-income housing benefits. This project's interventions targeted
mainly the demand side constraints of improving access to housing finance. These need to be

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: Low-Income Housing Finance (P119039)



complemented with supply-side reforms (such as access to water, sanitation and electricity), for
sustained improvements in housing for the low-income population.

(3) The Bank should adopt the Environmental and Social Due Diligence (SEDD) framework as
an institutional framework to ensure efficient and sustainable safeguards in housing finance
projects. The experience of this project demonstrated that setting the SEDD framework as an
institutional framework between the NHB and the PLIs, combined with sample-based loan-level
monitoring can be an efficient and sustainable way to ensure compliance with environmental and
social safeguards.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



The ICR is well-written and clear. It provides a good description of the way the project activities addressed a
market failure of lack of access to finance to the low-income segment of the population from the formal banking
sector. .The ICR is also candid in acknowledging the contributions of the International Finance Corporation. The
ICR's ratings is generally consistent with the guidelines and the ICR draws reasonably good lessons from the
experience of implementing this project.

The ICR at several points in the text (Table 1, page 9 and Annex 3, page 40) refers to financing in
terms of Special Drawing Rights (SDR) terms and not in US$ terms as required. This issue was however
clarified by the team.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 14
