     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central African Backbone-APL3 - Congo Rp (P122398)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021936

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P122398                                    Central African Backbone-APL3 - Congo Rp

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Africa                                     Digital Development


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)             Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-49740,IDA-59910                        31-Dec-2016                                       18,679,030.61

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 25-May-2011                                28-Feb-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           15,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                            20,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                        18,679,030.61                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Ranga Rajan                Kavita Mathur                 Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 16) was "to contribute to increase geographical coverage and
   usage of regional broadband network services and reduce their prices".




                                                                                                Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central African Backbone-APL3 - Congo Rp (P122398)



   This assessment is based on the three sub-objectives: (1) To contribute to increase geographical coverage of
   regional broadband network services; (2) To contribute to reduce the prices of regional broadband network
   services; and (3) To contribute to increase the usage of regional broadband network services.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   This project was the third phase of Central African Backbone (CAB) regional program, aimed at increasing
   the geographical reach and usage of regional broadband network services and reducing their prices in the
   Republic of Congo (RoC). The other countries in the program included Cameroon, Chad and the Central
   African Republic. There were four components (PAD, paragraph 21).

   1. Enabling environment at the regional and national levels (estimated cost at appraisal US$3.5 million;
   actual cost US$3.5 million). This component was expected to finance technical assistance (TA) activities
   for developing the legal framework in the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) sector.
   Activities included: (i) strengthening the regulatory framework of key stakeholders (the Ministry of Posts and
   Telecommunications and the Regulatory Agency for Post and Electronic Communications (ARPCE); (ii)
   promoting Public-Private Partnership (PPP) and an Open Access regime; (iii) designing a strategic plan for
   restructuring Congo Telecom; and (iv) designing and implementing a management policy for ".cg" domain
   name in RoC.

   2. Connectivity (estimated cost at appraisal US$9.0 million; actual cost US$12.4 million). This component
   was expected to finance following activities: (i) CAB related environmental and resettlement
   consultancies; (ii) three inter-regional links to neighboring countries, Gabon (through the Dolisie-Mbinda
   link), Cameroon (the Oyo - Ouesso link) and Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) (the Brazzaville-
   Kinshasa link); and (iii) establishing national and regional Internet Exchange Points (IXPs).

   3. Promotion of ICT sector (estimated cost at appraisal US$1.0 million; actual cost US$2.2 million). This
   component aimed at building ICT skills and creating business opportunities for local ICT firms. Activities
   included: (i) TA for developing information laws and "cyber" legal framework; (ii) promoting ICT start-up
   firms through a business incubator approach; and (iii) financing a study for designing and developing
   an interoperable platform for mobile and electronic applications (e.g. m-banking).

   4. Project Management (estimated cost at appraisal US$1.0 million; actual cost US$1.5 million). This
   component would provide management support in areas relating to human resources,
   procurement, financial management, monitoring and evaluation, internal and external audit and
   communications expertise.



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Central African Backbone-APL3 - Congo Rp (P122398)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$30.0 million. Revised estimate with Additional
  Financing (AF) was US$35.0 million. The actual cost was US$33.7 million.

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA credit of US$15.0 million. AF of US$5.0 million was
  approved on March 30, 2017. With this the total IDA credit for the project was US$20.0 million. The actual
  amount disbursed was US$18.7 million. The difference between the credit at appraisal and actual
  disbursements was due to exchange rate changes during implementation.

  Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution at appraisal was estimated at US$15.0 million. The
  actual contribution was as planned.

  Dates. The project was approved on May 2011, became effective six months later on December 19, 2011
  and was scheduled to close on December 31, 2016. AF was approved on March 30,2017. The project
  closed about two years later on February 28, 2019.

  Other changes. There were five level 2 restructurings.

  The first restructuring on March 17, 2015 substantially modified the scope of component one, two and
  three and following activities were dropped:

  (i) TA for restructuring Congo Telecom was dropped for a combination of factors, including studies that
  showed that costs of these activities could not be supported by the project and lack of responsiveness of
  Congo Telecom;

  (ii) Of the planned three links with neighboring countries, the links with Cameroon and DRC, were dropped
  for factors such as, cost overruns of construction activities, exacerbated by exchange rate changes between
  the C.F.A. Franc and the US$ during implementation, on-going crisis in Central African Republic that halted
  all major infrastructure projects in the country, and delays on the Cameroon side; and

  (iii) The activities of establishing e and m platforms and promoting ICT startup firms through a business
  incubator approach was dropped, as feasibility studies showed that costs for these activities exceeded the
  provision made for these activities.

  Funds released from the dropping of these activities were reallocated to cover the costs of extending
  the infrastructure to Pointe-Noire and the project coordination unit.

  The second restructuring on November 29, 2016 extended the closing date by 18 months to June 30,
  2018 to facilitate the preparation of an AF for financing component two activities that could not be covered
  through counterpart funding as planned.

  Following the approval of AF, the third restructuring on March 30, 2017 added a new activity which aimed
  at establishing a Digital Development Fund and the closing date was extended by six months to December
  30, 2019.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central African Backbone-APL3 - Congo Rp (P122398)



   The fourth restructuring on November 6, 2018 resulted in: (i) reallocation of AF funds among project
   components to cover a financing gap due to the government's budget constraints; and (ii) cancellation of
   some component three activities (such as establishing a Digital Development Fund).

   The fifth restructuring on March 21, 2019 changed the closing dates for the original and AF. The closing
   date was brought forward from December 20, 2019 to February 28, 2019, following the completion
   of activities as per the previous restructuring.

   Split rating. The PDO indicators were not revised. However, the results framework was modified and
   intermediate indicators were added following the first and second restructurings to account for new activities
   planned under component three. These new activities were subsequently removed from the results
   framework following the third restructuring. A split rating assessment will not be undertaken.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. The RoC's strong economic performance in the years before appraisal was oil-driven,
with little diversification. Stimulating development of non-oil sectors, such as the ICT sector, was part of the
government's long-term economic diversification effort for sustaining economic growth. In the ICT sector,
while competition in the mobile market had increased mobile coverage in major cities, coverage remained
low in areas outside major population centers. Most telecommunications operators in the region did not
have broadband terrestrial networks and relied on expensive and poor-quality satellite connectivity to link
cities at the national level. Mobile broadband access was low (with only 15,000 internet
subscribers) and operators offered limited access. The main obstacles affecting the sector, included
incomplete market liberalization and absence of national backbone infrastructure. These constraints
impinged on the countries’ ability to trade with others, create new jobs, and expand production of goods and
services.

Government and regional strategy. The PDO was consistent with the Government's strategic vision for
the ICT sector – Cyberstrategy, which was issued in 2008-2009. This strategy promoted the ICT sector as
an opportunity for non-oil diversification of the economy and an engine for job creation and provided a road
map for ICT connectivity. The PDO supported three areas identified in the strategy: (i) developing the legal
framework: (ii) implementing a broadband network: and (iii) capacity development of the regulatory
agency. The strategy also identified the need for creating ICT for micro and small and medium
enterprises. The PDOs were aligned to the target 18 of the Millennium Development Goals of making
available the benefits of new technologies in the ICT sector to the population.

In the regional context, the PDO was consistent with the declaration adopted by the Central African
Economic and Monetary Committee (CEMAC) and the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), of creating an integrated and competitive economic space in Central Africa. In particular the
project contributed to the implementation of the third pillar of the 2010-2015 CEMAC Regional Economic
Program relating to physical inter-connectivity of its member countries.

Alignment with the Bank’s country and regional strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with the Bank
strategy. The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2010-2012, underscored the need for providing a

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Central African Backbone-APL3 - Congo Rp (P122398)



               foundation for increasing RoC's market share in regional transit services, reducing prices of broadband
               network, building ICT skills and extending economic opportunities in the local ICT industry. The PDO was
               aligned with the Bank's Regional Integration Assistance Strategy for Africa (RIAS) at appraisal. The RIAS
               issued in 2004, underscored the need for improving connectivity for effective regional economic integration
               and improving competitiveness of African countries. The project was also aligned with the ongoing CPS for
               2013-2016. The competitiveness and employment pillar of the current CPS underscored the need for
               improving regional telecommunications. The PDO continues to be relevant to the Bank strategy. The first
               strategic focus area of the Country Partnership Framework (CPF), approved by the Board in
               December 2019 for the 2020-2024 period, highlighted the need for strengthening economic management to
               create an improved climate for private-sector led growth, through activities that boost productivity within
               sectors like ICT and agriculture (CPF, pages 24-25). The new CPF also included provisions for supporting
               the governments Digital Vision 2025.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To contribute to increase geographical coverage of regional broadband network services.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The project activities included capacity building activities and infrastructure investments,
                             and the causal links between activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and the intended outcomes were
                             measurable. Strengthening the legal and regulatory framework, promoting an Open Access and PPP
                             regimes, and establishing a special purpose vehicle for the ICT infrastructure, were aimed at fostering
                             competition in the sector. Setting interregional links and Internet Exchange Points, were aimed at
                             improving RoC's telecommunication infrastructure and interconnections with neighboring countries.
                             Strengthening the ICT institutional framework, setting an ICT business incubator and TA for developing an
                             interoperable platform for digital development platform, were aimed at improving the efficiency of processing
                             transactions. These activities together were likely to increase the geographical reach of regional broadband
                             network services, reduce prices and contribute to increased usage of broadband services.

                             Outputs (ICR paragraphs 39-42).

                                        The project had initially underestimated the construction costs. The construction of 505 km fiber optic
                                         network connecting RoC and Gabon was completed in 2018. This link was extended from 338 km to
                                         520 km to along the railway lines and to connect directly with the West Africa Cable System (WACS)
                                         landing station near Pointe- Noire. However, although completed, the network was not yet
                                         commercialized due to delays associated with the two national regulators. According to the
                                         information provided subsequently by the team, this issue has not yet been resolved to date. The

                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Central African Backbone-APL3 - Congo Rp (P122398)



       regional link to Cameroon (420 km) and the Democratic Republic of Congo (10km) was dropped, as
       the funding (original IDA, plus AF, plus counterpart funding) was adequate for only the segment
       connecting RoC and Gabon.
      These activities were completed as targeted: (i) a broadband strategy was delivered in 2013 and
       was adopted by the government: (ii) studies on homologation of equipment and portability
       were completed and implemented; (iii) an observatory was put in place in 2013 for monitoring the
       telecom industry and is producing quarterly reports; and (iv) a frequency management plan for
       international broadband access and ICT sector development was adopted by the Regulatory Agency
       for Post and Electronic Communications.

Outcomes

      The international internet bandwidth (bits per second person) increased from 51 in 2010 (baseline) to
       3,341 at project closure and 15,500 in December 2019, far exceeding the target of 500.

      97% of the population had mobile network coverage when the project closed. This exceeded the
       target of 95%.

      50 localities had broadband internet access when the project closed (baseline was 4). This exceeded
       the target of 10.

      The core pillars of the CAB regional program - the PPP arrangement to maintain the regional
       infrastructure and establishing an Open Access Regime - were not realized when the project closed,
       due to political economy considerations.

      Despite the interconnection between Gabon and the RoC being operational, no traffic was exchanged
       between the two countries.

      None of the operators and service providers were buying capacity from the deployed regional
       infrastructure when the project closed (target three).



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To contribute to reduce the prices of regional broadband network services.

Rationale
The theory of Change for this objective is the same as the one discussed under the first objective.

Outputs (ICR, paragraphs 44- 45).




                                                                                                 Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Central African Backbone-APL3 - Congo Rp (P122398)




      TA on taxation mechanisms to improve the price of internet access was completed as targeted.

      TA was provided to improve the pricing for internet access.

      The Congo Internet Exchange (CGIX) became functional in 2013. Two Internet Exchange Points and
       two operators were connected. Training was provided on Border Gateway protocol routing.

      As described above (under objective 1), the regional network infrastructure between RoC and Gabon
       (intended to increase international traffic) was not complete when the project closed. The
       infrastructure was intended to increase international traffic and contribute to the achievement of this
       objective by increasing regional competition and thereby decreasing costs. Similarly, the Open Access
       regime, which is yet to be adopted, was expected to foster competition in the broadband wholesale
       market and lower prices also as a result (ICR para 45).

Outcomes

      Average monthly price of wholesale international capacity link from the capital city to Europe reduced
       from US$3,200 in December 2010 to US$892 in February 2019, short of the target of US$800.

      The retail price of internet service (per 256 kbit/per month) dropped from US$300 in 2010 to US$74 in
       February 2019. This was short of the target of US$70.

      The average cost of mobile call (three minutes at local peak time) dropped from US$0.50 at the
       baseline to US$0.16 in February 2019. This was short of the target of US$0.10.

Through project-financed technical assistance to the regulator, the project achieved some progress in
contributing to reduce the price of broadband services. The retail price of internet service did decrease
significantly, and the target was 98 percent achieved. However, the PDO indicator of average monthly price of
wholesale international E1 capacity was achieved at 75 percent. The achievement of this objective is rated
modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To contribute to increase the usage of regional broadband network services.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The activities described above to increase the geographical reach of regional broadband
network services and reduce prices were expected to contribute to the increased usage of broadband
services. The technical assistance for the development of cybersecurity, privacy, promotion of the ICT sector,
promotion of ICT start-up firms through a business incubator approach and development of an interoperable


                                                                                                 Page 7 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Central African Backbone-APL3 - Congo Rp (P122398)



                            platform for m- and e-applications, were expected to contribute to increase the usage of regional broadband
                            network services.

                            Outputs (ICR, paragraphs 46 -49).

                                  The project assisted in the implementation of the management of the Congolese domain name “.cg”.
                                   The goal was to develop a local ecosystem and local content. About 27 government websites and
                                   over 630 local domain names were created and are currently being used.

                                  Twelve institutes of the Marien Ngouabi university were provided with fiber inter-connection. This
                                   provided access to nearly 30,000 students and teaching and administrative staff. The university
                                   launched e-schooling, enabling students to register online.

                                  The Marien Ngouabi university launched the University of Innovation in Technologies and Services
                                   (PUITS) Program. This program was a digital center aimed at supporting ICT projects and
                                   helping young entrepreneurs. In January 2018, the program received over 900 applications for 30 ICT
                                   trainings. The PUITS also served as an incubator through a partnership between the Regulatory
                                   Agency for Post and Electronic Communication and the International Organization of Francophone
                                   (OIF).

                                  The legal and regulatory framework relating to the "cyber strategy" were completed as targeted.

                                  The 2025 Digital Strategy (Vision Congo Digital 2025), developed under the project, was published by
                                   decree 2019-150 on June 17, 2019. This strategy contained three pillars: e-Citizen, e-Government
                                   and e-Business.

                            Outcomes

                                  The number of internet subscribers per 100 people increased from 6.1 at the baseline in December
                                   2010 to 42 in December 2018, exceeding the target of 40.

                                  The number of beneficiaries (defined as people who were connected to the internet or more generally
                                   to the communications network), increased from 50,000 at the baseline in December 2010 to
                                   2,119,873 at closure. This represented a 23% increase relative to the target of 1,732,021. 35% of the
                                   beneficiaries were women as compared to the target of 37%.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Central African Backbone-APL3 - Congo Rp (P122398)



  The PDOs were not ambitious and the project outcome indicators measuring the objectives exceeded the
  targets, as the price of internet in RoC was too high at appraisal. Although the project contributed to reducing
  the internet price, the internet price remains high to date because (a) the ICT market in RoC does not have a
  real competitive environment, and (b) open access principles were not implemented and this negatively
  impacts on internet price.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
  Modest                                                      Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. An Leontief intersectoral Input-Output (IO) analysis was conducted at appraisal. The IO
analysis is used to demonstrate how industries are linked together through supplying inputs for the output of the
economy and to assess the relative significance of a sector in terms of its final impact on output, incomes and
employment. The Leontief analysis showed that investment in broadband infrastructure has a significant impact
on employment and economic growth in RoC. Specifically, the final demand of C.F.A Francs (XAF) one billion
(equivalent of US$1,895,849) for the Post and Telecommunication Industry was expected to contribute to a total
impact of XAF 1.29 billion (US$2,448,768). The result revealed that the Post and Telecommunication industry
has a strong forward linkage and hence is a leading sector in the economy. This result indicated that increase in
government spending would have a tremendous impact on the rest of the economy and adopting ICT in all the
other sectors will boost economic growth. This methodology was not replicated at closure. According to World
Bank research, each 10% increase in broadband penetration in developing countries was expected to
increase Gross Domestic Product (GDP) by 1.38%.

The ICR (paragraph 51) notes that while GDP in RoC grew in the years following the implementation of this
project, it decreased in 2016 and 2017.

No financial analysis was carried out. The ICR stated (para 53) that it was not possible to carry out a financial
analysis as no business plan or financial model was developed for the operationalization of the
network constructed by this project.

Administrative and Operational inefficiencies. The project became effective on December 19, 2011, three
months after the initial planned date of September 12, 2011. Since a year was spent on completing studies for
component one activities, implementation of these activities could start only in 2013. Costs of several activities
were underestimated, and these were exacerbated by exchange rate changes and delays in counterpart
funding. These factors contributed to a drastic reduction in scope of project activities. The political resistance to
creating a Special Purpose Vehicle and establishing PPP, adversely impacted the utilization of the regional
network. At closure, the project was not able to implement the Open Access regime and PPP principles of the
CAB program, fell short of the targets for the reduction in prices of broadband services and did not reap
the economic and financial benefits of the regional infrastructure.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


                                                                                                         Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Central African Backbone-APL3 - Congo Rp (P122398)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the government and the Bank strategy is rated as high. The efficacy of the sub-
objective "to increase the usage of regional broadband network services" is rated as substantial and the efficacy
of the two objectives "to increase geographical coverage" and "reduce prices of regional broadband network
services" are rated as modest. The efficiency is rated as modest in view of the administrative and operational
shortcomings which contributed to non-completion of many activities.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. The regional network was not commercialized when the project closed. There is
substantial risk associated with the commercialization of the regional network, given that the government still
needs to finalize policy agreements with neighboring countries to enable international traffic to flow.

Institutional risk. There is substantial risk that the regulatory environment will not continue to develop
favorably to achieve lower, affordable prices for broadband services. The ICR reports (para 86) that the
regulator has capacity to effectively regulate the market, but the use of price floors in recent years suggests
a substantial risk to the achievement of lower, affordable prices for broadband.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project was prepared based on the ongoing policy dialogue in the ICT sector in RoC since 2008
  and lessons from prior- Bank financed ICT projects in the region. Lessons incorporated at design,
  included TA to implement a PPP for managing and operating the network capacity. Several risks were

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central African Backbone-APL3 - Congo Rp (P122398)



  identified at appraisal, including risks associated with the PPP scheme, risks associated with
  noncompletion of the national backbone infrastructure which the CAB was to connect, and governance
  risk. Mitigation measures incorporated at design included, a hybrid PPP model that would allow the
  government to maintain ownership of infrastructure while delegating its management; developing a legal
  framework and tools to support the enforcement capacity of regulators (PAD, paragraph 37). With these
  mitigation measures, project risk was rated as moderate at appraisal. The implementation arrangements
  were appropriate, with the Project Coordination Unit housed in the premises of the Ministry of Posts and
  Telecommunications, the main implementing agency (PAD, page 39). Appropriate arrangements were
  made at appraisal for monitoring and evaluation and safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in
  section 9 and 10).

  There were moderate shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. Costs were underestimated, with the actual cost
  of several activities being much higher than anticipated. The cost overruns exacerbated by exchange rate
  changes and delays in counterpart funding, contributed to significant reduction in project scope. The
  project underestimated the political resistance to PPP principles in the CAB program and this undermined
  the regional dimensions of the program. Unlike in other subsequent CAB projects in the Democratic
  Republic of Congo and Gabon, this project did not have covenants or binding conditions for activities
  such as an Open Access regime, PPP and Special Purpose Vehicle. This undermined the crucial
  elements of the CAB program.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (paragraph 83) notes that the task team leader was based in Brazzaville from 2016 to 2017 and
 25 supervision missions were conducted during the lifetime of the project. The missions were
 complemented by remote support. The team was proactive in responding to the challenging context in the
 RoC (such as when the government was not able to provide counterpart funding), and by finalizing AF for
 the project. Issues were identified in a timely manner and the progress of project implementation and
 discussions with the government were documented through detailed Aide Memoires. The training of
 the PIU staff on financial management, procurement, and safeguards aided in safeguards and fiduciary
 compliance (discussed in section 10).

 Given the challenges encountered during implementation due to the political environment and governance
 risks, the mitigation measures could have been modified to reflect these risks.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                 Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central African Backbone-APL3 - Congo Rp (P122398)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The key outcome indicators for this project were the same as the outcome indicators for the CAB regional
 program and were standard quantitative ones that covered geographical reach, usage and price of ICT
 services. The four key outcome indicators - volume of international traffic, the number of internet
 subscribers, the average price of international communications and the number of direct project
 beneficiaries, were in principle, measurable. The selected indicators had baseline figures and clear targets,
 against which progress towards objectives could be assessed. The Post and Communications Regulatory
 Agency was responsible for data collection. The PAD (paragraph 71) notes that a M&E system was to be
 set up within the Project Coordination Unit for monitoring project performance.



b. M&E Implementation
  Although the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) did not have a M&E specialist for a year in 2012, this was
  rectified by 2013. After initial bottlenecks, a detailed quarterly report was produced, with data collected
  by ARPCE.

  Following the reduction in scope of project activities, targets were appropriately modified through project
  restructurings. The ICR (paragraph 72) notes that some new and original indicators (the number of
  kilometers of fiber optic laid out and the number of urban zones connected to the backbone) were not
  consistently tracked and eventually these indicators were removed.



c. M&E Utilization


  The M&E data was used for adjusting indicators during implementation and monitoring performance at
  closure. The data collected was also used for the team's ongoing dialogue with the regulator on pricing.
  The ICR (paragraph 72) notes that the M&E framework served as the basis for finalizing the regulatory
  texts on price floors and that pricing data continues to be collected by the Regulatory Agency for Post
  and Telecommunication. However, the growth in GDP in the years following the implementation of this
  project could not be directly attributable to the project (discussed in section 5).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B project under World Bank safeguard policies. Five safeguard
   policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.04); Natural Habitats (OP 4.04);


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Central African Backbone-APL3 - Congo Rp (P122398)



  Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP 4.10); Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11); and Involuntary Resettlement
  (OP 4.12) (PAD, paragraph 25). The PAD (paragraph 61) noted that the environmental and social impacts
  of the project, were expected to be minimal and site-specific. An Environmental and Social Management
  Framework, a Resettlement Plan Framework and an Indigenous People Planning Framework, were
  prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 50). Specific Environmental Management
  Plan, Indigenous People Development Plan and a Resettlement Action Plan, were to be prepared as
  required during implementation.

  There was compliance with environmental and social safeguards during implementation. There were no
  environmental issues. Regarding resettlement, after the first inventory of lost property in 2015,
  compensation was paid to all concerned in April 2016. 21 complaints were recorded in 2016 as a result of
  the damage suffered by the destruction of trees and fields, particularly in sections 5 and 6, between
  Makabana and Mbinda. All complaints were resolved by August 30, 2016.

  An audit conducted in March 2017 recommended creation of a functional Grievance Redress Mechanism
  for addressing additional complaints. This mechanism was implemented by the project and by December
  2018, compensation had been made to the targeted communities (ICR, paragraph 77).

  The ICR did not provide ant details on the implementation of other safeguards.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. An assessment of the implementing agency's ability to address financial
  management issues was conducted at appraisal. The assessment revealed minor weaknesses in staffing
  arrangements and capacity issues and the financial risk was rated as medium (PAD, page 41). Mitigation
  measures incorporated at design, included recruiting an experienced financial management specialist and
  accountant. A financial management plan was prepared at appraisal (PAD, page 46). There was
  compliance with financial management during implementation. A World Bank financial management
  specialist based in the Brazzaville country office supported the project through implementation. There were
  no financial issues and unmodified audits were submitted in a timely fashion.

  Procurement. An assessment of the implementing agency's ability to address procurement issues was
  conducted at appraisal (PAD, page 54). The procurement risks identified at appraisal, included a weak
  governance environment and overall lack of transparency in conducting procurement. Mitigation measures
  incorporated at design, included public disclosure of relevant information through a project website at the
  country level and conducting a workshop for relevant staff. A procurement plan was prepared and publicly-
  disclosed at appraisal and the plan was to be updated as required to reflect project implementation needs
  (PAD, page 56). There was compliance with procurement management during implementation. The ICR
  (paragraph 79) notes that the Project Coordination Unit regularly updated the project procurement manual
  to improve performance during implementation. There were no reported cases of mis-procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


                                                                                                Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central African Backbone-APL3 - Congo Rp (P122398)



   There was one unintended positive impact. The ICR (paragraph 59) notes that the network infrastructure
   was built along the railway roads of the Congo Public Train Company. The company in charge of civil
   works for the fiber optic infrastructure constructed several rural access roads along the site during
   construction and these roads were used by the rural population in the vicinity during implementation.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                  Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                  Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some modification of language.

      Legal covenants or disbursement conditions need to be considered for critical
         elements of a project. The PPP structure in this project was identified as a critical element
         for the effective and efficient operationalization of the regional network. Through the lifetime
         of this project, there were major issues with matters pertaining to establishing PPP for the
         regional network. Measures such as inclusion of PPP as a legal covenant or conditions for
         disbursement, could have helped in overcoming such challenges. The ICR (paragraph 87)
         notes that such disbursement conditions have been incorporated in the ongoing CAB
         projects in Gabon and the Democratic Republic of Congo.

      A careful consideration of political economy considerations is required at appraisal.
         This project encountered serious implementation delays due to delays in counterpart funding.
         The experience of this project demonstrated that future projects could benefit from having
         contingency funds factored in project design.

      Project implementation can be facilitated through strong stakeholder engagement.
         This project required a significant amount of sensitization. The recruitment of a
         communications specialist in the Project Implementation Unit in this project helped in
         promoting the project across stakeholder groups. While stakeholder engagement early in the
         project was valuable, regular dialogue with the operators could have helped in identifying


                                                                                                       Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Central African Backbone-APL3 - Congo Rp (P122398)



         regulatory and policy bottlenecks, and could have provided a better understanding for the
         failure of the PPP and potential alternatives.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is reasonably well-written. It reports both outputs and outcomes of the project and its assessment is
evidence-based. It is candid in acknowledging the difficulties associated with implementing the PPP, which
undermined the regional dimensions of the program. It is also candid in addressing the issues that arose in the
wake of delays in counterpart funding for the projects. The ICR follows the guidelines and draws reasonably
good lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

The ICR would have benefitted with better editing. The main text of the ICR is 35 pages (more than twice the
recommended length of 15 pages).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 15
