     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MSME Innovation and Inclusion Project (P151544)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0021915

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P151544                                    MSME Innovation and Inclusion Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                      Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84710                                31-Mar-2020                                        265,375,414.54

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Feb-2015                               31-Mar-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          500,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           265,375,414.54                                              0.00

 Actual                                       265,375,414.54                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo         Fernando Manibog             Christopher David Nelson       IEGFP (Unit 3)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The single project development objective was "to improve access to finance of Micro, Small and Medium
   Enterprises (MSMEs) in manufacturing and service sectors from early to growth stage, including through
   innovative financial products" [Loan Agreement (LA), p.5]. The statement of the project objective in the
   Project appraisal Document (PAD) on p.5 is identical, and remained unchanged throughout the period of
   project implementation.



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MSME Innovation and Inclusion Project (P151544)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Spurring Early Stage and Risk Capital Financing (appraisal cost estimate of US$163.6
   million, of which US$148.7 million was IBRD loan, actual IBRD loan of US$27.55 million). This
   component was designed to support early stage debt (startup and venture debt) and risk capital financing to
   MSMEs. Around a third of the component was expected to be utilized for debt financing to startups and
   early stage MSMEs, while two thirds of the component was to be utilized for risk capital financing to
   MSMEs, including supporting innovative risk capital products such as mezzanine debt capital.

   Component 2: Supporting Service Sector Financing Models (appraisal cost estimate of US$220
   million, of which US$200 million was IBRD loan, actual IBRD loan of US$109.97 million). This
   component aimed to support products offered by Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) and
   Participating Financial institutions (PFIs) tailored for the service sector. The component included (i) the
   introduction and scale-up of innovative models of financing with customized appraisal parameters that relied
   on business viability and cash flow assessments, and the support of innovative products such as asset-light
   loans and franchisee financing.

   Component 3: Supporting Finance to Manufacturing MSMEs (appraisal cost estimate of US$165
   million, of which US$150 million was IBRD loan, actual IBRD loan of US$154.40 million). This
   component aimed to support various manufacturing sector MSME financing products, including support
   to sustainable improvements in manufacturing MSMEs through loan extension services and pilots of cluster
   financing.

   Parallel Technical Assistance (TA), (appraisal cost estimate of US$5 million, actual IBRD loan
   unknown): The integrated TA was designed to support implementation of the three components and
   achievement of the PDO. It was to support SIDBI and the PFIs in the development of innovative financial
   products, services and partnerships targeting underserved MSMEs, including leveraging digital finance
   models. The TA also included various capacity building activities such as strengthening the credit appraisal
   methods of SIDBI and PFIs, and support to a beneficiary survey and communication and dissemination
   efforts.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
       Cost: The total project cost estimated at appraisal was US$550.0 million, with actual
          project disbursed amount of US$291.91 million, or 53 percent of the approved amount. (ICR, page 2
          of Data Sheets and Annex 3, page 48)
         Financing: The project was funded by an IBRD loan of US$500.0 million. However, only US$291.91
          million was disbursed, with the undisbursed balance cancelled, as the loan lost its competitiveness
          on the domestic financial market.

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MSME Innovation and Inclusion Project (P151544)



         Borrower Contribution: The Borrower commitment at appraisal was in the amount of US$50.0
          million, and the IBRD loan was guaranteed by the Government of India. Disbursed Borrower
          contribution amount is unknown.
         Dates: The project was approved on February 24, 2015 and made effective on June 26, 2015. The
          project was restructured and closed on March 31, 2019, due to the cancellation of the undisbursed
          portion of the loan, ahead of the initial closing date set on March 31, 2020,




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The Project Development Objective (PDO) was in line with the country's priorities and the Bank's
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS). The Five-Year Plan of India (2012-17) identified the critical role of
MSMEs in supporting sustained growth and job creation, and recognized the urgent need to improve their
access to finance. The project was in line with the CPS (FY13-17) and contributed to the first area of
engagement - integration - by increasing access to finance for MSMEs, particularly in manufacturing, and
contributing to the sector’s growth, and to the third area of engagement - inclusion-.

The PDO was still in congruence with the World Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
FY18-22 at project closure. The project directly supported the second focus area of the CPF, “Enhancing
Competitiveness and Enabling Job Creation,” whose key objective was to “increase resilience of the
financial sector and financial inclusion” by providing financing and technical assistance to facilitate funding
to underserved MSMEs. The project also indirectly contributed to the first CPF focus area, “Promoting
Resource Efficient Growth,” by providing MSMEs with necessary capital to improve the efficiency of their
production processes. The 2018 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, 2018) put Indian MSMEs at the
center stage of sustained economic growth and creation of well-paid jobs. Outstanding MSME loans were
still low by middle-income country standards, and the MSME financing gap was still a key barrier to MSMEs
expansion and job creation. Access to credit was central to the Indian authorities, and the 2019 Report of
the Expert Committee on MSMEs from the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) identified high risks, high
operational cost, and low access as the main barriers to MSME financing (ICR, para 14). Given the
enormity of the MSMEs’ financing needs, the appropriate approach to address the issue was to provide
credit to MSMEs through a mix of risk capital, debt, and innovative financing resources.”

The project aimed to improve access to finance by addressing challenges facing the underserved
MSMEs. Entrepreneurship and business creation by MSMEs were especially crucial for large-scale
employment generation and productivity growth. The growth of the MSME sector had been severely
constrained by lack of access to finance. It was estimated that about 87 percent of MSMEs did not have
access to finance and were self-financed. Financial institutions limited their exposure to the sector due to a
perceived high level of risk, information asymmetries, high transaction costs and the lack of collateral. Bank
loans to MSMEs represented only 15 percent of all bank loans, and MSMEs lacked alternative sources of
financing. These financial constraints hampered the competitiveness of MSMEs and slowed job creation
and economic growth. The project aimed to address the challenges faced by underserved segments,
including the early stage and startups MSMEs in the services and manufacturing sectors.




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MSME Innovation and Inclusion Project (P151544)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access to finance of MSMEs in manufacturing and service sectors from early to growth stage,
                             including through innovative financial products.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change

                             At appraisal, there was no explicit theory of change, but at the ICR phase, the project team constructed one
                             that can be summarized as follows:

                                        The approach was to use innovative lending methods to reach underserved MSMEs, and create a
                                          demonstration effect in the wider economy;
                                        The expected outputs arising from the project activities included: (a) enhanced credit appraisal
                                         methods and procedures, (b) the launching of innovative financial products and partnerships, and (c)
                                         the delivery of a large number of credits to MSMEs;
                                        The project's results chain was built on the assumption that delivering credit to MSMEs operating in
                                         the service and manufacturing sectors and providing parallel technical assistance supporting the
                                         development of new financial products would lead to improved access to finance by MSMEs;
                                        Prior to this project, the Government of India had initiated The Fund of Funds for Startups (FFS) to
                                         support and boost the startups for economic and innovative developments. The FFS intended to
                                         disburse INR100 billion indirectly to startups (US$1.5 billion) by 2025. SIDBI was operating as the
                                         Fund manager for the FFS, with the funding provided by the Government of India. The ICR did not
                                         factor in as a project achievement the private sector financing that was crowded in using FFS
                                         resources and thus was not considered as an outcome of this operation;
                                        The expected long-term outcome would be an increased support to firm growth and job creation.

                             Project's efficacy is portrayed by the outputs generated by the project and the direct and indirect oucomes
                             achieved as summarized below:

                             Outputs

                                        Fully Achieved:

                                        Key outputs related to early stage and risk capital financing were: (i) a strategy and blueprint to
                                          “augment SIDBI’s roles in the startup to growth stage segment was prepared; (ii) extensive

                                                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
MSME Innovation and Inclusion Project (P151544)



     implementation support aimed to produce a comprehensive end to end automated process for the
     Fund of Funds for Startups (FFS) operation, (iii) tailored marketing campaigns and analytical work
     were conducted to inform the operation of the FFS, and (iv) SIDBI’s Startup Mitra portal, an automated
     loan-origination platform exclusively for startups, and the portal registered more than 13,925 startups,
     121 incubators and 92 investors as of October 2018;
    Key outputs in the service and manufacturing sector financing were: (i) the Udyami Mitra (UM) portal,
     a digital MSME lending aggregator and matchmaking platform was launched; (ii) 151 eligible lenders,
     including commercial banks, Small Finance Banks (SFBs), Non-bank Financial Companies (NBFCs)
     and fintech companies, as well as more than 250,000 MSMEs, were on the platform together with
     certified credit counselors, credit bureaus and MSME assistance agencies, and (iii) a contactless
     lending platform built on the learning from the UM portal and was launched in 2018;
    Innovative products and partnerships were launched and scaled up by SIDBI and will be further
     replicated by other financial institutions to improve access to finance. SIDBI improved its working
     capital facility, including quicker processing and multiple collateral options, through a single window for
     customers. SIDBI also piloted a co-lending scheme with the SFBs to provide term loans to
     underserved micro and small enterprises in areas where SIDBI previously could reach, as well as a
     trade finance scheme for retailers and wholesalers;
    Products tailored to underserved MSMEs such as franchises, MSME vendors and MSME dealers
     were designed, along with capacity building to carry out the transactions. Franchisee financing, supply
     chain financing with automated solutions and securitization are in the pipeline and ready to be piloted
     as soon as market conditions improve. Co-lending schemes with NBFCs are also currently being
     further developed, based on initial inputs to the schemes by the project;
    Credit appraisal methods in the service sector have benefited from the training on cash flow-based
     lending for asset light business, end-to-end process enhancement and the digital lending platforms
     including the Udyami Mitra portal and the contactless lending;
    Three schemes/products were introduced under the manufacturing sector against a target of 4 as
     follows: (i) SIDBI Loan for Purchase of Equipment for Enterprise (SPEED), (ii) SMILE Equipment
     Finance SPEED, and (iii) co-lending model with Small Finance Banks;
    While no formal schemes dedicated to women were introduced (against a target of 2 schemes), 19
     percent of the MSMEs end beneficiaries under the World Bank credit line were women-
     owned/managed MSMEs, 4 percentage points higher than the average in SIDBI's portfolio and almost
     twice larger than the 11 percent share of women-owned/managed MSMEs in India;
    The target for SIDBI and PFI officials trained (cumulative and by gender) was exceeded, reaching 342
     against a target of 150, and trainings include sessions on early stage and risk capital financing and
     cash flow-based financing for asset light business in service sector;
    The target for improved collaboration for information sharing with external partners was achieved, as
     new partnerships including the co-lending scheme with Small Finance Banks and partnerships with
     Original Equipment Manufacturers were established, and enhancement to digital lending platforms
     including the Udyami Mitra portal and the contactless lending platform were undertaken with Project
     support to facilitate information sharing between SIDBI and external partners.

  Partially achieved:

  The number of total MSMEs extended risk capital under the credit line was partially achieved,
     reaching 82 against a target of 260 and a baseline of 0, because SIDBI's direct lending towards early



                                                                                                  Page 5 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  MSME Innovation and Inclusion Project (P151544)



       stage and risk capital financing was suspended by the SIDBI management following the decision to
       support the early stage and risk capital financing ecosystem mainly through the FFS;
      The target for the total service sector MSMEs under the credit line was partially achieved, reaching
       175 against a target of 300, and a baseline of 0, as the increasing cost of SIDBI's foreign exchange
       borrowing including the IBRD loan slowed disbursement since Year 3;
      The target of the number of women-owned or managed MSME beneficiaries under the credit line was
       partially achieved, reaching 205 against a target of 325, as the increasing cost of SIDBI's foreign
       exchange borrowing including the IBRD loan slowed disbursement since Year 3 of Project
       implementation;
      The target of MSMEs (other than early stage) in Low Income States benefitting from the line of
       credit was partially achieved, reaching 201 against a target of 320, as the increasing cost of SIDBI's
       foreign exchange borrowing including the IBRD loan slowed disbursement since Year 3 of Project
       implementation;
      The target for the volume of disbursed amount from the lines of credit to SME was partially achieved,
       reaching a disbursement ratio of 53 percent. The closure target was US$425 million, or 85 percent of
       the US$500 million IBRD loan. Disbursement was fast in the first two years of the Project, but volatile
       foreign exchange rate market, ample domestic liquidity, and increasing concessional funding sources
       from the Government of India to SIDBI made the cost of the foreign exchange commercial borrowing
       including the IBRD financing unattractive.

    Not Achieved:

    No MSMEs benefitted from loan extension services because disbursement under this sub-component
     was curtailed partly due to the slow disbursement since year 3 and early cancellation of undisbursed
     balance;
    The indicator for the total number of PFIs supported under the credit line was missed (none against a
     target of 8) as the World Bank credit line was disbursed through SIDBI's direct lending business;
    The volume of loans extended to MSMEs using innovative methods including franchising finance
     under the credit line was missed, as innovative lending methods were still being developed in the early
     years of Project implementation. As these new lending methods materialized and market conditions
     changed, the World Bank funding became too costly, disbursement slowed and the undisbursed
     balance was cancelled, reducing the capacity for the Project team to quickly expand lending using
     these innovative tools through World Bank financing.

Outcome

    Direct outcomes from the credit line support

    An in-principle approval can be issued to approved borrowers within 59 minutes of the online loan
     application, and MSMEs can choose the most cost-effective loan from a list of financial institutions that
     provide in-principle approvals. The loan can be sanctioned/disbursed within 5-7 working days after in-
     principle approval;
    The average time for processing credit for startups in SIDBI's direct lending business was cut in half in
     the early years of the Project, reached 2.89 months against a target of 1 month, and a baseline of 6
     months, but progress was interrupted as the lending towards early stage and risk capital financing was
     suspended by SIDBI management following the decision to focus more on indirect lending through the
     Fund of Funds for Startups;

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MSME Innovation and Inclusion Project (P151544)




      The target for the total number of MSMEs beneficiaries under the credit line was significantly achieved
         at 80 percent of the closing date target, reaching 1,061 against a target of 1,320. The increasing cost
         of the foreign exchange borrowing by SIDBI including the IBRD loan led to slow disbursement since
         Year 3 of project implementation;
        The target for the outstanding MSME loan portfolio in risk capital financing including startups at the
         closing date was achieved at 24 percent of the target, reaching US$61.53 million against a target of
         target is US$260 million. This indicator only captures SIDBI's direct lending towards the early stage /
         startup sector and does not include funding disbursed to start-ups by the Fund of Funds for Startups
         (FFS) in the amount of US$258 million by June 2019;
        The target for the outstanding MSME loan portfolio in the service sector was achieved at 19 percent of
         the closing date target. This indicator only captures SIDBI's direct lending towards the service sector
         and does not include SIDBI's indirect lending business as well as the private sector financing
         crowded-in through the digital lending platforms. The indicator fell below the target because (i) SIDBI's
         direct lending increasingly focused on the manufacturing sector given the concessional funding for the
         SIDBI Make in India Loan for Enterprise (SMILE) scheme, which provided the majority funding for
         SIDBI's direct lending business and in line with the GoI's Make in India vision, and (ii) new lending
         tools were being developed in the early years of project implementation.
        The target for the outstanding MSME loan portfolio in the manufacturing sector was significantly
         achieved at 92 percent of the closing date target, reaching US$946.15 million against a target of
         US$1033.00 million, and a baseline of US$497.00 million. This indicator only captures lending in
         SIDBI's direct lending business and does not include SIDBI's indirect lending as well as private sector
         financing crowded in through the digital lending platforms;
        The target for the turnover of startups supported through the project was achieved at 52 percent of the
         closing date target. This indicator was deemed to be not useful during Project implementation as it
         incentivizes lending to larger firms;

     Indirect outcomes from the FFS

     Following the fluctuations on the domestic and international financial markets, the conditions of the
World Bank's credit line were no longer competitive, and the undisbursed balance was canceled. Using
cheaper Government's resources and the new lending tools that were developed in the early years of project
implementation, the private sector was crowded in using the FFS, and the outcomes below were achieved:

      The FFS invested up to 35 percent in alternative investment funds (AIFs), grew quickly under project
       support, with outstanding disbursement to 48 AIFs at US$480 million by June 2019, up from 26 AIFs
       and around US$200 million one year earlier. More than half of the funds (INR 16.8 billion, US$258
       million) had benefited 251 startups as of June 2019. Industry stakeholders have recognized the strong
       crowding-in effect of the FFS, with many private investors considering the FFS as the “anchor”
       investor and only followed FFS to invest in the AIFs.
      The project supported SIDBI’s pioneering Udyami Mitra (UM) digital portal, and the learning from the
       UM portal has crowded in US$1.9 billion of private sector financing for MSMEs with a reduction in
       turnaround time and credit cost. By June 2019, 151 eligible lenders, including commercial banks,
       SFBs, NBFCs and fintech companies, as well as more than 250,000 MSMEs, were on the platform
       together with certified credit counselors, credit bureaus and MSME assistance agencies;
      By June 2019, 45,265 new loans, worth INR 127 billion (US$1.9 billion), have been sanctioned on the
       contactless lending platform, making it the largest online lender in India. The contactless lending


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                MSME Innovation and Inclusion Project (P151544)



                                    platform enabled more efficient matching between lenders and MSME borrowers and significantly
                                    reduced turnaround time and credit cost, leveraging fintech solutions and data analytics tools.




                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Fully and partially achieved outputs supported by this operation contributed significantly to the transformation
                            of the landscape of the financial infrastructure supporting the access to finance by MSMEs. Direct outcomes
                            of the operation were substantive in the following areas: (i) significant time reduction in loan approval and
                            processing of credit for startups, (ii) the number of MSMES beneficiaries under the credit line, and (iii) the
                            outstanding MSMEs loan portfolio in the manufacturing sector. However, key outcomes were missed
                            including (i) the outstanding MSME loan portfolio in risk capital financing including startups, (ii) the
                            outstanding MSME loan portfolio in the service sector.

                            The significant change in the domestic financial market that made the credit line resources unattractive and
                            the cancellation of the undisbursed amount should be considered as a case of force majeure, and caused
                            underperformance in achieving three important outcomes related to (i) the outstanding MSME loan portfolio in
                            risk capital financing including startups, (ii) the outstanding MSME loan portfolio in the service sector, and (iii)
                            the turnover of startups supported through the project.

                            Partly reflecting the results achieved during the first years of project implementation, indirect outcomes were
                            achieved and could make up for the above-mentioned missed outcomes as follows: (i) the FFS
                            disbursed US$480 million to 48 Alternative Investment Funds (AIFs) by June 2019, and more than half of the
                            funds had benefited 251 startups as of June 2019; (ii) the project supported SIDBI’s pioneering Udyami Mitra
                            (UM) digital portal, and the learning from the UM portal has crowded in private sector financing for MSMEs
                            with a reduction in turnaround time and credit cost, and (iii) the contactless lending platform launched in the
                            context of FFS's support enabled more efficient matching between lenders and MSME borrowers and
                            significantly reduced turnaround time and credit cost, leveraging fintech solutions and data analytics tools.
                            However, the attribution of the indirect outcomes to the project was not established in the ICR write-up.

                            In all, the overall efficacy of the project is rated as Modest, due to the fact that key outcomes identified at
                            appraisal were missed.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason

                                                                                                                                   Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MSME Innovation and Inclusion Project (P151544)



  Modest                                                    Insufficient evidence


 5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency: Overall, the assumptions and methodology used to calculate the project's economic
efficiency were sound, and the results feasible.The economic analysis compared the projected value addition to
MSMEs under the project to the counterfactual firm performance without the project. The economic model
estimated the direct benefits of project financing through the increased turnover and the value added of MSMEs
and compared it to the case where the limited access to finance constrains the firm's growth. The internal rate of
return (IRR) for the early stage and risk capital financing was low at 7 percent, following the largely slow
disbursement for this component. The IRR for the services sector financing reached 23 percent, as the
disbursement was fast in the early years of the project, allowing firms to grow quickly early on. The IRR for the
manufacturing sector was the highest at 32 percent, as more than 90 percent of the allocated funds were
disbursed in the first two years of the project. Computing together the IRR for the three components, the overall
IRR was estimated at 20 percent.

Implementation and admnistrative efficiency: Despite the early partial cancellation of the loan due to
changes in market conditions, the credit line succeeded to reach out to the targeted underserved
segments, through the implementation of innovative lending methods and the crowding-in of finance from the
private sector. SIDBI launched the contactless lending platform, which has become the largest online lending
marketplace for MSMEs in India. Existing lending practices were improved and new products and partnerships
were implemented to bring finance to underserved MSMEs. On the low side, frequent changes in SIDBI PIU
staff and top management led to delays in certain key decisions, including the extent and scope of the project
restructuring.

Overall, as indicated in the ICR (paragraph 27), "while the project improved access to finance for targeted
underserved MSMEs and supported SIDBI in implementing innovative lending methods and crowding-in private
sector financing, the partial cancellation of the financing component, albeit due to changes in market conditions,
as well as the frequent organization changes in SIDBI, reduced the efficiency of the project, leading to a Modest
rating."




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 26.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MSME Innovation and Inclusion Project (P151544)



                                                                                     53.00
ICR Estimate                                               20.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective was substantial given its congruence with the country's priorities and the strategies of
the World Bank in India. Efficacy was modest: while the project generated directly achieved outcomes, the
attribution of the indirect outcomes resulting from the crowded-in finance from the private sector using the
project's financial instruments and platforms was not established in the ICR. Efficiency was modest, resulting
in a moderately unsatisfactory rating of the overall project outcome.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There are two major risks to development outcome as detailed below:

(i) Asset quality and inadequate risk management: The ICR (paragraph 50) reported that "the gross NPL
ratio in the India banking sector rose from 4.3 percent in 2015 to 11.2 percent in 2018". If not properly
addressed, the fast-increasing NPL ratio and the deteriorating asset quality in the banking sector could result
in banks and financial institutions markedly slowing down lending, thus reducing the availability of private
sector financing for MSMEs. The deterioration in asset quality and inadequate risk management measures
imposed some risk to project outcomes.

(ii) Sustainability and viability of MSMEs: The project's outcomes will be sustained only if the beneficiary
MSMEs remain viable and profitable in the long run. While new financial instruments and platforms were
designed and brought to bear in expanding finance to the MSMEs, similar or parallel efforts to strengthen the
business environment of the MSMEs performance and viability were not as successful. For instance, while
the Doing Business ranking of India did improve from the 100th rank in 2018 to 63th in 2019 out of 190
economies, there are areas whereby India is still lagging behind like (i) enforcing a contract (159th ),
registering property (154th) and (iii) starting a business (136th). Outcomes achieved under this operation will
be maintained if the business environment is progressively favorable to MSMEs.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project's design combined a credit line and technical assistance, in application of lessons learned
  from other lines of credit and previous IBRD operations jointly implemented with the apex financial

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MSME Innovation and Inclusion Project (P151544)



  institution (SIDBI). The project team relied on trust funds from the FIRST and IFC to support the
  integrated TA. The significant gap in debt financing for early stage and risk capital financing was
  identified through analytical work and market consultations, and the project design hence focused on the
  gap in debt financing to the early stage segment. Such design was also motivated by SIDBI’s
  comparative advantage in debt financing.

  The project’s design leveraged SIDBI’s role as the apex development bank in India to oversee project
  implementation. SIDBI was well positioned to develop and demonstrate new products and markets, and
  create new ways to reach underserved segments and crowd-in private sector financing. To maximize
  outcomes, the project design targeted a wide range of underserved MSMEs in the early stage in
  the service and manufacturing sectors. Through analytical work and market consultations with
  stakeholders, the WB team identified underserved MSMEs in the above sectors and underlying market
  failures. Given the wide focus, the project also left certain flexibility as to the exact products in order to
  better align with SIDBI’s evolving strategic priorities and to allow for testing and piloting (ICR, p.26-27).

  Economic and financial analyses were carried out during project appraisal, and singled out the growth
  benefits for MSMEs in comparison with the counterfactual without project. Financial analyses included a
  financial review of the apex financial institution, and several commercial banks and participating
  institutions which passed the eligibility test under the World Bank Policy OP10.00. Moreover, key risks to
  project implementation were identified and rated moderate, based on the previously demonstrated
  capacity during the collaboration between SIDBI and the World Bank over the last 10 years. However, the
  risks arising from the fluctuations of domestic and international financial markets were not discussed, and
  when they hit, they could not be mitigated.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project was managed by a coordinated team of the WB and IFC advisory staff that leveraged the
 respective expertise and convening power of each institution. The team used an innovative approach to
 resolve the bottlenecks in releasing one of the IFC trust funds, and in onboarding the TA funding to support
 SIDBI in the implementation of the innovative lending methods.

 The WB team provided proactive support through a total of eight implementation support missions, in
 coordination with the WBG country team in Delhi and Mumbai. Training sessions were organized and
 various senior experts in early stage financing and MSME financing, including a project implementation and
 data analytics firm comprising of several senior staff. Video conferences were conducted regularly,
 including a scheduled monthly call with the SIDBI PIU. The WB team also demonstrated flexibility to
 changing needs and opportunities, such as leveraging digital infrastructure development.

 However, the resource allocation (US$150 million) towards Component 1 ended up being overambitious
 given that SIDBI’s direct lending towards the startup and early stage segment was still at a pilot stage. A
 smaller allocation would have been more appropriate. During project implementation, the project supported

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MSME Innovation and Inclusion Project (P151544)



 both debt and equity financing through the FFS, which was in line with the PDO but slightly different from
 what had been envisaged at design. FFS enhanced SIDBI’s contribution and multiplied the benefits to the
 startup and early stage MSMEs although it was not captured by the PDO indicators.

 Given the slower-than-envisioned disbursement under Component 1 and the deficiencies in certain results
 indicators to capture real progress of the project, the WB team proposed a project restructuring to (a) make
 modifications to the results framework to better reflect the outcomes of the project, and (b) reallocate
 funding from Component 1 to Components 2 and 3. But the restructuring of the results indicators was
 eventually not processed, following SIDBI’s opting to cancel the undisbursed balance of the credit line, due
 to the rising costs of foreign exchange borrowing.

 The WB task team worked proactively together with the WB Treasury and presented alternative financing
 instruments, including local currency financing options. However, after reviewing all options, SIDBI
 management concluded that the cost of WB financing was comparatively higher than alternative funding
 sources and decided to cancel the undisbursed balance. The GoI's cancellation request was received in
 March 2019 by the WB , which approved a level 2 restructuring.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 There was a results framework in the Annex 1 of the PAD which aimed to track generated outputs and
 outcomes in a systematic and timely manner. The framework identified (i) five PDO indicators and
 15 intermediate outcomes indicators, which had baselines in 2014, with annual cumulative targets for the
 duration of the project, and (ii) the institution responsible to for data collection.

 Most indicators were appropriate to track the progress toward the project outcome and objective. However,
 there was room for improvement for the PDO indicators to better capture the private sector financing
 mobilized by the project, instead of focusing narrowly on SIDBI’s outstanding loan portfolio in its direct
 lending business. Moreover, the PDO results indicators at the design stage focused mostly on SIDBI’s
 direct lending business and did not fully capture the intended outcomes of the project. Also a beneficiary
 survey was planned (but not implemented, as discussed below) to monitor the final impact of the project, in
 particular on financial access and on MSME growth and employment creation.




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MSME Innovation and Inclusion Project (P151544)



b. M&E Implementation
  The PIU within SIDBI regularly reported key project data using its management information system (MIS),
  which was strengthened with the project support. In particular, SIDBI implemented tagging of loans to
  women owned/managed businesses and loans made in low-income states. Data outside the results
  framework were also collected by the WB team to evaluate the efficacy of the project, such as data on
  new lending methods using the Fund of Funds for Startups and the digital lending platforms. The WB
  team also initiated frequent market consultations with key stakeholders during project implementation to
  understand progress and key challenges. The designed beneficiary survey was not carried out due to
  delays in the onboarding of funding from IFC’s SME Global Facility as well as the subsequently slower
  pace of disbursement and early cancellation of the undisbursed balance.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data and information related to project performance was regularly analyzed to track any discrepancy
  from identified targets. The ambitious targets in the results framework helped SIDBI to move fast on new
  and innovative products and partnerships. Following the slower pace of disbursement in early stage and
  risk capital financing compared to faster disbursement in the manufacturing sector, a project
  restructuring was proposed by the WB team, which determined during project midterm to reallocate
  more project financing towards the service and manufacturing sectors and revise the results indicators.
  However, the restructuring ultimately did not take place due to a delay by SIDBI in submitting the
  restructuring request despite frequent follow-ups by the WB task team, leading to the cancellation of the
  remaining undisbursed balance.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, environmental and social risks were rated as moderate. The project was not classified in
   any category and only one safeguards policy was triggered: Environmental assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The
   environmental safeguards management at the SIDBI corporate level included the following measures: "(a)
   integration of environmental risk management aspects into the overall credit risk management mechanism;
   (b) adoption of environmental sustainability and gender inclusion principles as part of SIDBI’s corporate
   policies; and (c) integration of Resource Efficiency and Cleaner Production initiatives as part of its lending
   programs" (ICR, paragraph 43). Moreover, SIDBI had strong internal arrangements for grievance redressal,
   which relied on a web-based and branch-based system to channel complaints. At project closure,
   the overall environmental safeguards performance was upgraded by the project’s safeguards team from
   Moderately Unsatisfactory to Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MSME Innovation and Inclusion Project (P151544)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: SIDBI had a framework in place to carry out the project’s financial management
   functions and a credit policy for loan appraisals and end-use monitoring of project funds. The financial
   reports were prepared were regularly submitted to the WB for financial monitoring and disbursement
   claims. The project accounts were annually annually by an external auditor, submitted to the WB on time,
   and found to be satisfactory.

   Procurement: As the project was a financial intermediary project, the sub-borrowers of SIDBI followed
   private sector commercial practices using an Operational Manual developed by SIDBI with WB’s
   guidance. Trainings were organized for SIDBI officials to create awareness about the impact of goods
   procurement on the success of sub-projects. A database was also developed to capture procurement-
   related information during project implementation. Procurement operations were found to be
   satisfactory until the project closure.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Beyond the indirect outcomes presented under Section 5, which arose from the financing from the
   crowded-in private sector using the FFS, the ICR did not report any other unintended impacts.



d. Other
   The ICR did not raise any other issues.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately             Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MSME Innovation and Inclusion Project (P151544)



This review supports the four lessons filtered from the experience of the project implementation,
which are rephrased below:

(i) The potential for declining competitiveness of IBRD's credit lines needs to be discussed at
project appraisal, and risk mitigation measures should be identified and activated in case of
risk materialization. The cost of the IBRD credit line became uncompetitive for SIDBI due to the
Government's guarantee fee and the foreign exchange rate movements, which were further
compounded by the introduction of domestic concessional funding sources. The cost of the IBRD
credit line was inclusive of the hedging cost and the sovereign guarantee fee and turned unattractive
to institutions like SIDBI, and prompted the cancelation of the undisbursed credit line.

(ii) Using improved data analytics and innovative lending methods can help overcome the
bottlenecks in expanding lending to MSMEs. MSMEs in different sectors and countries suffer
from common types of market failures. Using common lending methods including fintech solutions
and improvement in data analytics can help reduce transaction costs and overcome information
asymmetries in order to improve access to finance for MSMEs across different sectors and
countries. This project targeted MSMEs in both manufacturing and service sectors from early to
growth stage and effectively leveraged complementarities in serving the MSMEs across different
sectors, building on common lending methods including the fintech and digital lending platforms.

(iii) When designing a project, the design of the results framework needs to better
articulate intermediate outcomes and the PDO indicators. In designing the project's results
framework, the PDO results indicators focused narrowly on SIDBI’s direct lending business. To fully
capture the project’s impact in terms of improving the MSME financing ecosystem, the PDO
indicators that measure performance related to the crowding in of private sector financing should
have been identified at appraisal. Focusing the results indicators too much on a development of
financial institutions’ direct lending business was inadequate when designing a project with an
intended impact of crowding in the private sector.

(iv) Synergy between the debt market and equity investment is key to the scaling-up of
lending to MSMEs: The strategy and blueprint to revive lending towards the startup sector provided
under this project pointed out that the development of the venture debt market requires a vibrant
ecosystem of venture equity investment. Strong synergy exists between the development of the
venture debt market and a vibrant ecosystem of equity investment.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The MSMEs sector is an important component of the Indian setting in which the World Bank is contributing to
  shared growth and poverty alleviation through different instruments. Moreover, most development instruments
  generate their impact after a certain number of lags, and this is the case for this operation for which the



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MSME Innovation and Inclusion Project (P151544)



  planned survey on project impact could not be conducted. A PPAR of this operation and other projects
  targeting the MSMEs would shed light on the long-term impact of these operations



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and comprehensive. Efficacy and overall project performance were supported by
adequate evidence, including (i) a constructed theory of change as there was none at appraisal, and (ii)
outcome achievements resulting directly from the SIDBI's lending business, and those that arose indirectly from
private sector financing for MSMEs that was crowded in using innovative financial products. Efficiency was
supported by an update of the economic analysis carried out in the PAD, although the financial analysis was
not revisited at project closure. This review agrees with the lessons, which were derived from the experience of
the project's implementation. The quality of ICR is rated as substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 16 of 16
