     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Higher Education Quality Enhancement (P106216)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0021744

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P106216                                   BD: Higher Education Quality Enhancement

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Bangladesh                                Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-45440,IDA-53320                       31-Dec-2013                                        191,938,252.75

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Mar-2009                               31-Dec-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           81,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           205,812,964.42                                              0.00

 Actual                                       196,426,533.23                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz        Judyth L. Twigg               Joy Behrens                   IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 4) and the Financing Agreement (page 5), the
   project objectives were as follows:

           To improve the quality and relevance of the teaching and research environment in higher
           education institutions, through encouraging innovation and accountability within universities
           and by enhancing the technical and institutional capacity of the higher education sector.


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Higher Education Quality Enhancement (P106216)



   The project objectives remained the same throughout the project period, although key outcome targets were
   briefly revised downward during a January 2013 project restructuring, due to slow implementation
   progress. However, the targets were subsequently revised upward at the time of Additional Financing (AF,
   within one year), and therefore a split rating is not applied.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  03-Dec-2013

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Promoting Academic Innovation (Appraisal: US$ 50.2 million; AF: US$ 48.7 million; Actual: US$ 116.1
   million): This component aimed to introduce a demand-driven funding mechanism to allocate public funds to
   higher education institutions, with an emphasis on innovation and accountability. An Academic Innovation
   Fund (AIF) was to provide grants to eligible public and private universities on a competitive basis, according
   to clearly identified selection criteria and procedures. The three funding windows were as follows:
   improvement of teaching and learning; enhancement of research capabilities; and university-wide
   innovations. The overall aims of the AIF were to improve the quality of academic activities and outcomes,
   promote voluntary self-assessments, and strengthen universities' linkages with national development
   efforts.

   2. Building Institutional Capacity (Appraisal: US$ 4.4 million; AF: US$ 4.6 million; Actual: US$ 6.8 million):
   This component aimed to reinforce the strategic and institutional capacity of the higher education sector,
   both at the central level and at the institutional level. Activities were to support both the University Grants
   Commission (UGC) and individual universities, and included the following: capacity building for strategic
   planning and management; development of a Higher Education Management Information System (HEMIS);
   communication campaigns about the AIF; and technical assistance in preparing subprojects for the AIF.

   3. Raising the Connectivity Capacity of the Higher Education Sector (Appraisal: US$ 34.0 million; AF: US$
   44.2 million; Actual: US$ 45.9 million): This component aimed to integrate universities with the global
   knowledge community. Activities included: establishment of the Bangladesh Research and Education
   Network (BdREN); and establishment of a digital library network.

   4. Project Management, Communication and Monitoring and Evaluation (Appraisal: US$ 3.2 million; AF:
   US$ 11.6 million; Actual: US$ 16.4 million): This component was to support project management through
   the Project Management Unit (PMU).

   AF was approved to scale up activities, as well as to meet the financing gap for AIF. The project objectives
   were unchanged, while the original components were scaled up and one new component was added.

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BD: Higher Education Quality Enhancement (P106216)



  According to the Interim Impact Assessment conducted in June 2013, the project was on track to achieve its
  development objectives despite initial delays, including achieving targets for satisfaction levels of
  stakeholders. The study recommended areas of support to scale up impact, including conducting an
  awareness-raising campaign to increase utilization of facilities and digital services, developing university-
  industry linkages, and establishing a separate entity to oversee quality assurance. The following additions
  were made to the components:

  1. Promoting Academic Innovation: A third round of grants from the AIF was created, with a new window
  named the "Innovation Fund" to support stronger university-industry linkages.

  5. Establishment of Quality Assurance Mechanism (AF: US$ 37.0 million; Actual: US$ 15.8 million): This
  component aimed to ensure quality of higher education through the establishment of quality assurance
  mechanisms. Activities included: institutional strengthening of the Quality Assurance Unit in the UGC; and
  establishment of quality assurance cells at selected higher education institutions.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost

        The original project was appraised at US$ 91.8 million. With the approval of AF, the total appraised
         cost was US$ 216.5 million, and the actual total cost was US$ 216.8 million.
        Funds were reallocated to Component 3 (Raising Connective Capacity) from other components to
         meeting additional funding needs for the BdREN.

  Financing

        The original project was financed largely by an International Development Association Credit of
          US$81.0 million.
        AF in the amount of US$ 125.0 million was approved in December 2013, in order to scale up
          activities and to meet the financing gap for uncompleted activities.

  Borrower contribution

        At appraisal, the Borrower contribution was expected to be US$ 10.5 million. Following project
          restructuring, the total Borrower contribution was appraised at US$ 21.3 million. The actual amount
          was US$20.4 million.

  Dates

        January 2013: The project was restructured to streamline activities and modify the results framework
         (including key outcome targets) due to the slow pace of implementation. The closing date was
         extended from December 2013 to October 2015. At the time, US$54.5 million of the Credit, or
         67.3%, had disbursed.
        December 2013: Following the January 2013 project restructuring, the pace of implementation
         improved significantly and all funds under the original Credit were disbursed. Additional Financing in
         the amount of US$ 125.0 million was approved to build on the reforms and programs initiated during


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BD: Higher Education Quality Enhancement (P106216)



                                           the original project period. At the time, US$ 76.0 million, or 93.8%, had disbursed. The closing date
                                           was extended to December 2018.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               Bangladesh has made notable progress in poverty reduction and improved human capital outcomes in
               recent decades, particularly in comparison to countries at similar per capita income levels. In education,
               primary and secondary enrollments have increased significantly, along with gender parity. At the time of
               project appraisal, the higher education sector included 81 universities, of which 30 were public and 51 were
               private, accounting for 17% of total enrollments in the higher education sector (colleges accounted for 75%,
               and Open University accounted for the remaining 8%). The Ministry of Education (MOE) is responsible for
               policy, strategy, and budgeting for public funding. Within the MOE, the UGC was created in 1973 as the
               oversight apex body, serving as the intermediary between the government and universities. However, the
               sub-sector is marked by low quality, limited access, low level of research, inadequate governance, and
               weak institutional capacity. These challenges have been a significant impediment to economic growth and
               favorable investment climate.

               The Government's Higher Education Strategic Plan for 2006-26 was prepared with participation of multiple
               stakeholders and was viewed as a significant shift by the government to commit to investing in higher
               education and addressing long-term challenges. The Bank's Country Partnership Strategy for FY16-20
               identified quality improvement in education, including increasing relevance of higher education to respond
               to labor needs, as a priority area.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the QUALITY of the TEACHING environment in higher education institutions

                             Rationale
                             According to the project's theory of change, the provision of grant funding to schools through a competitive
                             grant mechanism, the networking of institutions through a research network and digital library, and the
                             introduction of a quality assurance framework, all supported by institutional strengthening activities, were
                             likely to contribute to the outcomes of improved quality and relevance. The emphasis on demand driven

                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Higher Education Quality Enhancement (P106216)



activities (Academic Innovation Fund), in particular, was likely to have immediate impact on relevance, as
strong demand indicates the areas of most need or interest. With regard to quality, project activities
(Academic Innovation Fund and capacity building) were also likely to improve quality in the short term for
teaching and research environment/conditions and for promoting innovation and accountability.



Outputs

Academic Innovation Fund

Provision of financing to 439 subprojects in 38 private and public universities through the AIF. The AIF used a
transparent competitive funding mechanism, which the post-evaluation found had 100% of fund allocations
adhering to the transparent procedures and judged by "renowned experts and competent authority." The
subprojects led to the following improvements: upgraded labs and education infrastructure, increased
connectivity to high speed internet, enhanced teaching capacity and tools, and modernized
curricula. Specifically, the ICR reported the following outputs:

      27,051 students and staff trained in academically-oriented areas such as research methodologies,
         proposal writing, statistics, technical knowledge for specialized equipment, curriculum development,
         and pedagogy
        15,350 pieces of information and communications technology equipment for teaching installed across
         38 universities
        41,184 books and journals procured for offices/libraries
        1,653 classrooms/labs/offices renovated
        12,012 faculty members faculty receiving additional training in various disciplines
        618 Masters degree students enrolled
        9 libraries modernized and automated with modern library management system
        103 curricula updated

Digital Connectivity

      Digital library platform with subscriptions to over 3,000 e-journals
      Establishment of the BdREN, connecting 40 universities (target: 60)
      Establishment of the HEMIS, with annual statistical yearbooks being produced

Quality Assurance

      Creation of Quality Assurance Unit within the UGC to promote good practices and governance
      Establishment of 69 Institutional Quality Assurance Cells (IQAC) at 28 public and 41 private
       universities (target: 15), producing 810 self-assessment reports, which set the benchmark on quality
       and propose strategies for attaining those quality goals.
      Drafting of a National Qualifications Framework, which provides the foundation of an accreditation
       process




                                                                                                 Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Higher Education Quality Enhancement (P106216)




Outcomes

      The mean satisfaction level among students* increased on the five-point Likert scale from 3.3
       in March 2009 to 3.7 in December 2018. This fell short of the revised target of 4.0. The ICR (page 20)
       suggested that the shortfall was due to the fact that student cohorts sampled were, by nature of the
       survey, always new cohorts who have had only a few years in university and thus can only make
       relatively short-term comparisons about improvements in the learning environment. As such, their
       satisfaction levels are more likely to be modest compared to faculty members and employers who
       tend to base their perception on longer-term comparisons. Furthermore, it is also possible that
       undergraduate students have limited research activities and thus did not directly benefit from
       improvements in the research environment where much of the project investments were directed.
      The mean satisfaction level among faculty increased on the five-point Likert scale from 2.9 in March
       2009 to 4.0 in December 2018. This achieved the revised target of 4.0. The ICR (page 18) cited
       particularly high levels of satisfaction regarding access to online journals and e-resources, quality of
       internet, and availability of modern lab equipment and facilities. Annex 8 of the ICR presented
       evidence, largely qualitative, from the Final Round Satisfaction Survey, Graduate Tracking Survey,
       and Final Impact Assessment. The findings included the following: the AIF-financed technology
       improved the learning environment for students and enhanced faculty's ability to teach more advanced
       concepts. Faculty members in AIF departments had higher satisfaction levels than the control group of
       faculty from non-AIF departments, owing to the improved quality of infrastructure and
       materials. However, one finding was that "students in AIF departments did not survey higher survey
       satisfaction across a number of common indicators of pedagogy (such as quality of instruction), but
       AIF departments were found to more effectively use technology in instruction" (ICR, page 64).
      17 institutions submitted institutional improvement plans, in addition to the 810 self-assessment
       reports produced by the 69 institutional quality assurance cells, which led to the implementation of a
       range of quality improvement activities.
      The Bangladesh Accreditation Council Act was passed by National Parliament in 2017, establishing a
       statutory autonomous entity for accreditation of universities and programs. The project team confirmed
       that the Endowment Fund for the Council has been established to provide operating budget and that
       the Council is now operational and preparing for the initiation of the accreditation procedure.

* The survey methodology was described in ICR Annex 8; this description included numbers of departments
and individuals surveyed but lacked specific information on response rates (or on actual numbers or
responses received either through the survey or in focus groups).



Achievement is rated Substantial. There was improved satisfaction of faculty and the delivery of numerous
outputs that likely improved the quality of the teaching and learning environment. Although there were
moderate shortcomings in the implementation of national quality assurance framework, quality improvements
were still carried out at the institutional level.



Rating

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Higher Education Quality Enhancement (P106216)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the RELEVANCE of the TEACHING environment in higher education institutions

Rationale
Outputs

See outputs reported above on subprojects approved through the AIF and digital connectivity.



Outcomes

      The mean satisfaction level among employers increased on the five-point Likert scale from 3.0
       in March 2009 to 4.1 in December 2018. This nearly achieved the revised target of 4.2. Employers
       noted satisfaction with customer service skills, critical thinking and analytical skills, communication in
       English, advanced computer skills, and willingness to learn. The graduate tracer survey reported that
       AIF projects were effective in improving skills, job search prospects, and employability;
       however, "students from AIF-supported institutions reported a high rate of unemployment (38%)
       among all university graduates in Bangladesh" (ICR, page 66).
      However, there was a "considerable lack of academia-private industry collaboration. Less than half of
       surveyed employers maintain collaboration with universities and even less in any sort of sustained
       way. However, from the academic institution side, most mentioned maintaining some kind of
       relationship with industries" (ICR, page 67).



Achievement is rated Substantial due to improved employer satisfaction and increased utilization of digital
resources, although a minor shortcoming is noted in the limited academia-industry collaboration.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the QUALITY of the RESEARCH environment in higher education institutions

Rationale
Outputs

See outputs reported above on subprojects approved through the AIF and digital connectivity.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Higher Education Quality Enhancement (P106216)




Outcomes

      As reported above, the mean satisfaction level among faculty increased on the five-point Likert scale
       from 2.9 in March 2009 to 4.0 in December 2018. This achieved the revised target of 4.0. The ICR
       (page 18) cited particularly high levels of satisfaction regarding access to online journals and e-
       resources, quality of internet, and availability of modern lab equipment and facilities. Annex 8 of the
       ICR presented evidence, largely qualitative, from the Final Round Satisfaction Survey, Graduate
       Tracking Survey, and Final Impact Assessment. The findings included the following: the AIF-financed
       technology invigorated the research environment for faculty and provided researchers with greater
       capacity to conduct research and disseminate findings. Faculty members in AIF departments had
       higher satisfaction levels than the control group of faculty from non-AIF departments, owing to
       the improved quality of infrastructure and materials.
      The original indicator on the percentage of students and faculty with access to advanced internet
       connectivity was dropped. Instead, the project reported that the monthly average volume of inbound
       education/research data traffic in BdREN increased from 10 terabytes in 2013 to 1,362 terabytes in
       2018.
      778 academic publications were produced through AIF support, of which 181 were papers published
       on conference proceedings. This surpassed the target of 150.
      The number of doctoral level enrollments increased by 368% to 170 students, surpassing the target of
       100%.



Achievement is rated Substantial due to increased satisfaction among faculty, as well as other evidence of
increased volume and productivity in research.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To improve the RELEVANCE of the RESEARCH environment in higher education institutions

Rationale
Outputs

See outputs reported above on subprojects approved through the AIF and digital connectivity.



Outcomes



                                                                                                 Page 8 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               BD: Higher Education Quality Enhancement (P106216)



                            See outcomes reported above for Objectives 2 and 3.



                            Achievement is rated Substantial due to increased satisfaction among faculty and among employers as well
                            as other evidence of increased volume and productivity in research. A minor shortcoming is noted in the
                            limited industry-academia collaboration.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Achievement of the objective to improve QUALITY of the teaching environment is rated Modest. Achievement
                            of the remaining three objectives to improve RELEVANCE of the teaching environment and the QUALITY and
                            RELEVANCE of the research environment is rated Substantial due to evidence of improved faculty and
                            employer satisfaction. Overall Efficacy is therefore rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal (PAD, Annex 9), a cost-benefit analysis was conducted to compare the expected stream of
   incremental wage gains for project beneficiaries with the project costs. The estimated internal rate of return,
   under the base case scenario, was 17.9% for the AIF component. A cost efficiency analysis was also conducted
   for the BdREN activity, with the BdREN providing high-speed and high-performance connectivity to institutions
   at a significant cost savings compared to the current spending by the institutions on the current system (US$ 9-
   10 million for 50 Mbps vs. US$ 4 million for 100 Mbps through BdrEN).

   The ICR (Annex 4) updated the cost-benefit analysis, under the assumption that 20% of total eligible university
   graduates had benefited from the project. Benefits were identified as: additional wage premiums for university
   graduates (the wage differential in entry-level salaries) alongside growth in university enrollments. The net
   present value was calculated at US$ 728.0 million, and an internal rate of return of 52.8%. However, there was
   limited evidence on the extent to which the project actually improved the skills of the graduates that were to
   have led to improved job prospects and increased wages.

   Other indications of efficiency in the use of project resources were suggested: the use of specialized expertise
   (for technical work in the digital network, quality assurance, and intellectual property) contributed to project

                                                                                                                         Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Higher Education Quality Enhancement (P106216)



efficiency. In comments on the draft ICR Review, the project team reported that 2.7% of total project costs was
used for technical assistance and that the ambitious reforms supported by the project would have likely
experienced setbacks (and hence further implementation delays) had this specialized expertise not been
available; and the digitization of annual data collection from universities replaced time-consuming manual data
collection. Also, despite a project closing date extension of almost two years for the original project period, US$
76.0 million of the original credit (94%) had been utilized at the time of the original closing date.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      54.70
 Appraisal                                                  17.90
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                               52.80
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the project objectives is High due to strong alignment with country conditions and Bank and
country strategies. Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial due to evidence of improvements in quality and
relevance of the teaching and research environment. Efficiency is rated Substantial. Therefore, overall
outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The two primary risks to development outcome are institutional capacity and financial sustainability. With
regard to institutional capacity, the skills to implement the innovation fund and develop quality assurance
mechanisms have been introduced into the MOE and UGC, although it is unclear whether quality assurance,
despite the passage of the Accreditation Act, will be carried out by the individual tertiary institutions without
continued support. With regard to financial sustainability of the numerous activities funded by the AIF, each
entity was supposed to create a maintenance plan for equipment and facilities to ensure sustainability,
although the final surveys highlighted the beneficiaries' concern for continued financing to sustain benefits of
the project. Endowments were created for the BdREN and Accreditation Commission, as well as a dedicated

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Higher Education Quality Enhancement (P106216)



budget line for quality assurance activities at publicly funded universities. Lastly, a follow-up operation, the
Higher Education Acceleration and Transformation project (P168961), is currently under preparation and
aims to support similar outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project represented the first Bank operation in the higher education sub-sector in Bangladesh, a sub-
  sector in which few other development partners had interest and/or capacity to provide effective
  support. Despite being the first operation of its kind in the country, the Bank drew upon
  its significant experience in other countries, particularly in establishing innovation funds to promote
  research and innovation. As noted in the ICR (page 6), the project objectives and design were
  intentionally designed to be a "low reform-intensive project avoiding controversial measures... it was
  anticipated that opportunities and consensus for pursuing reforms in higher education will arise" once
  sufficient wins and strong engagement were demonstrated under this project. Therefore, government and
  higher education institution commitment was strong throughout the project period, although some time
  was needed to develop support for the demand-driven funding approach. The risk assessment was
  candid and realistic, identifying capacity constraints as the main risk.

  The results framework was overall satisfactory, with opportunities for improvement in terms of more
  specific and explicit outcomes/indicators for "innovation" and "accountability" rather than the more
  general outcome of "improved quality."



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project experienced significant implementation delays at the start, due to the need to shift the mindset
 of key stakeholders from supply-driven to demand-driven funding mechanisms. There was also significant
 learning-by-doing once the new demand-driven approach was established, such as selecting competitive
 grantees. Also, there were numerous technical and logistical difficulties in establishing the BdREN across
 multiple institutions. Implementation Supervision Report ratings during this period, however, appeared to
 lack some candor, as "Implementation Progress" was rated in the satisfactory range in all but one
 supervision report. However, proactive supervision support helped to improve the pace
 of implementation, and AF was secured to significantly scale up the project's activities and impact. The first
 project restructuring (October 2013) revised targets that were unlikely to be achieved due to the slow start
 and also revised indicators themselves to make them more measurable. The second
 restructuring/additional financing accounted for the improved performance and adjusted targets upward
 again. Initial fiduciary challenges were addressed sufficiently to ensure delivery of outputs and project
 completion, although some shortcomings remained.


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Higher Education Quality Enhancement (P106216)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The ICR (page 18) noted that the results framework opted to use satisfaction ratings to track improvements
 in quality and relevance to "overcome inherent difficulties of measurement of quality of higher education
 services. Assessing quality and relevance of higher education directly is known to be difficult due to the
 complex and diverse nature of higher education institutions and programs. High-level cognitive skills
 development of students is also extremely difficult to capture quantitatively." Opportunities for improvement
 remained in terms of identifying more specific and explicit outcomes/indicators for the aspects of
 "innovation" and "accountability. Also, baseline data was not established until two years into the project
 period. Notably, the M&E design included establishing an M&E Unit to support M&E implementation, which
 was critical for oversight given the newly introduced innovation fund mechanism.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E Unit conducted project monitoring activities (with regular reporting on project progress,
  implementation issues, and possible solutions), carried out validation surveys of AIF sub-projects, and
  completed three rounds of satisfaction surveys. There were initial delays and inadequate documentation,
  which led to a downgrade in the M&E rating. However, these challenges were subsequently addressed.
  Restructurings were used to enhance the results framework to make targets realistic and indicators more
  measurable. For example, one of the original key outcome indicators - "Number of universities (public
  and private) connected to BdREN" - was revised to "Monthly average volume of inbound
  education/research data traffic in BdREN" to better measure impact. Six evaluative studies were also
  conducted, including the three rounds of the satisfaction surveys, interim impact assessment, university
  graduate tracer study, and project impact assessment.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (page 29-30) reported the following examples of M&E utilization: regular M&E reports were
  used to support implementation supervision missions by identifying key issues, and evaluative studies
  informed the MOE's strategic plan for the sector and design of a follow-up operation. The National
  HEMIS developed under the project produced data to inform areas of interest such as enrollment,
  teacher numbers, and budgeting.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Higher Education Quality Enhancement (P106216)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project due to minor civil
   works/rehabilitation. Under the AF, the safeguard policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) was also
   triggered due to the potential for ethnic minorities to participate in project interventions (as beneficiaries). A
   Social Management Framework was prepared accordingly.



   At the time of the AF, environmental safeguards compliance was rated Satisfactory. There is no further
   information in the ICR about the level of compliance with the environmental and indigenous peoples
   safeguards and whether they remained satisfactory by project closing, although the project team
   subsequently confirmed that the project was in full compliance as of the final supervision mission.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: There were challenges in financial management performance throughout the
   project period, including delayed, inaccurate, and ineligible financial reporting, ineligible expenditures, a
   resurfacing of hiring needs, and a slowdown in field-level fiduciary support. According to the ICR, although
   these fiduciary issues were never fully mitigated, they were addressed sufficiently that financial
   management performance was rated moderately satisfactory by project closing.



   Procurement: Procurement performance was generally satisfactory, although there were some delays in
   procurement actions and staffing. In 2015, episodes of civil unrest disrupted procurement for AIF
   subprojects as well as for the BdREN. Specific challenges included: an outdated procurement plan; and
   delayed procurement of key items due to the failure to hire requisite procurement specialists and
   necessary staff in the UGC to implement the HEMIS and BdREN, thereby delaying overall implementation
   of the BdREN, the campus network, and the digital library. Actions were undertaken to strengthen
   procurement capacity, and performance improved by project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

                                                                                                       Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Higher Education Quality Enhancement (P106216)



   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn by IEG:

      Difficulties in measuring higher education sector outcomes (i.e. improved skills of university
       graduates) can be addressed through multiple evaluative sources. In the case of this project,
       the M&E plan employed student, faculty, and employer satisfaction surveys (three rounds),
       supplemented by findings from a tracer study and an impact assessment.
      Introducing a competitive grant mechanism can be an effective first step to engaging
       autonomous institutions, prior to attempting more complex sector reforms. In the case of this
       project, the grants aimed to spur innovation and accountability, while deeper quality
       assurance mechanisms (drafting of national qualifications framework and creation of quality
       assurance cells in each participating higher education institution) were introduced at a later
       stage.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Higher Education Quality Enhancement (P106216)



  This project would make a good candidate for further project assessment, given the use of a innovative
  approaches -- in particular the AIF and the quality assurance mechanisms. In addition, a project assessment
  would provide an opportunity to observe any future impacts on the quality and relevance of tertiary education.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presented a range of evidence, although the results framework created challenges for providing
a clear analysis of the outputs and outcomes at different points on the results chain. Output achievements were
clearly reported. Assessment of outcome achievements was based on "improved satisfaction" as a proxy of
improved quality. The Efficiency analysis would have been strengthened with a stronger evidence base,
specifically impact on wages for university graduates to verify benefits. Also, there were some negative findings
reported in Annex 8 that were not reported in the main text but had a bearing on Efficacy: Annex 8
reported survey findings on university-industry collaboration that indicate less engagement from industries
compared to universities, and less satisfaction from students regarding quality of instruction. In comments on
the draft ICR Review, the project team noted that historically there was zero collaboration and therefore any
level of engagement should be viewed as a positive improvement. There was also a lack of candor about
missing baseline data, which ISRs reported were not established until two years into the project period.
Lessons were presented as recommendations, without drawing out the specifics of what was learned from the
project experience. Given the shortcomings noted (inconsistent findings in annexes not explained in the ICR,
lack of candor about missing baseline data, and weak articulation of lessons), ICR Quality is rated Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 15
