          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)



                                                                                      Report Number : ICRR0021760

   1. Project Data



    Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
    Morocco                                      Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


    Programmatic DPL
    Planned Operations:          0               Approved Operations:          0

    Operation ID                                 Operation Name
    P147257                                      MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance


     L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
     IBRD-83630                                  31-Dec-2014                                        291,073,184.00

     Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
     29-Apr-2014                                 31-Dec-2014

                                                 IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                           300,000,000.00                                              0.00

     Revised Commitment                            300,000,000.00                                              0.00

     Actual                                        291,073,184.00                                              0.00




     Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
     Antonio M. Ollero           Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGFP (Unit 3)


PHPROJECTDATATBL




     Operation ID                                Operation Name
     P153603                                     MA-Second Capital Market Dev and SME DPL ( P153603 )



                                                                                                       Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                     Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-83630,IBRD-87560                     30-Apr-2018                                           350,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 16-May-2017                               30-Apr-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           350,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            350,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                        350,000,000.00                                                0.00




2. Program Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The First (CMSME1) and Second (CMSME2) Capital Market Development and Small- and Medium-
   Enterprise Finance Development Policy Loans were a programmatic series of single-tranche development
   policy operations that promoted the development of an inclusive, diversified, and efficient financial system in
   the Kingdom of Morocco.

   According to the Program Document (page 0), the program development objective (PDO) of CMSME1 was
   to: (a) deepen the capital markets by broadening the range of instruments and investors; (b) reform the
   pension system to ensure continued institutional demand for capital market securities; (c) foster solutions for
   the financing of small and young enterprises; and, (d) consolidate oversight to balance greater access with
   continued financial stability. According to the Program Document (page 1), the PDO for CMSME2 was to: (a)
   improve access to finance for small and young enterprises; (b) strengthen capital markets by improving the
   institutional framework and broadening the range of instruments; (c) improve the financial sustainability of the
   Caisse Marocaine des Retraites (CMR), the Mandatory Pension Fund for Civil and Military Services; and, (d)
   strengthen oversight of the banking sector.

   The PDOs of the first and second operation are essentially the same. The language of the PDO in CMSME2
   is used for this ICR Review.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   The programmatic series had four policy areas.
   Access to Finance for Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) aimed to improve access to
   finance --- the access to and use of credit, savings, insurance and payment services --- for MSMEs


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)



  by: (a) expanding the guarantee operations of the Caisse Centrale de Garantie (CCG), the Government
  Credit Guarantee Agency, including for women-owned MSMEs and for MSMEs in under-served regions, and
  expanding the CCG's co-financing operations with private banks to cover the financial restructuring of
  distressed MSMEs; (b) addressing the working capital requirements of MSMEs through tax, monetary, and
  other instruments; (c) introducing credit scoring for MSMEs to help build their credit and repayment records;
  and, (d) licensing non-bank providers of payment services to broaden the access to basic financial services
  for MSMEs and for the unbanked, particularly those in rural areas.

  Capital Market Development supported the deepening and strengthening of capital markets by: (a)
  strengthening the newly independent Autorité Marocaine du Marche des Capitaux, (AMMC), Capital Markets
  Authority, including its functions to license and certify finance professionals and ensure business conduct
  and investor protection that were in line with international standards; (b) introducing legislation to strengthen
  the governance structure of the stock exchange; (c) implementing the securities lending framework to ensure
  continuous prices quotes for key securities and thereby facilitate the pricing of new corporate debt; and, (d)
  developing new capital market instruments including real estate investment trusts (REITs), that would also
  help finance business offices for small and medium enterprises (SMEs).

  Pension Reform supported the parametric reform of the CMR, both to ensure the financial sustainability of
  the defined benefit pension system for the public sector and to foster robust institutional demand for capital
  market securities. Parametric reform of the CMR --- changes to the contribution parameters, benefits
  parameters, and eligibility conditions to ensure the sustainability of the pension system --- would constitute
  the first of three phases of pension reform announced in 2014 (the second phase, outside of the scope of the
  DPL, would merge the CMR with the Regime Collectif d'Allocation des Retraites (RCAR), the mandatory
  pension fund for state-owned enterprises, and continue with a second parametric reform program; and, the
  third phase, also outside the scope of the DPL, would merge the Caisse Nationale de Securite Sociale
  (CNSS), the mandatory pension fund for salaried employees of the private sector, with the Caisse
  Interprofessionnelle Moracaine de Retriates (CIMR), the voluntary pension fund for the private sector).

  Oversight of the Banking Sector aimed to strengthen the regulatory and supervisory oversight of banking
  by: amending the old Banking Law of 2006; launching the work of a systemic risk council of financial
  regulators; broadening the scope of financial regulation to cover financial conglomerates, microcredit
  institutions and nonbank providers of payment services; strengthening prudential requirements (prudential
  regulation requires financial firms to control risks as defined by capital requirements, liquidity requirements,
  concentration risk limits, and reporting and public disclosure rules); and, creating a framework for bank
  resolution including developing recovery and resolution plans for systemics banks that were also part of
  financial conglomerates.




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
  Program Cost: The programmatic series was estimated to cost US$650 million: US$300 million for CMSME1
  and US$350 million for CMSME2.

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)




   Financing: CMSME1 was financed with a EUR217.6 million (US$300 million equivalent at appraisal, US$291
   million equivalent at program closing) DPL, and CMSME2, with a US$350 million DPL, both of which were
   fully disbursed.

   Dates: CMSME1 was approved on April 29, 2014, became effective on July 30, 2014, and closed as
   scheduled on December 31, 2014. CMSME2 was approved May 16, 2017, became effective on April 30,
   2018, and closed as scheduled on April 30, 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  The program objectives were relevant to the development priorities adopted by Morocco at the time of
  program appraisal of CMSME1 in 2014 and CMSME2 in 2017. Le Programme Gouvernemental 2012-
  2016 (The Government Program for 2012-2016) sought to address three development challenges: (a)
  strengthening governance and institutions for better public interventions; (b) accelerating and sustaining
  economic growth; and, (c) addressing social and economic exclusion. According to the Program Documents
  (PDs) for CMSME1 (pages 11-14) and for CMSME2 (pages 9-10), the government recognized the crucial role
  of finance for economic growth and economic inclusion. The financial system had grown rapidly in the
  preceding decade and had performed well in mobilizing savings as evidence by the sizable assets of the
  banks, the pension funds, and the insurance companies. However, the system had not allocated capital
  efficiently and a more robust, diverse and inclusive financial system --- one that provided access to finance for
  young and small enterprises, including enterprises owned by women, and enterprises located in lagging
  regions and that performed financial intermediation efficiently through the capital markets in addition to banks
  --- would promote economic competitiveness and financial stability. A financial sector structural reform
  program focused on the institutional, legal and regulatory framework for MSME finance, capital markets,
  pension reform, and oversight of the financial system would support these goals.

  The program objectives were relevant to the development priorities adopted by Morocco at the time of
  program closing in 2018. Le Programme Gouvernemental 2016-2021 (The Government Program for 2016-
  2021) advanced five pillars: (a) supporting the choice of democracy and the principles of rule of law and
  advanced regionalization; (b) strengthening integrity, reforming the administration, and anchoring good
  governance; (c) upgrading the economic model, employment promotion, and sustainable development; (d)
  strengthening human development and social and territorial cohesion; and, (e) deepening Morocco’s relations
  with other African countries and organizations. The program objectives, with their focus on MSME finance
  and financial access, were relevant to the third and fourth pillars of the Government Program.

  The program objectives were aligned with the Bank Group strategy in Morocco at the time of program
  appraisal of CMSME1 in 2014 and CMSME2 in 2017. The "Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the
  Kingdom of Morocco for the Period FY2014-2017" committed Bank Group support for Morocco's development

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)



  program organized around three "results areas": (a) promoting competitive and inclusive growth; (b) building a
  green and resilient future; and (c) strengthening governance and institutions for improved service delivery to
  all citizens. The objectives of the DPL series were aligned with the first results area, specifically with the
  strategic outcome "to improve access to finance with a particular focus on low-income households; micro,
  small and young firms; and, youth and women." In 2016, the "Performance and Lending Review (PLR) of the
  Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the Kingdom of Morocco for the Period FY2014-2017" reinforced the
  alignment of the program objectives with the CPS: "Morocco's financial system performs well in mobilizing
  savings for capital formation, but the functions of financing and monitoring capital could be strengthened.
  Market-based finance would … supplement banks in developing new solutions for financing small and young
  enterprises."

  The program objectives were also aligned with the Bank group strategy in Morocco at the time of
  program closing in 2018. The "Country Partnership Framework for the Kingdom of Morocco for FY19-FY24"
  committed Bank Group support for Morocco's development program organized around three "strategic focus
  areas": (a) promoting job creation by the private sector; (b) strengthening human capital; and (c) promoting
  inclusive and resilient territorial development." The objectives of the DPL series were aligned with the first
  results area, specifically with the objectives "to increase opportunities for private sector growth with a focus on
  MSMEs" and "to increase access to finance."



  Rating
  High

b. Relevance of Design
  The theory of change was sound. The policy areas were consistent with the program objectives.

    • Access to Finance for MSMEs would foster the financing of MSMEs --- although Morocco had led the
    Middle East and North Africa region in access to finance for MSMEs (MSMEs accounted for 24 percent of
    bank loans in 2011), access to finance remained a major business constraint among MSMEs, according to
    the Enterprise Survey of 2014, with a particular concern on financial inclusion for MSMEs owned and
    operated by women and MSMEs located in lagging regions of the country.
    • Capital Market Development would broaden the sources of financing for borrowers --- bank credit to
    the private sector had plateaued and large borrowers were turning to the local debt market to replace
    traditional bank finance, but the capital market infrastructure was under-developed with the equity market
    downgraded from emerging to frontier status in 2013 and the debt market unable to efficiently price new
    debt issues in the absence of price information on benchmark government securities.
    • Pension Reform would address financial sustainability issues with the CMR --- with assets under
    management at 8 percent of GDP, the mandatory pay-as-you-go scheme for the public sector faced
    looming financial sustainability problems, with high accrual and high net income replacement rates, rising
    dependency ratios (of beneficiaries to contributors), negative cashflow operations in 2014, and a
    prospective dependency on the government budget to cover deficits.

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)



  • Oversight of the Banking Sector would strengthen regulation and supervision of the banking system to
  help safeguard financial stability --- the joint Bank-IMF Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) of
  2016 had recommended: an extension of supervision over systemic banks that were part of conglomerates;
  the creation of a framework for recovery and resolution planning for the banks; the design rules and
  procedures for the operation of a deposit insurance corporation independent of the central bank; and, the
  creation of a framework for crisis management.

And the prior actions were supportive of the policy areas. Many of the prior actions for CMSME1 and
triggers and prior actions for CMSME2 provided the legal and regulatory framework for policy and institutional
reforms.

  • To improve MSMEs' access to finance, the prior actions included: (a) the adoption by the CCG of a
  strategic plan for 2013-16 expanding bank guarantees and creating new financing solutions for SMEs; (b)
  the organization by the Bank of Morocco, the CCG, and the Groupement Professionnel des Banques du
  Maroc (GPBM), the Association of Moroccan Banks, of a co-financing arrangement supporting the financial
  restructuring of SMEs; (c) the determination by the government of the conditions for paying VAT credits to
  MSMEs; (d) the selection by the Bank of Morocco of a commercial entity to act as a second credit bureau
  and the issuance of a license for the second credit bureau, with requirements to offer MSME credit scoring;
  (e) the adoption by the Council of Government of the draft Law No. 18-14 on capital investment mutual
  funds modernizing the legal framework for private equity and venture capital and providing for their
  investment in SMEs; and, (f) the publication of the regulations implementing Law No. 103-12 on Credit
  Institutions and Other Businesses (the new Banking Law) governing nonbank providers of payment
  services.
  • To strengthen capital markets, the prior actions included: (a) the adoption of the Council of Government
  of Organic Law No. 12-14 on the higher civil service --- a requisite step for the appointment of the chairman
  of the board of the new AMMC; (b) the appointment by the board of the AMMC of the members of the
  College of Sanction (the independent body in charge of enforcement); (c) the adoption by Minister of
  Finance of the rules of the AMMC; (d) the publication of Law No. 19-14 on the stock exchange and
  on investment advice --- to enable the AMMC to license and regulate investment advisors; (e) the
  transmittal by the Ministry of Economy and Finance of draft agreements with six primary dealers regarding
  the provision of continuous quotes of tradable prices for a panel of Treasury securities and the conclusion of
  one such agreement; (f) the issuance by the Ministry of Economy and Finance of a master agreement for
  securities lending following Law No. 45-12; and, (g) the publication of Law No. 70-14 on real estate
  investment trusts (REITs) and the issuance of Decree No. 2-16-1011 exempting REITs from the corporate
  income tax.
  • To improve the financial sustainability of the CMR, the prior actions included: (a) the publication of the
  government's plan for the reform of the CMR together with the transmittal of the 2014 Budget Law to
  Parliament; and (b) the publication of laws setting the pension system parameters of the CMR, including
  Law No. 71-14 (amending Law No. 11-71) establishing the civil service pension fund, and Law No. 72-14
  (amending Law No. 12- 71) setting the mandatory retirement age for the civil and military services.


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 24
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)



           • To strengthen the oversight of the banking sector, the prior actions included: (a) the adoption by the
           Council of Government of draft Law No. 103-12 establishing the oversight regime for financial
           conglomerates and giving the Bank of Morocco licensing authority over microcredit institutions; and, (b) the
           transmittal by the Bank of Morocco to banks of the draft regulations on recovery planning for systemic
           banks belonging to financial conglomerates, following Law No. 103-12.



       The choice of lending instrument was appropriate. A DPL provides an IBRD loan and guarantees budget
       support to governments "for a program of policy and institutional actions to help achieve sustainable, shared
       growth and poverty reduction". The programmatic approach allowed the government to stage a first set of
       policy and institutional reforms in the financial sector under CMSME1 and to advance and deepen the reforms
       under CMSME2.

       The macro-fiscal framework was adequate. The IMF Article IV consultation with Morocco in 2014
       determined that "sound economic fundamentals and strong policy implementation had helped stabilize the
       economy", with GDP growth expected to reach 3 percent in 2014 and 4.5 percent in 2015, the fiscal deficit
       expected to shrink from 6.8 percent of GDP 2012 to 4.3 percent of GDP in 2015, and the current account
       deficit expected to narrow from 9.8 percent of GDP in 2012 to 6 percent of GDP in 2014. The IMF also stated
       that: the financial system was sound overall; the adoption of new banking and central bank laws was
       expected to help strengthen the financial sector; the reform of the pension system was urgent to maintain its
       viability; and, the efforts of the central bank to strengthen supervision were sound. The IMF Article IV
       consultation in 2017 reported that GDP growth had picked up from the sharp economic slowdown in 2016 and
       was expected to recover to 4.4 percent in 2017. On the financial sector, the IMF concluded that: risks to
       financial stability were limited; banks were well capitalized; nonperforming loans were large but adequately
       provisioned; and efforts to increase supervisory capacity were well-advised, including more risk-based and
       forward-looking supervision and tighter provisioning requirements. The IMF also stated that stronger
       medium-term growth would hinge on continued implementation of comprehensive reforms, including, among
       others, promoting access to finance.


       Rating
       Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To improve access to finance for small and young enterprises.

    Rationale


                                                                                                         Page 7 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)



The degree of achievement of the objective to improve access to finance for small and young enterprises is
assessed as substantial.

Expanding the CCG Credit Guarantee Program for SMSEs. The CCG expanded its guarantee
program in support of MSMEs, and achieved the four results targets set at appraisal.

  • The target for financing for eligible micro-, small- and medium-enterprises (MSMEs) to reach MAD 6
  billion was achieved by end-2017, half-a-year ahead of the target date.
  • The target to increase MSME loans with guarantees from the CCG from MAD 4.6 billion in the baseline
  (mid-2013) to MAD 18 billion was achieved. The volume of loans guaranteed by the CCG was MAD 20.5
  billion in 2018.
  • The target to increase MSME loans with CCG guarantees for majority female-owned MSMEs from MAD
  420 million in the baseline (mid-2013) to MAD 1.8 billion was achieved. The volume of loans extended to
  majority female-owned MSMEs guaranteed by the CCG was MAD 2.3 billion in 2018.
  • The target to increase MSME loans with CCG guarantees for the under-served Marrakesh and Oriental
  regions from MAD 555 million in the baseline (mid-2013) to MAD 1.5 billion was achieved. The volume of
  loans MEME loans to the Marrakesh and Oriental regions guaranteed by the CCG guarantees was MAD
  2.2 billion in 2018.

The CCG also expanded its co-financing program with private banks, and met three of the four targets
defined at appraisal. The CCG, the Morocco Banks Association, and the Bank of Morocco established a co-
financing program supporting the financial restructuring of MSMEs --- participating banks would extend credit
lines to eligible MSMEs, in exchange for long-term low-interest rate subordinated loans from the CCG.

  • The target for the CCG to raise co-financing with private banks from MAD 130 million in the baseline
  (mid-2013) to MAD 400 million by mid-2016 was exceeded. Co-financing by the CCG with banks reached
  MAD 1.1 billion in 2016; it topped MAD 1.2 billion in 2017 and MAD 1 billion in 2018.
  • The target to increase the number of new or young enterprises from 1,572 in the baseline (the period
  June 2010 to June 2013) to 3,000 in the period from June 2013 to June 2016 cannot be assessed. There
  is no readily available data on the age of firms served by the CCG.
  • The target to increase the number of new CCG outlets in the regions from 2 in the baseline (mid-2013)
  to 6 by mid-2016 was achieved. The CCG had 8 operational business centers in 8 regions in
  2016: Tangier (Tanger-Tetouan-Al Hoceima region), Agadir (Souss-Massa region), Marrakech
  (Marrakesh-Safi region), Oujda (Oriental region), Casablanca (Casablanca-Settat region), Fez (Fes-
  Meknes region), Laayoune (Laayoune-Sakia El Hamra region), and Rabat (Rabat-Sale-Kinitra region).
  • The target to create a centralized electronic registry for movable collateral was dropped
  because adoption of the law on secured transactions, for which this target was associated, was dropped
  in CMSME2.




                                                                                                  Page 8 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)



Reducing the Working Capital Needs of MSMEs. The DPL series aimed to help reduce the working
capital needs of MSMEs through various policy measures. The Ministry of Economy and Finance met the
results target for the payment of VAT tax credits to MSMEs.

  • The target to pay MAD 250 million of MSME VAT credits was achieved. The amount of MSME VAT
  credits paid was MAD 623.7 million in end-2017 to enterprises with a turnover below MAD 50 million, and
  another MAD 42.8 million in end-March 2018, from MAD 0 in the baseline (mid-2013). Breaks in chains of
  VAT rates generate credits for enterprises that pay higher VAT to suppliers than the VAT they collect
  from buyers. VAT credits may only be used to extinguish future VAT debits, according to Morocco's tax
  code, except that in 2013 the government agreed to a one-time exception and recognized VAT credits
  accumulated in 2004-13 as debt which it would pay out. The payment of VAT credits helped reduce the
  working capital needs of MSMEs.
  • Following payment of VAT credits to MSMEs, the government has since decided to reimburse other VAT
  credits using a factoring scheme --- banks would advance VAT credits to MSMEs with turnover above
  MAD 50 million at a discount rate of 3 percent, and the Treasury would pay the advance over three
  years. Moreover, the government has revised the tax code to prevent future VAT credit accumulation.
  • In addition to paying VAT credits, the government also took other measures to help ease the working
  capital needs of MSMEs. The Bank of Morocco: (a) extended the maturity of its funding-for-facility, which
  refinances bank MSME loans at the policy rate, to 12 months, in January 2014 (banks typically tap the
  facility to lend more to MSMEs); (b) tightened its "large exposure" regulation, limiting the extent to which
  banks lend to large firms, thereby allowing more lending to MSMEs; and (c) gave MSMEs access to its
  database of bounced checks and payment defaults, enabling MSMEs to monitor the financial standing of
  existing customers and to screen new ones.

Credit Scoring for MSMEs. After the Bank of Morocco selected a second credit bureau in March 2014, the
credit reporting business in Morocco faced challenges when: (a) the first credit bureau, operating in the
country since 2009, decided to leave the Moroccan market, and (b) the firm selected as the second credit
bureau withdrew its application for a license. Another international credit reporting agency eventually
acquired the first credit bureau's Morocco operation in July 2015, and the central bank subsequently selected
and licensed a second credit bureau, which started operations in November 2017. While both bureaus have
committed to provide credit scoring form MSMEs, the achievement of the results target defined at appraisal
cannot be ascertained.

  • The achievement of the target for 40,000 MSMEs to have credit scores by mid-2018 cannot be assessed
  because the current credit bureau information system: (a) distinguishes only between individuals and legal
  entities; and, (b) among legal entities, there is no distinction made between large companies and
  MSMEs. Moreover, credit scores had been traditionally offered by the first credit bureau only upon request
  by an enterprise.
  • According to the ICR (pages 29-30), the target may have been achieved following the opening of a
  second credit bureau, which would have increased the coverage of enterprises (90 percent of all


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 24
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)



        enterprises in Morocco are SMEs). However, from the available data --- some 449,395 individuals and
        8,180 legal entities received credit scores as of July 2017 --- it is difficult to prove this contention.
        • Following the licensing of the second credit bureau, the Bank of Morocco is planning to revamp the
        Public Credit Registry, according to the ICR (page 30). Credit bureaus and credit registries are the two
        principal types of credit reporting institutions. While credit bureaus are typically privately-owned and -
        operated commercial enterprises that cater to the information requirements of commercial lenders, credit
        registries tend to be public entities that support the state's role as a supervisor of financial institutions and
        whose data are geared towards policymakers and regulators. Improvements with the Public Credit
        Registry will help the Bank of Morocco better manage systemic risk in the financial system.

    Non-Bank Providers of Payment Services: Following the issuance of two regulations to implement the
    provisions of Law No. 103-12 on non-bank providers of payment services, the program met the results target
    defined at appraisal for licensing non-bank providers of payment services.

        •  The target to have four non-bank financial services providers licensed by mid-2018 was
        exceeded. There were five non-bank financial services providers licensed by February 2018; there had
        been no licensed non-bank providers in the baseline (mid-2013). Broadening the payments system as
        authorized under the new Banking Law would expand the access to finance for MSMEs and for the
        unbanked population particularly in the rural areas.
        • In addition to licensing nonbank payments service providers, the government has taken other steps,
        outside the scope of the DPL series, to modernize the payments system and broaden financial inclusion:
        (a) the government issued a decree in April 2016 allowing the use of electronic money for payments to the
        Treasury; (b) the Ministry of Economy and Finance started crafting a national strategy for financial
        inclusion, with assistance from the Bank; and, (c) the Bank of Morocco is coordinating a privately-financed
        project aimed at reducing the use of cash in the payments system, and is implementing a national financial
        literacy program.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     To strengthen capital markets by improving the institutional framework and broadening the range of
     instruments.

    Rationale
    The degree of achievement of the objective to strengthen capital markets by improving the institutional
    framework and broadening the range of instruments is assessed as substantial.


                                                                                                             Page 10 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)




Supporting the Newly Independent Capital Market Authority. Although the DPL series supported
strengthening the AMMC, created as the successor to the Conseil Deontologique des Valeurs Mobileries
(CDVM) and made independent with the passage of Law No. 42-13, the AMMC did not achieve the results
target defined at appraisal to evidence its ability to regulate investment advisors by the program closing date.

  • The target for the AMMC to certify 50 percent of finance professionals engaged in trading, compliance,
  asset management, and financial analysis who were required to register under Law 42-13, was not
  achieved --- there were no finance professionals certified by the AMMC by the program closing date on
  April 2018. The AMMC was not able to launch the accreditation process in time, although no reasons are
  cited for the delay. Regulation of advisors is important to ensure that the investment management
  business is conducted in line with professional technical and fiduciary standards.
  • However, the target may yet be achieved before the end of 2019, according to the ICR (page 6). The
  AMMC officially launched the accreditation process for market professionals in April 2019 and is in the
  process of reviewing all applications for certifications. An initial review of the applications identified
  400 finance professionals as certification-eligible, and clearance rounds were scheduled for June,
  September, October, and December 2019. The professionals covered by the accreditation process are
  reportedly preparing their training plans, though their professional associations, based on the AMMC
  syllabus.
  • Overall, the institutional capacity of the AMMC had been supported under the DPL series with: the
  installation of the AMMC board; the appointment of members of the College of Sanction; the adoption of
  the AMMC rules and regulations (and the review by the Bank of the AMMC rulebook though a parallel
  technical assistance project); and, the creation of the AMMC advisory committee.

Strengthening the Stock Market. The Bank supported measures to improve the functioning of the
Casablanca Stock Exchange (the seventh largest in the Middle East and North Africa region by market
capitalization in 2014) through a Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative (FIRST) technical
assistance project to help prepare a law on the stock exchange and investment advice. The DPL series
supported the passage of Law No. 19-14, published in March 2017, aiming to modernize the stock exchange
by, among others: strengthening the governance structure of the exchange; creating new market segments
for principal and alternative listings; creating dedicated listing and oversight requirements for SMEs; and,
creating a capital market commission presided by the Minister of Finance. No results targets were
associated with this activity.

Strengthening the Government Debt Market and Implementing the Securities Lending
Framework. The results targets for strengthening the government debt market and implementing the
securities lending framework were achieved. Morocco's government debt market was fairly developed but
could be improved with: a cleaner yield curve, less fragmentation, greater liquidity with key bonds including
in the secondary market, an electronic trading platform, and a securities lending facility.




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)



  •  The target to have continuous prices posted on Bloomberg for key government securities --- less than 1-
  year residual maturity, less than 2-year residual maturity, more than 10-year residual maturity, 5-year
  benchmark, 10-year benchmark, more than 10 years residual maturity --- was achieved by mid-
  2018. There had been no Moroccan page on Bloomberg in the baseline (mid-2013). CDG Capital S.A., a
  Moroccan investment bank, signed the first agreement to quote prices in March 2013 and 15 other primary
  dealers followed in January 2015. Continuous quotes are posted daily by the banks in Bloomberg's "E-
  bond Morocco" platform. End-of-day quotes are also available at the website of the Ministry of Economy
  and Finance. Continuous posting of prices facilitates the pricing of new corporate debt as well as
  of interest rate and foreign exchange swaps.
  • The target to reduce the number of separately-identified securities from 77 in the baseline (mid-2013) to
  66 was nearly achieved; there were 69 separately-identified securities by end-2018. Narrowing the
  number of separately-identified securities would reduce fragmentation of the debt market.
  • The target to have securities lending contracts regulated and recorded in a central depository was
  achieved in end-2108, with the recording of securities lending contracts centralized at the
  AMMC. Following the recommendations of the FSAP of 2015, the recording of securities lending
  contracts was assigned to the AMMC rather than the central depository and settlement system for
  securities, as originally proposed. In the baseline (mid-2013), securities lending contracts were neither
  regulated nor recorded in a central depository. Securities lending --- the transaction in which an owner of
  shares or bonds transfers the securities temporarily to a borrower in exchange for a borrowing fee and the
  transfer of other shares, bonds or cash to the lender as collateral --- is a core foundational element for
  completing capital markets: market participants borrow a security temporarily for trading (taking risk for
  profit), arbitrage (making riskless profit from unjustified price differences), and hedging (reducing
  risk). Until 2013, Morocco had lacked an effective securities lending framework that ensured informative
  prices.
  • Additionally, it is noteworthy that the master agreement for securities lending prepared by the Ministry of
  Economy and Finance addressed two issues earlier flagged as important to the operation of the securities
  lending market: the participation of large non-resident investors in securities lending; and, temporary limits
  on short-selling in cases of systemic distress. The Ministry of Economy and Finance had received
  technical assistance from FIRST to prepare regulations to implement Law No. 45-12 on Securities
  Lending.
  • The target to have all derivatives traded on a regulated market and cleared and settled through a central
  clearing counterparty was dropped with CMSME2, after the FSAP of 2015 recommended that the Law on
  Derivatives of 2012 not be implemented because it did not incorporate recent international standards on
  central clearing counterparties.

Launching a New Capital Market Instrument. Although the program supported the formation of REITs
with the passage of Law 70-14 on Real Estate Collective Investment Schemes (OPCI Law) in 2016, the
target to have two real estate investment trust (REIT) managers licensed was not achieved by the program
closing date on April 2018.



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 24
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)



        • The ICR (page 32), however, reports that the target may likely be achieved before the end of
        2019. Following publication by the Ministry of Economy and Finance in April 2019 of Decree No. 3149.18
        approving AMMC Circular No. 12/18 on management companies for REITs, the AMMC has launched the
        process for licensing REIT managers and is reportedly evaluating licensing applications. REITs are
        investment funds that own industrial and commercial real estate; they offer institutional investors assets
        yielding steady rental income. Some REIT industrial and commercial real estate are also leased to SMEs,
        thereby also helping with SME finances.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective
     To improve the financial sustainability of the CMR.

    Rationale
    The degree of achievement of the objective to improve the financial sustainability of the CMR is assessed as
    substantial.

    Implementing the Parametric Reform of the CMR. The program achieved the results target set at
    appraisal for actuarial calculations to project 2028 as year in which the CMR would deplete its reserves
    following reforms to the pension system, compared to 2022 without the reforms.

        •  In its Annual Report for 2017, the CMR announced that the new actuarial forecast for reserve depletion
        was revised from the year 2022 to 2027.
        • The actuarial calculations were based on the following changes to the pension parameters submitted by
        the government to Parliament in January 2016 as part of the pension reform program: (a) the age at which
        civil servants would retire without penalties would be raised from 60 to 63 years; (b) the contribution
        rates for the employee and employer would gradually increase from 20 to 28 percent of salary; (c) the
        base for computing pensions would be changed from the last year to the last eight years of a retiree's
        salary; (d) the accrual rate (the rate of benefit per year of pensionable service in a defined benefit
        scheme) would be decreased from 2.5 percent to 2 percent of salary; (e) the minimum pension would be
        raised from Moroccan Dirham (MAD) 1,000 (US$103 equivalent) to MAD 1,500 (US$155 equivalent) per
        month to protect the least well-off retirees and employees; and, (f) there would be no change to pension
        rights accrued before the reforms came into effect.
        • Moreover, although the next two phases of pension reform lay outside the scope of this DPL, according
        to the PD for CMSME2 (page 27), the government was ready for the second phase of the reform plan with
        a second set of proposed parametric reforms for a merged CMR-RCAR system: (a) a replacement rate of


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 24
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)



        preretirement income of about 40 percent for the defined benefit pillar; (b) an accrual rate in the low 1
        percent; (c) retirement age at 65 years; (d) contribution rate in the low teens; and, (e) the lifetime
        averaging of salary. The second phase would close the gap between public and private pension rights,
        homogenizing pension contributions.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 4
    Objective
     To strengthen oversight of the banking sector.

    Rationale
    The degree of achievement of the objective to strengthen oversight of the banking sector is assessed as
    substantial.

    Strengthening Oversight of the Banking Sector. The program met the results target set at appraisal for
    strengthening oversight of the banking sector.

        • Parliament passed Law No. 103-12 in December 2014, following the adoption earlier by Council of
        Government of the draft legislation in January 2014. Among its key provisions, the new Banking Law:
        created a systemic risk council of financial regulators; established a deposit insurance corporation
        independent of the central bank; introduced a new bank resolution framework including the use of direct
        intervention and resolution tools; broadened the supervisory regime to cover financial conglomerates,
        microcredit institutions, and nonbank providers of payment services; and strengthened prudential
        requirements.
        • Following passage of the law, the Bank of Morocco adopted three sets of implementing regulations,
        including Circular Number 4/W/2017 governing crisis recovery planning by banks following consultations
        by the central bank with financial firms in September 2016. The new Banking Law and the implementing
        rules incorporated key recommendations advanced by the Joint Bank-IMF FSAP of 2015.
        • Financial conglomerates reported to supervisors their internal arrangements for the identification and
        management of risks, by end-2016, meeting the results target set at appraisal. The achievement of this
        target provides supervisors with the information needed to verify that solvency and liquidity buffers for the
        banking parts of conglomerates are not tunneled out. In theory, supervisors should be able to use the
        information to mandate support by parent companies to financial affiliates.
        • The AMMC submitted to the Bank, as part of the FSAP process, its assessment of the implementation of
        International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) Principles and Objectives, in March
        2015, meeting the target set at appraisal for the AMMC to comply with IOSCO Principle 6 (which states

                                                                                                         Page 14 of 24
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)



        that a "regulator should have or contribute to a process to monitor, mitigate and manage systemic risk,
        appropriate to its mandate") and Principle 7 (which states that a "regulator should have or contribute to a
        process to review the perimeter of regulation regularly").
        • Three banks that were designated by the central bank as systemically important in 2016 --- the three
        banks accounted for 65 percent of the country's total banking assets and belonged to conglomerates also
        active in insurance and asset management --- filed recovery plans in mid-2018, meeting the results
        target. A recovery plan identifies triggers and options for responding to a wide range of severe but
        plausible internal and external stress scenarios with the goal of restoring a bank to financial strength and
        viability in a timely manner.
        • Based on the recovery plans, the central bank was able to develop resolution plans for the systemic
        banks, according to the ICR (page 34). Commonly known as a living will, a resolution plan describes the
        strategies for the rapid and orderly resolution of the banks in the event of failure or material financial
        distress.
        • A technical assistance activity funded by FIRST assisted the authorities to develop the resolution plans,
        which included: (a) decision tree for when emergency liquidity assistance became solvency support; (b) a
        definition of the roles of the Ministry of Economy and Finance and the Bank of Morocco when the line was
        crossed; and, (c) provisions for coordination with the other regulators.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  The outcome of the DPL series is rated as satisfactory.

  The program objectives were highly relevant to the development priorities articulated in the Government
  Program for 2012-2016 and 2016-2021 and were highly aligned with Bank Group strategy in Morocco contained
  in the Country Partnership Strategy for FY14-17 and the Country Partnership Framework for FY18-24. The
  program design was substantially relevant, with the four policy areas consistent with the program objectives, the
  prior actions supportive of the policy areas, the choice of lending instrument appropriate, and the
  macroeconomic framework adequate. The degree of achievement of the four program objectives --- to improve
  access to finance for small and young enterprises (with 8 of 10 results targets met); to strengthen capital
  markets by improving the institutional framework and broadening the range of instruments (with 4 of the 5
  results targets met in 2018, and the fifth expected to be met in 2019); to improve the financial sustainability of
  the CMR (with the single results target met); and, to strengthen oversight of the banking sector (with all 3 results
  targets met) --- were all substantial.

                                                                                                        Page 15 of 24
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)




a.     Outcome Rating
       Satisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

The risk to the sustainability of the development outcomes is assessed as moderate.

Political risk. Government commitment to financial sector reform is strong: (a) Morocco had been modernizing
its financial sector for decades before the DPL series; (b) the government successfully completed all 18 prior
actions for CMSME1 and CMSME2, many of which involved the adoption by Council of Government of new
draft legislation and the passage by Parliament of new laws (see Section 3.B); and, (c) the government
took additional steps to broaden the reform plan beyond the requirements of the DPF series, including, among
others, planning the revamp of the Public Credit Registry, drawing up a national strategy for financial inclusion;
and, standing ready to launch the second phase of pension reform (see Section 4). Moreover, the government
has: (a) actively pursued technical assistance projects with FIRST, in support of financial sector development
and reform; (b) participated in the IFC-World Bank Joint Capital Markets Program --- Morocco was one of seven
countries selected for a three-year advisory engagement focused on capital market development, including the
creation of private markets for MSME financing through nonbank channels; and, (c) obtained approval of the
Financial Inclusion and Digital Economy DPF --- the US$700 million operation supports the government's
National Financial Inclusion Strategy.

Institutional capacity risk. The principal agencies implementing the program --- the CCG, the Bank of
Morocco, the Ministry of Economy and Finance, the AMMC (the predecessor was the CVDM), and the CMR ---
have had long operating histories and have demonstrated, with their performance in the DPF series, that they
have institutional capacity to undertake structural reform measures. The Autorité de Contrôle des Assurances
et de la Prévoyance Sociale (ACAPS), the Independent Insurance and Pension Fund Supervisory Authority,
created in 2016 to supervise insurance companies and pension funds (replacing the Department of Insurance
and Social Welfare of the Ministry of Economy and Finance), is a fairly new organization. The systemic risk
council of financial regulators, created with the program, is also a new institution; but its membership consists of
the leadership of the principal agencies, hence the institutional capacity risk is modest.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
       Modest

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     The Bank's performance at entry is assessed as satisfactory.


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)



The program design was underpinned by extensive analytic work. Reforms in the four policy areas
were informed by: (a) the joint IMF-World Bank "Morocco: Financial System Stability Assessment (FSAP):
Update" of October 2008; (b) the IFC's "Secured Transactions and Collateral Registries" report of January
2010; (c) the Bank's "Financial Access and Stability: A Road Map for the Middle East and North Africa"
report of September 2011; (d) the IFC's "Credit Reporting Knowledge Guide" of 2012; (e) the Bank's
"Modeling Pension Reform: the Pension Reform Options Simulation Toolkit" of 2013; (f) the Bank's "Project
Appraisal Document for the Morocco Microfinance Development Project” of June 2013; (g) the joint IMF-
World Bank "Morocco: Financial System Stability Assessment (FSAP)" of February 2016.

Preparation of the program was supported by comprehensive technical assistance. FIRST, the
multi-donor grant facility that provides technical assistance to promote robust and diverse financial systems
in low- and middle-income countries, delivered some 25 "advisory services and analytics" (ASAs)
engagements under 9 technical assistance projects to Morocco on: (a) MSME finance and inclusion (7
ASAs); (b) capital market development (13 ASAs); (c) financial structure and credit information systems (2
ASAs); and, (d) financial stability (3 ASAs) (ICR, pages 48-49).

The program was aligned with other Bank projects and programs in support of Morocco's financial
sector development and reform program. The programmatic series was linked with three other recent
DPLs: (a) the MSME Development Project, approved in June 2012; (c) the First Economic Competitiveness
Support Program DPL, approved in March 2013; (c) the Second Economic Competitiveness Support
Program DPL, approved in March 2015; and, (d) the Financing Innovative Startups and SMEs Project,
approved in March 2017.

The Bank coordinated the design and preparation of the program with the IMF. In 2016, the joint
IMF-World Bank FSAP found that: (a) lack of financial access was still a constraint for MSMEs, which
represented 90 percent of total firms; (b) financial market infrastructure needed upgrading; and, (c) rising
nonperforming loans and concentration risks in banking needed monitoring. The FSAP advanced 22 major
recommendations that laid the basis for many of the prior actions included in the programmatic
series. Overlapping with the DPL series, the IMF approved: (a) a two-year precautionary and liquidity line
(PLL) arrangement for Morocco for US$5 billion in July 2014; (b) another PPL for US$3.5 billion in July
2016; and, (c) a third PLL for US$2.97 billion In December 2018. The PPLs encouraged continuing
action with financial sector reforms. In 2019, the IMF concluded an Article IV Consultation with Morocco
which cited the authorities for: progress with fiscal management; the diversification of the economy; and, the
implementation of the 2016 FSAP recommendations.

The Bank secured adequate government commitment to the objectives of the program. Policy
presentations made by the Minister of Finance, the Governor of the Bank of Morocco, and the heads of
financial regulatory agencies as well as budget laws drafted by the government reflected and reinforced
the strategic thrusts of the program: (a) introducing new solutions for the financing of MSMEs; (b) changing
the mix of bank and market financing; (c) reforming the pension system; and, (d) safeguarding financial
stability. The authorities also articulated financial sector policies that were aligned with many of the reform
elements supported by the program, including: the establishment of an independent capital market
authority; regulating the provision of investment advice; demutualizing the stock exchange; bringing key

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)



  market infrastructure under the roof of one holding company; making the insurance and pension authority
  independent; separating the deposit insurance function from the central banking by creating a dedicated
  deposit insurance corporation; creating a bank resolution authority; and forming a systemic risk council.

  The scale and scope of the program was aligned with the government's regulatory architecture and
  implementation capacity. The Ministry of Finance oversees financial sector policy while regulation and
  supervision is devolved to three dedicated agencies --- the Bank of Morocco for credit institutions (banking,
  leasing, and microfinance); the AMMC for capital market institutions; and, the ACAPS, for insurance and
  pensions. The Ministry of Economy and Finance is staffed with skilled technical personnel who are
  experienced in the design and implementation of Bank operations and, according to the ICR, their
  ownership of the reform program, knowledge, and leadership were critical to the success of the
  programmatic operation.

  The Bank clearly identified the risks to achieving the program objectives and advanced mitigation
  measures. The PDs for CMSME1 (page 35) and CMSME2 (page 37) identified three risks: (a) pension
  reform could cost political capital, particularly with labor unions, and be delayed; (b) capital market
  development could challenge the dominance of banks in the financial system and be difficult to implement;
  and, (c) financial stability issues were complex. The PDs observed that the Bank had taken these risks into
  consideration and designed the program to help mitigate the risks: (a) extensive dialogue with stakeholders
  had built consensus with the merits of parametric reform, while grand-fathering pension promises would
  protect the welfare of current retirees; (b) capital market development was carefully phased; and, (c) there
  would be close collaboration with the IMF on financial stability measures.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The quality of the Bank's supervision is assessed as moderately satisfactory.

  There were no formal Bank supervision missions solely for CMSME1 or CMSME2. However, the
  program was effectively supervised and monitored, according to the ICR (page 37), as there were regular
  supervision missions for the technical assistance activities supported by FIRST and related to the policy
  areas and prior actions of the programmatic series. The task team leader was based in Rabat for
  implementation of CMSME2 and ensured the Bank's presence in the field during the period. Through daily
  continuous contact and coordination with the government, the Bank was able to guide the government in
  meeting the overall program objectives.

  However, there were deficiencies with formal reporting on progress with the program. Bank
  procedures require an Implementation Status and Results Report (ISR) for a programmatic series in which
  the Board approval dates between successive operations exceeded 12 months. Following the
  procedure, the Bank produced two ISRs for CMSME1 and one for CMSME2. However, according to the
  ICR (page 37), the two CMSME1 ISRs contained minimal information about government actions, progress

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)



 on outcomes and results, and issues requiring management attention. Moreover, the ISR for CMSME2 was
 never validated nor formally submitted to management because it was produced at program closing in April
 30, 2018 (CMSME2 became effective and closed on April 30, 2018). The draft ISR was simply deposited in
 the project files. The Bank ICR team had to collect its own data for the ICR.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  The government's performance is assessed as satisfactory.

  The government's commitment to the program was strong. The Government’s ownership
  of the financial sector structural reforms was strong during both the design and implementation phases of
  the DPF series. The Council of Government adopted all draft legislation required as prior actions for
  CMSME1 and CMSME2. Parliament subsequently approved the proposed laws (see Section 3.B and
  Section 4).

  The government crafted and adopted the national plans to advance the reform objectives: (a) the
  CCG strategic plan for 2013-16 to expand credit guarantees and co-financing operations; (b) the long-
  term three-phase pension reform plan; and, (c) the national financial inclusion strategy (see Section 4).

  The government consulted widely with stakeholders on the financial sector development and
  reform plans. According to the ICR (pages 31-31), the government consulted with stakeholders and the
  International Labor Organization on the pension reform plans; (b) with capital market participants on the
  secured transactions law; and, (c) with a "strategic committee of stakeholders" at the Ministry of
  Economy and Finance on the financial sector infrastructure and capital market reforms. The
  consultations ensured that the reform plans were well vetted.


  Government Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  The Ministry of Economy and Finance was designated as the implementing agency of the DPF
  series and signed the letter of development policy, although four other agencies --- the Bank of
  Morocco, the CCG, the AMMC, and the CMR --- implemented the structural reforms supported by the
  DPF series.

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)




  The Ministry of Economy and Finance completed all its actions for the program including: concluding
  agreements for the continuous quotes of key government securities; paying VAT credits to MSMEs;
  and, drawing the master agreement for securities lending. The implementation of the reform plans by
  the other agencies reflect the effectiveness of the Ministry's policy coordination role. However, the ICR
  (page 26) faults the Ministry for not delivering on a formal and regular reporting system for all the reform
  actions.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The M&E plan identified 21 specific results indicators to evidence the achievement of the program. The results
  indicators were relevant to the objectives; measurable, with available baseline values; and, time-bound, with
  targets set for the closing date of the program, if not the closing date of the first operation. However, the M&E
  design failed to ensure that the information and reporting systems of at least two agencies --- those of the first
  private credit bureau and of the CCG --- produced data for two indicators --- the size of enterprises requesting
  and receiving credit reports from the credit bureau and the age of enterprises benefitting from the credit
  guarantee and co-financing operations of the CCG.

  The Ministry of Economy and Finance was tasked with leading the implementation of the M&E. It was
  understood that the agencies implementing the program activities --- the CCG (MSME credit guarantee and
  MSME co-financing), the Bank of Morocco (bank resolution planning), the credit bureaus (credit scoring), the
  Ministry of Economy and Finance itself (VAT credits), the AMMC (advisor certification), and the CMR (pension
  fund parametric reform) --- would produce the M&E data. The PDs for CMSME1 and CMSME2 also stated that
  the Ministry of Economy and Finance and the other agencies would coordinate closely with the Bank to conduct
  periodic reviews of the program.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation lacked regularity and formality, according to the ICR (page 26). The Ministry of
  Economy and Finance did not track the results indicators continuously. In part, the lack of Bank supervision
  missions for CMSME1 and CMSME2 may have led to some slack in program reporting. However, the ICR
  also claims that this did not impact program performance. The Bank team received program performance
  data collected by the technical assistance missions fielded by FIRST.


                                                                                                     Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)




c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data were used to assess achievement of the program objectives. They were also reported in the
  Bank's Morocco Country Economic Memorandum for 2017, "Morocco 2040 - Emerging by Investing in
  Intangible Capital”, Chapter 3, "Investing in Market Support Institutions".
  A Modest M&E rating combined with a Mod Sat (or above) rating of Outcome would normally raise a red flag,
  as a Modest M&E rating would suggest that there might be insufficient evidence for a substantial efficacy
  rating, but in this case it is clear that sufficient evidence was collected by the TTL/bank team and by the ICR
  team despite the poorly designed and implemented M&E system.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  Environmental Safeguards: According to the PDs for CMSME1 (page 33) and CMSME2 (pages 34-35 and
  73-75), structural reform initiatives supported by the DPF series were not expected to have material
  environmental impacts. MSME investment and business activities arising from greater access to finance
  would not likely have negative environmental effects; moreover, any potential environmental risk would be
  managed through: (a) the application of the country's environmental laws and associated systems for risk
  mitigation --- which were sound and largely improved over the last decade; (b) the adherence by private
  banks to environmental and social safeguards --- following training received from the Bank's MSME
  Development Project (implemented in 2012-17); and, (c) the use of the IFC's environmental impact
  screening and mitigation procedures (the IFC had worked closely with Morocco's private banks on SME
  finance) --- which included environmental sustainability assessment during a project's due diligence phase,
  and action planning and regular monitoring during a project's implementation phase. The ICR did not report
  any adverse environmental impact from the implementation of the program.

  Social Effects: The reforms supported by the DPF series were expected to have positive poverty, social
  and distributional effects, according to the PDs for CMSEME1 (pages 32-33) and CMSME2 (pages 33-34
  and 73-75). Greater access to finance for MSMEs and the unbanked would generate positive social effects
  from: (a) increased investment, income-producing activities, and job creation by MSMEs; (b) job protection,
  with the financial restructuring of distressed MSMEs; and, (c) financial inclusion for the unbanked. Pension
  reform would generate positive social effects by: (a) raising the minimum pensions of the least well-off
  employees; (b) protecting the pensions of current retirees; and, (c) safeguarding survivorship pensions --- 99
  percent of survivorship beneficiaries were women. The ICR did not report on any of these social effects from
  the implementation of the program.



                                                                                                   Page 21 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: According to the PDs for CMSME1 (page 34) and CMSME2 (pages 35-36), the
   operations would follow standard Bank disbursement procedures for DPFs: the loan proceeds would be
   deposited in a government account at the central bank, and the equivalent funds in local currency would be
   transferred to the treasury department's current account. The PDs reported that: (a) the IMF's safeguards
   assessment in 2013 found the central bank to have a robust financial management framework with strong
   controls; and, (b) the Bank's public expenditure and financial accountability assessments in 2009 and 2017
   found the government's public financial management framework to be sound and supportive of fiscal
   discipline. The ICR (page 38) reports that fiduciary performance was rated satisfactory, with no
   shortcomings with financial management covenants.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
    ---


d. Other
    ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                       Satisfactory            Satisfactory                ---
Risk to Development
                              Modest                  Modest                      ---
Outcome
                              Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory     ---
                              Satisfactory
                              Moderately
Borrower Performance                                  Moderately Satisfactory     ---
                              Satisfactory
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                 ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

                                                                                                    Page 22 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)




Two lessons are drawn from the ICR (pages 38-39), with some adaptation, and a third is added by this ICR
Review.

Government commitment to reform objectives are crucial to the success of structural reform
programs. In this programmatic development policy operation, the government of Morocco went beyond
completing the 18 prior actions for the series to proactively plan for, as well as to undertake, more measures
that would advance its reform objectives. The government had a long history of commitment to the
development of its financial sector dating back to the creation of the credit guarantee agency in 1949 and the
financial market regulator in 1993. Following this DPF series, the government has continued to engage
FIRST with technical assistance projects, the IFC with a capital market development program, and the Bank
with a financial inclusion DPL.

Policy and structural reform programs in the financial sector can benefit from the provision of
technical assistance both for program design and program implementation. The implementation of this
programmatic development policy operation was supported by 25 "advisory services and analytics" activities
under 9 technical assistance projects supported by FIRST, in areas including: MSME finance; capital market
laws, rules, and regulations; credit information systems; financial inclusion, and financial stability
frameworks. The "advisory services and analytics" supplied valuable technical inputs to the reform measures,
including knowledge about international standards and practices. Moreover, according to the ICR, the
technical assistance, which was well integrated into the operation, helped ensure its success by: supporting
the implementation of the prior actions, and strengthening the capacity of the implementing ministries and
agencies.

In designing M&E plans, it is important for governments and the Bank to ensure that public or private
information systems can supply the data required for reporting on results indicators. In this
programmatic development policy operation, the private credit bureau's information system did not report the
size of enterprises --- large, medium, small and micro enterprises --- that requested and received credit
reports. Thus, the attainment of the target to have 40,000 MSMEs covered by credit reports could not be
ascertained. Similarly, the credit guarantee agency's information system did not report on the age of
enterprises --- new or young --- covered by its guarantee and co-financing operations. Thus, the attainment of
the target to raise the number of new or young enterprises from 1,572 to 3,000 could not be ascertained
either.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



                                                                                                  Page 23 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MA Capital Market Develop. & SME Finance(P147257)



The assessment of the program's results is evidence-based. The ICR (pages 29-33): (a) uses the
indicators defined in the results framework to rate the degree of achievement of the program objectives in four
policy areas; (b) explains that prior actions that required the adoption by the Council of Government of
draft legislation were quickly followed up with the approval by Parliament of the proposed laws; and, (c) cites
other actions taken by the Ministry of Economy and Finance and the Bank of Morocco to advance the program
objectives beyond the original requirements of the DPF series.

The analysis of the project results is candid. The ICR: (a) cites two cases where the attainment of the
results targets could not be ascertained, because the government and the Bank had not ensured that the
agency information and reporting systems actually produced the data required; (b) lists two cases where the
target, while not achieved at the program closing date in April 2018, are likely to be achieved by end-2019; (c)
mentions gaps with the Ministry of Economy and Finance's reporting system for the reform program;
and, (d) identifies deficiencies with the three ISRs produced by the Bank.

The ICR produced a fairly good record of the composition of the structural reform program. Because
the operation was a programmatic series, with changes in the transition from CMSME1 to CMSME2, the ICR
tracked the program revisions fairly well: (a) Table 2 (page 17) keeps tab of the policy areas; (b) Table 3
(pages 17-21) records the changes to the prior actions, relative to the indicative triggers, for CMSME2; (c)
Table 5 (pages 21-22) and Table 6 (pages 22-23) reports on the status of the prior actions; and, (d) Table
1 (pages 15-16) lays out the results indicators for each operation, for each policy area. A narrative of the
program results, including actions taken by the government in addition to the DPF requirements, is presented
in the "Achievement of Program Development Objectives" section (pages 29-34). The ICR team also quickly
supplied the Results Table for CMSME1, which had not been included in the original ICR submission.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 24 of 24
