     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022014

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P122204                                   Second Secondary and Local Roads Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Georgia                                   Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-81430,IDA-50780                      30-Jun-2017                                          62,501,983.40

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Mar-2012                               30-Jun-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           70,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            66,469,548.32                                               0.00

 Actual                                        62,501,983.40                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Elisabeth Goller           Peter Nigel Freeman           Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO), as mentioned in the project appraisal document (PAD, para 18)
   and the loan and financing agreements (LA, FA, schedule 1) was to "improve local connectivity and
   travel time for the selected secondary and local roads, and to strengthen the capacity of the roads department
   (RD) to manage the road network."




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



   For the purpose of this review, the PDO will parsed as follows: (i) improve local connectivity for the selected
   secondary and local roads; (ii) improve travel time for the selected secondary and local roads; and
   (iii) strengthen the capacity of the RD to manage the road network.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project was structured along the following two components:

   Component 1: Rehabilitation and Improvement of Selected Secondary and Local Roads (cost at
   appraisal US$86.0 million, including contingencies; actual cost US$81.3 million). This component aimed at
   (i) rehabilitating and improving 19 road sections with a total length of 225 km, including piloting two design-
   build contracts; and (ii) rehabilitating, repairing, and maintaining 200 km of roads in the Kakheti Region
   using the Output and Performance-based Road Contract (OPRC) model.

   Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management (cost at appraisal US$1.5 million,
   including contingencies; actual cost US$1.8 million). This component aimed at strengthening the capacity of
   the RD and the foreign project unit in (i) project management and implementation; (ii) identifying,
   developing, and implementing road safety measures on secondary and local roads, including improving
   road safety engineering at the design stage and road safety audits; (iii) carrying out impact evaluations; (iv)
   developing the road asset management system; and (vi) managing and implementing alternative
   contracting methodologies.

   The project components and activities were not changed.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost

   The total project cost was US$83.1 million (ICR, para 15 and page 39), which is 95 percent of the appraisal
   estimate of US$87.5 million. The cost savings were due to the devaluation of the Georgian Lari vis-a-vis the
   US$ and the fact that the remaining two years of maintenance under the OPRC will be financed by the
   government.

   Financing

   The project was financed through an IDA credit and an IBRD loan for a total amount of US$62.5 million
   equivalent (ICR, datasheet, page 2), which is 89 percent of the IDA and IBRD financing of US$70.0 million

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



   equivalent envisaged at appraisal (IDA credit of SDR25.8 million, equivalent to US$40.0 million, and IBRD
   loan of US$30 million (LA and FA)). The IDA credit and the IBRD loan were not fully disbursed because (i)
   the government repaid US$3.5 million, partially from the IDA credit and partially from the IBRD loan, to the
   World Bank after misprocurement was declared and (ii) an undisbursed balance of about US$3.4 million by
   project close under the IBRD loan due to the devaluation of the Georgian Lari, which could not be used for
   additional maintenance works because of procurement problems. It should be noted that these two
   amounts do not add to the undisbursed amount of US$7.5 million due to fluctuations in the US$/SDR
   exchange rate, which reduced the US$ equivalent of the credit.

   Borrower Contribution

   According to the Bank task team, the actual borrower contribution was US$20.6 million, which is 118
   percent of the appraisal estimate of US$17.5 million.

   Dates and Project Restructuring

   The project was approved on March 15, 2012, became effective on May 24, 2012, and was originally
   expected to close on June 30, 2017. The project was restructured on July 9, 2015, when an amount of
   US$51.0 million was disbursed. The restructuring was necessary to extend the closing date by 24 months,
   to June 30, 2019 to implement the first five-year OPRC pilot in Georgia. This OPRC represented 46 percent
   of the IBRD loan, and its original bidding process had to be cancelled because the bid prices were three
   times higher than the budget estimate mainly because of the inclusion of maintenance of a gravel road in
   the contract in addition to paved roads.

   In addition to the closing date extension, the restructuring included changes to the results framework to
   adjust several indicator targets to the actual project circumstances, including the targets of two outcome
   indicator targets. The target of the outcome indicator of "average decrease in travel time" was made more
   ambitious by increasing it from 20 to 40 percent. The target for the outcome indicator of "roads managed
   under alternative contracting methodology" was adjusted downwards from 200 km to 137 km.



   Considering that two key outcome indicator targets were revised, this review will apply a split rating and will
   assess the project outcome based on the original and revised indicator targets.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The relevance of the objective is considered substantial. At appraisal in 2012, the country had mostly
recovered from the August 2008 war with Russia and the 2008-2009 global economic crisis. The economy
grew by 7.2 percent in 2011, and the country continued its high levels of public investment, mainly in the
road sector. This public investment had been aimed to boost the economic recovery by improving main
road corridors and local connections and create temporary employment. Despite these investments, and
progress being made in the sector, 70 percent of the secondary and core local roads required significant
improvements. Therefore, improving local connectivity and travel time and strengthening the RD's network

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



               management capacity was highly relevant. The PDO was in line with the strategic goal of Georgia's
               FY2010-13 World Bank Country Partnership Strategy of strengthening competitiveness for post-crisis
               growth, by facilitating improved road connections and reducing transport costs in the region.

               The PDO remained relevant by project close. At that time, 34 percent of the secondary roads were still in
               bad condition (ICR, page 32 - the ICR does not provide information on the condition of local
               roads). Georgia's FY2019-22 World Bank Country Partnership Framework envisages support to Georgia,
               among others, to enhance inclusive growth and competitiveness. In this area, better connectivity and
               reduced travel times are expected to improve access to markets and economic participation in the region.
               In addition, a strengthened RD was expected to better plan and manage the road infrastructure.

               This was the third World Bank project that supported secondary and local roads in Georgia.The first
               Secondary and Local Roads Project aimed at upgrading and rehabilitating roads and strengthening the
               road department's management capacity. The PDO of the Kakheti Regional Roads Improvement Project
               was to reduce transport costs and improve access and traffic safety. By aiming at improving local
               connectivity and travel time and strengthening road management, the project's ambitions were higher than
               under the first project and similar to the Kakheti project. However, the project is different and more
               sophisticated compared to the previous ones because it experimented with OPRCs. Consequently, the
               PDO's level of ambition was largely adequate. The PDO was realistic, but the term "connectivity" would
               have benefited from a clear definition.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve local connectivity for the selected secondary and local roads (under original outcome targets)

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for subobjective 1, as reconstructed by IEG based on the information in the PAD, was
                             that rehabilitating selected secondary and local roads and paying adequate attention to road safety features
                             in this process would increase the km of local and secondary roads rehabilitated with such adequate features.
                             This, in turn, would increase the km of secondary and local roads in good and fair condition, and more roads
                             in good and fair condition would mean that local connectivity improved. In addition, maintaining these roads
                             and using alternative contracting methods, especially the OPRC, which combines road maintenance and
                             rehabilitation, were to enhance the sustainability of the roads and connectivity improvements.

                             For the purpose of this review, IEG interprets connectivity as the ability of people to connect by road to their
                             destinations, which not only requires roads or better roads, but in most cases also vehicles and transport
                             services. Therefore, the theory of change was not only based on the assumption that the government has

                                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



adequate resources and capacity to improve the roads, but also that better roads will attract the necessary
transport services.

Outputs

The following outputs were achieved during the life of the project to meet subobjective 1 (ICR, para 29 and
annexes 1 and 6.3):

      238 km of secondary and local roads rehabilitated, more than the original target of 225 km and the
       revised target of 200.5 km
      20 road safety audits completed, significantly more than the original target of 5 and in line with the
       revised target of 20
      117 km of roads maintained under the OPRC pilot
      135.27 km of roads managed under alternative contracting methods, slightly less than the revised
       target of 137 km and significantly less than the original target of 200 km

Outcomes

Because of the road rehabilitated under the project, the secondary and core local road network in good and
fair condition increased from 30 to 34 percent, in line with the original and unrevised target. The project
directly benefited 122,000 residents (the original and unrevised target was 150,338 direct project
beneficiaries) and provided them with a better connection to markets, services, and the Georgian road
network (ICR, para 29).

The project's socio-economic impact evaluation carried out for nine rehabilitated roads in 2015 also provided
evidence on the project's contribution to improved connectivity (ICR para 32 and annex 6.5). The impact
evaluation showed in a statistically significant way that, for the households in the treatment
group, the frequency of bus use to most destinations, including schools, municipal centers, hospitals,
and pharmacies, increased by about four percent. A larger increase of 10 percent was seen in the frequency
of minibus journeys to schools. Correspondingly, walking decreased as a mode of travel for visiting markets,
municipal centers, pharmacies, and schools. 37 percent of the respondents mentioned that the road
rehabilitation has simplified their travel and made it easier for residents in villages to reach their destinations.
25 percent of the respondents also mentioned a reduction in travel time. Among the positive impacts of the
road rehabilitation, the respondents identified better transport schedules, lower expenses for fuel, and
increased communication between villages and the city. Local businesses reported having increased the
distance driven by about 12 percent. Over 90 percent of both residents and businesses stated their access to
various services has considerably improved or improved.

The impact assessment also showed that the travel cost per km, which according to the task team refers to
the operating cost per km considering fuel and maintenance but not to the time cost of the driver and/or
passengers, decreased on average by 0.04 GEL. For households with a person with disabilities, it decreased
by 1.9 GEL per km. However, the statistical significance of the travel cost-related findings was weak.

The Bank task team clarified that the impact evaluation used a difference-in-difference methodology. 3285
households were surveyed, 2287 in the treatment area and 998 in the control area, before and after the road
interventions. According the Bank task team, the impact evaluation was adequately done and comprehensive,
but it had shortcomings in the presentation of the results.


                                                                                                      Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve local connectivity for the selected secondary and local roads (under revised outcome targets)

Revised Rationale
The theory of change remained unchanged under the revised outcome indicator targets.

Outputs:

The outputs are the same under the original and the revised outcome indicator targets.

Outcomes:

The outcomes are the same under the original and the revised outcome indicator targets.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve travel time for the selected secondary and local roads (under original outcome targets)

Rationale
The theory of change for subobjective 2 was that rehabilitating selected secondary and local roads would
decrease travel times on these roads, and this, in turn, would improve travel time for the selected secondary
and local roads.

Outputs

The outputs achieved during the life of the project to meet subobjective 2 were the same as mentioned under
bullet 1, 3 and 4 for subobjective 1 above.

Outcomes

The secondary and core local road rehabilitation under the project improved the condition of these roads,
bringing the network in good and fair condition from 30 to 34 percent, in line with the original and unrevised
target. These improvements reduced the average travel time on the 19 project-rehabilitated roads by 44.1




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



percent, from 5.97 hours before to 3.34 hours after the rehabilitation. This reduction is significantly higher
than the original target of 20 percent.

The project's socio-economic impact evaluation of 2015 also confirmed an improvement in travel time for the
households in the treatment group. This evaluation showed in a statistically significant way that the average
time household members spent traveling per kilometer after the roads were rehabilitated decreased
significantly, i.e. by 0.94 minutes in the treatment group for the whole sample. The effect is slightly higher for
the bottom 40 percent of the sampled population by household income in the treatment group, where the
average time spent per km decreased significantly by 0.97 minutes.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve travel time for the selected secondary and local roads (under revised outcome targets)

Revised Rationale
The theory of change remained unchanged under the revised outcome indicator targets.

Outputs:

The outputs are the same under the original and the revised outcome indicator targets.

Outcomes:

The outcomes are the same under the original and the revised outcome indicator targets, except for the
indicator of "average decrease in travel time", for which the project end value of 44.1 percent is in line with
revised target of 44.0 percent.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen the capacity of the RD to manage the road network (under original outcome targets)

Rationale
The theory of change for subobjective 3 was that (i) supporting project management and implementation, (ii)
identifying, developing, and implementing road safety measures on secondary and local roads, including
improving road safety engineering at the design stage and road safety audits, (iii) supporting impact
evaluations, (iv) supporting the development of the road management system, and (vi) supporting the

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



management and implementation of alternative contracting methodologies would, among others, lead to more
km of roads managed under alternative contracting methods. This, in turn, was to be an indication that the
RD's road management capacity had been strengthened. The theory of change's underlying critical
assumption was that the alternative contracting methods, especially the OPRC, were sufficiently attractive
to local contractors.

Outputs

The following outputs were achieved during the life of the project to meet subobjective 1 (ICR, paras 38 to
48 and annexes 1 and 6.3):

      Two alternative contracting methods, OPRC and design and build contract, piloted, in line with the
         target
      20 road safety audits completed, significantly more than the original target of 5 and in line with the
         revised target of 20
        22 standalone rural road safety schemes designed and implemented (ICR, page 36)
        Consultancy services for road asset management provided over a period of five years, which
         according to the Bank task team were to support the continuous development of the road asset
         system, its running, and the preparation of the planning documents
        Technical specifications for road asset management equipment, and equipment and data collection
         vehicle procured. The Bank task team pointed out that this included a systems for video
         logging, measuring roughness and geometry, traffic counters, skid resistance measurement
         equipment, and a 4x4 vehicle on which to mount the equipment
        Feasibility studies, preliminary designs, and bidding documents for two roads to be rehabilitated under
         the design and build method prepared
        Application program interface and visualization tools for the RD to connect with the government's e-
         procurement system developed and in use
        Two impact evaluations completed, each with studies before and after the project. The Bank task
         team clarified that this included the project's socio-economic impact evaluation of 2015 mentioned
         under subobjective 1 and the 2019 road rehabilitation impact evaluation of the OPRC carried out in
         the Kakheti region

The Bank task team noted that the following outputs were also achieved:

      Informal evaluation of the Kakheti OPRC pilot by the project's monitoring consultant to correct
       shortcomings during its implementation and help shape future OPRCs
      Workshop on OPRCs organized by the Bank for the RD staff and contractors
      Training on OPRCs provided by the project's monitoring consultant to the RD staff
      Technical and contractual documents for the Kakheti OPRC pilot. A consultancy services contract for
       the “Preparation of a Framework for the Design and Implementation of Concessions (Contracts) for
       Performance-Based Road Maintenance” was originally started under the Third East-West Highway
       Improvement Project and then moved to this project

Outcomes




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



The project used the indicator of "km of roads managed under alternative contracting methods' as a proxy to
measure the achievement of this subobjective. By project end, 135.27 km of roads were managed under
alternative contracting methods, significantly less than the original target of 200 km. However, the Bank task
team confirmed that the underachievement on this indicators does not indicate that the RD's capacity was not
adequately strengthened. Rather, after a first bidding with significantly higher bid prices than the estimated
budget, the RD reconsidered the roads to be included in this contract to better balance the contractual risks
between the parties. This reduced the number of km of road under the OPRC.

The Bank task team highlighted that, in addition to the above-mentioned workshop and training, the RD
learned by doing under the OPRC pilot because the RD managed its implementation and was closely
engaged in all steps of the process. The ICR (para 43) highlights that the experience and lessons learned by
the RD from managing the OPRC pilot are being carried forward, and the RD is now developing a hybrid
OPRC for 240 km of roads in the Guria region, incorporating lessons learned from the OPRC pilot under this
project. The Guria OPRC is also supported by the Bank under the Secondary Road Asset Management
project. The RD is preparing a further OPRC under an Asian Development Bank project.

The ICR (paras 40 to 42) lists the hiccups in the implementation of the first OPRC, which were successfully
overcome. It also highlights the residents' satisfaction with the road network in the area where the OPCR was
implemented. The Bank task team clarified that this feedback is based on the 2019 road rehabilitation impact
evaluation in the OPRC's area of influence. Therefore, the positive response can be attributed to the road
improvements under the project in this area, but it is not clear if it is due to the OPRC modality or just the road
rehabilitation.

 As for the design and build contracts, the ICR (para 39) highlights that using alternative contracting methods
successfully is a sign of enhanced capacity. The Bank task team clarified that by introducing these methods
to the RD and providing the resources to implement and manage them, the project enabled the RD to
understand their benefits and created the capacity to move forward with them and other alternative
contracting methods. These instruments provide the RD with tools for more flexibility in procuring works and
maintenance.

The Bank task team also pointed out that the project's support to road asset management increased the RD's
capacity to collect road condition and traffic data and prepare the five-year rolling road program and the
annual planning. According to the ICR (para 44), the current use of the road asset management
system demonstrates a real strengthening of the RD's capacity to manage the network and represents one of
the best practices in the region. However, the Bank task team and the ICR point out that the Bank has been
supporting the introduction of road asset management in Georgia for more than a decade through a series of
different projects, so not everything is attributable to this project.

The impact evaluations provided the RD with a better understanding of the impact of the project investments
on the rural population and demonstrate better the project's outcomes (ICR, para 45). As an indicator of the
RD’s commitment to the use of impact evaluations, the ICR mentions that the RD undertook the final survey
for the OPRC area from their national budget after the project closed.

The project strengthened the RD's road safety capacity by introducing them to the concept of standalone
small-scale road safety schemes for rural roads. Through the support of two project-financed consultancies,
the RD identified 22 village locations, where they implemented road safety improvements, such as better
signs, road markings, guard rails and safety islands. The Bank task team pointed out that this created the


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 21
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



                            necessary capacity to carry out small road safety schemes, which the RD plans to continue with their own
                            funds.

                            The application program interface and web-based visualization tools enabled the RD to use the government's
                            e-procurement system, which improved transparency and efficiency in the procurement process and the
                            utilization of public funds (ICR, para 48). The Bank task team clarified that the interface enabled the
                            connection to the government's e-procurement system whereas the visualization tool generated procurement
                            related statistics and data that allow for a better management of the procurement process. According to the
                            Bank's 2018 enhanced procurement review, the e-procurement system minimized the risk of collusion
                            between civil servants and bidders or between bidders. This is because contrary to the previous practice of
                            using "paper-based" procurement, the implementing agency does not know which bidders submit or intend to
                            submit bids (ICR, para 48). The review also found that the system increased the level of competition because
                            the average number of bidders under this projects, which used "paper-based procurement", was much lower
                            than under successive Bank project, which used e-procurement.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            To strengthen the capacity of the RD to manage the road network (under revised outcome targets)

                            Revised Rationale
                            The theory of change for subobjective 3 remained unchanged under the revised outcome indicator targets.

                            Outputs:

                            The outputs are the same under the original and the revised outcome indicator targets.

                            Outcomes:

                            The outcomes are the same under the original and the revised outcome indicator targets, except for the
                            indicator of "km of roads managed under alternative contracting methods", which with 135.27 km nearly
                            reached the revised target of 137 km.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                          Page 10 of 21
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)




         Rationale
         The first subobjective under the original outcome indicator targets is rated substantial, the second is rated
         high, and the third is rated substantial. Therefore, the overall efficacy of the PDO under the original outcome
         indicator targets is rated substantial.




         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         All subobjectives under the revised outcome indicator targets are rated substantial, therefore, the overall
         efficacy of the PDO under the revised outcome indicator targets is rated substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency

At appraisal, the economic analysis covered six of the 19 road sections, totaling 61 km. The borrower carried out
separate economic analyses for the remaining roads and the OPRC pilot during project implementation. The
borrower used the Highway Development and Management (HDM-4) model, assumed a 20-year
evaluation period, and applied a 12 percent discount rate. The assumptions given in the PAD appear realistic.
The analysis showed an average Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 19.8 percent and an average Net
Present Value (NPV) of US$13.1 million. The sensitivity analysis showed an average EIRR of 15.8 percent if the
costs were to rise by 15 percent and the benefits were to go down by 15 percent.

The ICR (para 56) mentions that the economic analyses for all 19 road rehabilitations under the project were
economically justified with an average EIRR of 18.5 percent. The sensitivity analysis demonstrated that
most roads maintained an EIRR greater than 12 percent if the costs were to rise by 15 percent and the benefits
were to go down by 15 percent. The ICR also points out that the evaluations were prepared by different
consultants during 2011 and 2012 using different assumptions, so the EIRRs for individual roads may not be
directly comparable.




                                                                                                           Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



For the OPRC, the borrower carried out an economic analysis for the 117 km of paved road sections to be
included in this contract. This analysis showed an EIRRs that varied from 13.1 to 42.8 percent for the different
sections.

For the after project economic analysis of the 19 roads rehabilitated under the project, the borrower used
the known traffic growth rates and the actual construction costs but kept the other values constant where
applicable. As with the ex-ante analysis, a 20-year evaluation period was assumed and a 12 percent discount
rate was applied. The analysis confirmed that the investment in rehabilitating the secondary and local roads was
economically justified with an average EIRR of 14.9 percent and a NPV of US$11.11 million. However, the rate
of return was lower than the appraisal estimate of 18.5 percent and some of the sections had an EIRR lower
than 12 percent. The ICR (para 58) attributes the lower rate of return to the lower economic growth than
forecasted and differences between the economic models used.

For the OPRC, the borrower carried out the post-completion economic analysis for the 37.5 km of road
rehabilitation works. The analysis showed that the OPRC was economically justified, with an EIRR of 15.3
percent and a NPV of US$2.25 million. Due to the different scope of the OPRC than originally planned and
the way the EIRRs are presented in the PAD the ICR, it it not possible to compare the ex-ante and ex-post
returns.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency:

As mentioned in section 2.e., the total project cost was five percent lower than the appraisal estimate due to
currency devaluation and a remaining contractual balance under the OPRC to be paid by the borrower after
project close. The cost per km of the rehabilitation under the OPRC was comparable with rehabilitation costs of
the other roads under the project. The rehabilitation cost, which excludes the maintenance component of the
OPRC, was US$0.31 million per km, compared to an average of US$0.28 million per km for rehabilitation using
traditional input-based contracts. According to the ICR (para 61), the slightly higher cost per km might be
attributable to the additional risks associated with the OPRC and the cost of design of the road works. The ICR
(para 62) points out that the cost of the maintenance component of the OPRC was somewhat higher than the
average for nine other maintenance contracts of the RD (GEL 12,481/km/year compared with GEL
11,100/km/year). However, unlike the other contracts, the OPRC included maintenance backlog clearing and the
risk of penalties for not meeting service levels. This might justify a slightly higher cost per km.

The two-year closing date extension and the support needed in the implementation of the first OPRC
considerably increased the World Bank's supervision budget (ICR, para 65). They also increased the borrower's
project implementation costs (the ICR does not provide figures).

Overall, the project was implemented largely efficiently despite lower economic rates of return than at estimated
at appraisal and delays and higher administrative costs in the implementation of the OPRC pilot, which are
expectable.




Efficiency Rating


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    76.00
Appraisal                                                 18.50
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    68.00
ICR Estimate                                              14.90
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

With a substantial relevance, efficacy, and efficiency, the overall outcome under the original outcome indicator
targets is rated satisfactory (5).

With a substantial relevance, efficacy, and efficiency, the overall outcome under the revised outcome indicator
targets is rated satisfactory (5).

Based on the share of the disbursements of 81.6 percent at the time of the restructuring on July 9,
2015 (US$51.0 million out of US$62.5 million), the overall outcome rating is satisfactory (81.6*5+18.4*5=5).


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk that the development outcome of this project will not be maintained is modest. The main risk relate
to the following:

      Road maintenance of local roads. Four of the rehabilitated roads are under the responsibility of
       municipalities and therefore do not come under the RD’s maintenance program. There is a risk that
       the maintenance of these roads will be less than optimal, but the roads are currently being
       maintained with the municipalities outsourcing maintenance on an annual basis (ICR para 117).
      Future funding for maintenance of roads under the responsibility of the RD. According to the
       ICR (para 116), the RD maintains its roads by outsourcing maintenance to the private sector and
       maintenance funding is currently not an issue. However, there is a possibility that policy and
       economic changes might put this funding at risk. For the pilot OPRC, maintenance is included in this
       contract for a five-year period and the RD took over the funding of the remaining maintenance period
       at project close without any issues.

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



     Significant staff changes in the RD. A significant change in technical staff in the RD could undo
      some of the capacity strengthening achievements under the project, especially in terms of alternative
      contracting methods, road asset management, and road safety. However, the Bank task team
      pointed out that most key technical staff in the RD has been there for many years and when the
      government changes, normally only the chairman, vice-chairman, and some heads of divisions are
      replaced.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank task team largely designed the project based on the experience and lessons from the previous
  road projects in Georgia. The implementation arrangements stayed the same. The main differences with
  respect to the first Secondary and Local Roads Project was the strong focus on alternative contracting
  methods and the discontinuation of the support to capacity strengthening for municipalities. The reasons
  for the increased focus on alternative contracting methods are extensively documented in the PAD
  (annex 2, appendix 2) and the approach is well justified. The PAD does not mention why capacity
  strengthening for municipalities was not continued considering that the project still rehabilitated local
  roads under the responsibility of municipalities and the previous efforts to strengthen their capacity were
  not successful.

  Rightly and based on lessons from previous projects, the Bank team put a stronger focus on
  incorporating road safety considerations in road designs and strengthening the road departments road
  safety capacity. The team also used a more stringent approach to the evaluation of technical alternatives
  for road rehabilitation (PAD, para 15), using the HDM-4 model and ensuring that the country's key road
  priorities were included in the project.

  With respect to the alternative contracting methods, it was adequate to start with a pilot, which could be
  assessed and improved over time.

  The Bank task team identified most project implementation-related risks and considered the overall
  project risk as low. Although a low overall risk seems adequate in the light of Georgia's extensive
  experience with Bank-financed projects, the Bank task team failed to identify the risks related to the
  introduction of the first OPRC, including possible delays that materialized, and the risk related to the fact
  that road improvements alone might not be sufficient to improve connectivity. The Bank task team did
  also not propose mitigation measures for the governance risk because previous projects had no major
  procurement issues.

  The PAD (para 60) highlights the project readiness. When the project started, the RD had prepared the
  detailed designs and the bidding documents for six of the 19 road sections. The RD was also preparing
  the detailed designs for additional road sections and had started the selection of the
  supervision consultant. his made it possible for the RD to start the procurement of 18 works contracts
  within six months of project effectiveness. Preparations for the design and implementation of the OPRC
  were also underway by appraisal because the consultant had been appointed in March 2011 under the
  Third East West Highway Improvement Project.


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



  The Bank task team carried out adequate safeguards and fiduciary assessments and ensured the
  preparation of the necessary safeguards documents. As mentioned below, the project had some
  shortcomings in M&E.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank task team actively engaged with the RD and supported them in all aspects of project
 implementation. According to the ICR (para 112), the Bank task team closely worked with the RD to
 promote and move forward the OPRC pilot, which faced some resistance at times. The Bank task team
 identified the risks the failed OPRC bidding process posed to the achievement of the PDO and properly
 addressed it through project restructuring. However, as seen in section 12 below, the continuous support of
 a specialized technical consultant and a thorough industry and market analysis would have been beneficial.

 The Bank task team supported financial management through consulting services and was proactive in
 timely addressing the procurement and contractor performance challenges encountered throughout the
 project’s duration. This included (i) downgrading the procurement rating to moderately satisfactory to signal
 the problem of low bid participation in the first round of civil works contracts (ICR, para 107), (ii) convincing
 the RD to carry out an enhanced procurement review after the complaint by a potential bidder, which led to
 an INT case, (iii) preparing a procurement improvement plan for the RD, (iv) using project funds to develop
 an interface that enabled the RD to use the governments e-procurement system, and (v) preparing a web-
 based visualization tool to generate procurement-related data graphs, such as graphs on current and
 historical bid participation (ICR, paras 83 to 91 and 48). With respect to the low bid participation, the Bank
 task team clarified that because the contracts were small and awarded under national competitive bidding,
 they thought that Georgia had problems with its local construction industry. Therefore, they used the Bank
 budget to carry out a construction industry review in 2013. The Bank task team also pointed out that
 because of the low bid participation in this project, in the subsequent project they changed the contracting
 strategy, dividing the contracts into lots of different sizes.

 The Bank task team identified and raised issues related to the inadequacies in the disposal of waste and
 excess materials and pushed for proper action. The ICR (para 112) points out that although the change in
 the RD management during the project’s implementation constituted an opportunity, it also meant that the
 Bank task team had to build new relationships and repeatedly insist on the project’s objectives.

 The Bank task team carried out the supervision of this project together with the other road projects in the
 RD. Early practical experience from this project contributed to the design and implementation of third
 Secondary and Local Roads and the Secondary Road Asset Management projects, particularly in the
 areas of output and performance-based road contracting, design-build contracts, road asset management,
 road safety, and employment opportunities for women.



  Quality of Supervision Rating


                                                                                                      Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The RD was to be responsible for M&E and reporting. At appraisal, it had a dedicated M&E sub-unit with
 three staff.

 The results framework included three PDO indicators, each of them expected to measure one of the
 subobjectives. For two of the subobjectives, measuring their achievement was difficult, mainly due to
 shortcomings in the PDO indicators.

 With respect to the subobjective of improved connectivity, first, a definition of "connectivity" was missing.
 This made results measuring subjective. Second, using the core indicator that measures the percentage of
 the total classified roads in good and fair condition did not tell the whole story. Although more roads in good
 and fair condition enhance the ability of people to connect to their destinations, most people also need
 vehicles or transport services to be able to benefit from the road improvements to enhance their
 connectivity. Therefore, the project could have included an additional indicator that measured, for instance,
 the increased availability of transport services. Third, the core indicator is expected to capture the
 percentage of Georgia's “total” classified network in good and fair condition. In this case, it only referred to
 the 5,446 km of Georgia's secondary road network. This created an inconsistency in measuring the core
 indicators at Bank-wide level. Finally, using this core indicator to measure the achievement of project-
 specific objectives might cause an issue of attribution because road works additional to the project works
 might contribute to improvements of the "total" classified network". This was not an issue in this case
 because the borrower only captured the km of roads attributable to the project in the indicator end value.

 For the subobjective related to the RD's road management capacity strengthening, in hindsight,
 an indicator that measured the km of roads managed under alternative contracting methods was not the
 best choice for two reasons. First, although successfully managing roads under alternative contracting
 methods is an indication that the RD's capacity increased, the indicator did not include a reference to
 "successful" management, which also would have required a clear definition. Second, this indicator did not
 capture all key capacity strengthening results expected from the project, such as enhanced used of the
 road asset management system or the capacity to carry out road safety audits in-house. Therefore,
 additional indicators would have been desirable.

 The difficulties in measuring the project achievements caused by the shortcomings in these two indicators
 were overcome through additional evidence mainly from the two impact assessments carried out under this
 project (see section 4, subobjective 3).

 The project had four intermediate indicators adequate to measure project progress for certain activities. A
 few additional intermediate outcome indicator to capture key milestones, for instance, with respect to the
 road asset management system, could have been added.



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



 All indicators had baselines and target values, but the targets for two indicators were too conservative and
 had to be revised.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (para 98) points out that M&E was satisfactory for the duration of the project. It mentions that the
  RD's small dedicated M&E unit collected information related to the project, including fiduciary and
  safeguards aspects, from the different RD units, the Transport Reform and Rehabilitation Center, and the
  supervision consultants. The information formed the basis of the RD’s semi-annual progress reports. The
  quality of the information was good.

  The ICR (para 99) also highlights that throughout the project's lifetime, all indicators included in the
  results framework were routinely updated and reported in the six-monthly Implementation Status and
  Results (ISRs).

  The Bank task team slightly revised the results framework during the project restructuring, mainly to
  adjust the indicator targets. They did not change the target for the indicator on the number of project
  beneficiaries, however.

  The project carried out two impact evaluations as mentioned above.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E information was used to monitor progress in project implementation, towards the achievement
  of the PDO, and the safeguards compliance. As an example, the ICR (para 99) mentions that the Bank
  task team identified problems with the implementation of the OPRC pilot through the reporting on the
  indicators and that this led to remedial actions and project restructuring.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B for environmental assessment purposes. The project's negative
   impacts were expected to be of small to medium scale, site-specific, and predominantly confined to the
   construction phase. The following safeguards policies were triggered: Environmental Assessment
   OP/BP4.01 and Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP4.12.

   The RD prepared an environmental and social management framework. The contractors used this
   framework to prepare the site-specific environmental management plans for each road section. The RD also




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



  prepared a resettlement policy framework. The RD's environmental unit was primarily responsible
  to monitor and ensure safeguards compliance.

  In terms of environmental safeguards compliance, the major issue during project implementation was the
  poor control of the disposal of excess materials and construction waste. Although the environmental
  management plans addressed the disposal of materials and waste, several contractors struggled to apply
  adequate mitigation measures and minimize damage. The problem was aggravated by weaknesses in
  Georgia's regulatory framework and country-wide deficiencies in waste management infrastructure. The
  issues with disposal management was the reason why the environmental safeguards performance
  was rated moderately satisfactory during more than half of the project duration. At the request of the Bank
  task team, the RD largely addressed the issues through better control by the supervision consultants. The
  environmental safeguard compliance was rated satisfactory by project end (ICR, para 104).

  Social safeguard compliance was rated satisfactory during the duration of the project. Although the project
  was not expected to require land acquisitions or resettlements, the Involuntary Resettlement safeguards
  policy was triggered as a precaution. During project implementation, no land acquisition or
  physical displacement was necessary as it was possible to design all the works to be carried out within the
  existing rights of way (ICR, para 105).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The ICR (para 106) mentions that financial management was rated satisfactory throughout project
  implementation. The project benefited from the financial management arrangements of the previous
  projects. The project provided consulting services to the Transport Reform and Rehabilitation Center,
  responsible for financial management, to strengthen their capacity further. The Bank task team pointed out
  that interim financial reports (IFRs) and financial audit reports were submitted on time, and that all financial
  audit report had unqualified opinions.

  Procurement was rated satisfactory in the beginning of project implementation. It was considered
  moderately satisfactory because of poor participation of bidders in the procurement processes of the first
  round of civil works (ICR, para 107). The project had also delays in procuring the OPRC, which was the
  first contract of this type in the country, and there was a need to terminate three work contracts due to the
  contractor's bankruptcy (ICR, paras 83 to 86). In August 2018, the Bank declared misprocurement because
  of procurement irregularities in two design and build contracts and imposed sanctions for collusion on two
  contractors and one individual (ICR, para 87). The Bank task team also lowered the procurement rating to
  moderately unsatisfactory. The RD implemented remedial actions and strengthened its procurement
  performance (ICR, paras 89 to 91). Nevertheless, the Bank task team kept the procurement rating as
  moderately unsatisfactory until the project closed.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  The underachievement on the
                                                                                  indicator of "km of roads
                                Moderately                                        managed under alternative
Outcome                                                Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory                                      contracting methods" is not
                                                                                  evidence that the capacity of the
                                                                                  RD was not strengthened
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons have mostly been derived and summarized from the ICR, with minor additions
of the IEG evaluator:

Introducing new contracting methods requires the adaption of the World Bank's standard
contract modal to the local context. In addition, flexibility in adjusting and improving the
contract scope on a continuous basis is needed. It also requires more time for bidding and
implementation than conventional contracts, with which the RD and the construction
industry are familiar. The implementation experience of the first OPRC in Georgia demonstrated
the need for flexibility and the ability to adjust and improve the pilot at any stage of its
implementation. Although one of the objectives of the pilot OPRC was to introduce a shift in the risk
allocation between the government and the contractor, the shift moved too much risk to the
contractor and the risk allocation had to be revised after the failure of the first bidding process. The
redesign of the contract scope and the revision of the bidding documents resulted in a successful
second bid, but delayed the project. In addition, even after this second attempt, the maintenance
performance indicators needed to be refined after contract award because some of them were
irrelevant or difficult to measure. Overall, this demonstrates the need to adapt the OPRC model in
the World Bank’s standard bidding documents to the local context and circumstances, and to
allocate adequate time for bidding and contract modifications.


The implementation of an OPRC pilot requires specialized technical support and training to
avoid delays. To implement an OPRC for the first time in a country is technically complex and
it introduces new concepts to the sector. In this case, as already mentioned, the first attempt to
procure the OPRC was unsuccessful. Although the RD benefited from consultancy services at the
design and supervision stages and the advice of the Bank task team, they might have further
benefited from having highly specialized third party technical support available at key stages of the
pilot. The consultant could also have provided targeted training for key RD staff.


                                                                                                     Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)




Strong ownership in the RD and efforts by the Bank team to recreate this ownership after
management changes are vital to introduce OPRCs. The experience of the project highlights
strong ownership of the RD to introduce an OPRC pilot is a critical factor in its successful
implementation. It also demonstrated that there is a necessity for the Bank task team to
proactively work with the client during management transitions. In this case, shortly after the start of
the OPRC, changes in the RD management and at higher levels in the government required
substantial time for the new leadership to better understand and appreciate the benefits of the pilot.
This learning process stalled the implementation of the OPRC for several months. It only resumed
when the new RD management showed ownership following the Bank team's efforts.


Special attention to the construction industry and a careful market analysis are necessary
when preparing bidding documents and cost estimates for new road works contracting
methods. In this case, the OPRC bidding process was launched with insufficient attention to the
capacity of the local construction industry and a careful market analysis. This led the bidding
process to fail because the lowest bid was three times the cost estimate. The high prices were due
to shortcomings in the cost estimates and insufficient familiarity of the bidders with the new contract
type. A careful market analysis prior to piloting the OPRC would have been useful. This analysis
should have considered the allocation of risks, which needed to be carefully described in the bidding
documents and adequately priced in the cost estimates. The analysis could have been used to guide
the procurement strategy and improve the risk allocation in the bidding documents. An early and
more intensive dialogue with potential bidders could have helped them understand the new contract
type and price their bids correctly.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise, neatly-structured, and generally well written. It provides a clear overview of the project's
objectives, scope, and changes over time. The limited amount of "telling" pictures, a nice timeline of the World
Bank involvement in secondary and local roads in Georgia, and some additional annexes, such as the one on
the alignment of the PDO with the World Bank Country Partnership Framework, are useful.

The ICR follows the Bank Guidance on Implementation Completion and Results Reports for Investment Project
Financing Operations. It includes the project’s theory of change with the necessary assumptions. This theory of
change lacks, however, the PDO outcomes, such as the "km of road under alternative contracting methods"
and the "reduction in travel time". The ICR largely used the theory of change as guidance to present the
achievement of the PDO. This presentation is results-focused and also includes the PDO outcomes.

Because the PDO indicators had limitations, the ICR uses evidence from other studies and surveys to show the
achievement of the subobjectives. There are, however, some weaknesses in the presentation of this evidence.
For instance, the results of the impact evaluation as reported in para 32 are not fully clear. The ICR also cites

                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (P122204)



additional facts to evidence achievements, particularly for the third subobjective. This effort, although
commendable, has also some presentational shortcomings. For example, the ICR does not manage to clearly
link the evidence on road improvements in Kakheti in para 42 to the RD's capacity strengthening.

The remaining parts of the ICR are comprehensive and complete, and the lessons are solid and informative. A
minor shortcoming consists of not having mentioned the borrower contribution. The ICR would also have
benefited from a reference to key financial management obligations, such as the regular and timely submission
of IFRs and financial audit reports and the qualifications of the latter. However, it points out that the project's
financial management was satisfactory throughout project implementation.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 21 of 21
