     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-APL2 Roads & Bridges (P083325)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0021975

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P083325                                     MZ-APL2 Roads & Bridges

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Mozambique                                  Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-43080,IDA-48920,IDA-53460,IDA-          30-Jun-2011                                        270,618,311.17
 56020,IDA-H9040,TF-15898,TF-
 15923,TF-17375

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 23-May-2007                                 31-Dec-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                    31,131,748.50

 Revised Commitment                            280,722,639.48                                    29,970,033.40

 Actual                                        270,618,311.17                                    28,582,268.92




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Kavita Mathur                 Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   This was the second phase of the overall Roads and Bridges Management and Maintenance Program
   (RBMMP), aimed at stimulating growth and poverty reduction through improved road infrastructure, better
   sector policies and enhancing roads sector management. The program objective was to support the
   government in: (i) improving the coverage and conditions of roads and bridges; (ii) strengthen the institutional
   capacity to manage and administer the road sector; (iii) establish financing mechanisms for road

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-APL2 Roads & Bridges (P083325)



   maintenance; (iv) promote use of local resources in roads construction and management; and (v)
   improve road transport safety.

   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 3), the Project Development Objective (PDO) of the
   second phase of the Adaptable Program Lending (APL) was "to improve access of the population to all-
   season roads through maintenance, rehabilitation and upgrading of the classified road network".

   The ICR (page 13) notes that the overall Program Objectives were mistakenly inserted into the original
   Financing Agreement as the Project Development Objective (PDOs). This error was corrected through a
   subsequent project restructuring on April 7, 2011.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The original project had three components (PAD, pages 11-12).

   1. Overhead. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$69.6 million (of which the Road Fund and
   Development Partners (DPs), including IDA were to contribute US$45.2 million through the Pooled Fund
   (PF)). Following the cancellation of the PF arrangement (discussed under section 2e), the IDA financing for
   this component was estimated at US$21.7 million. The actual cost was US$38.6 million. There were three
   sub-components: (i) financing the administrative costs; (ii) capacity building of the National Roads
   Administration (ANE) at headquarters and in provinces and of the Road Fund (RF); and (iii) technical
   assistance for programs on road safety, axle load control and private sector development.

   2. Maintenance. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$263.9 million (of which the RF and DPs, including
   the IDA were to contribute US$246.2 million). Following the cancellation of the PF, the IDA financing for this
   component was estimated at US$36.7 million. The actual cost was US$30.8 million. This component
   provided financing for maintenance of the paved and unpaved roads and emergency civil works (including
   emergency flood recovery works in Maputo, Gaza, Zambezia, Nampula, Niassa, Cabo Delgado and Tete
   provinces, following the project restructuring in 2012 (discussed in section 2e).

   3. Investments. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$709.8 million (of which IDA was to contribute
   US$65.0 million). Following the cancellation of the PF approach, the IDA funding for this component was
   estimated at US$86.9 million. The actual cost of this component was US$86.9 million. There were three
   sub-components: (i) the rehabilitation and upgrading of the Jardim-Benefica section (7 km), the Xai-Xai -
   Chissibuca section (96 km), and the Massinga- Nhachengue section (57 km) of the national road
   network; (ii) the supervision of the civil works of the three roads; and (iii) the design of engineering plans.



                                                                                                        Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MZ-APL2 Roads & Bridges (P083325)



  These components were added through the project restructurings (discussed in section 2e).

  4. Emergency related works in the Limpopo River Basin. The estimated cost was US$121.0 million to
  be financed through IDA funding. The actual cost was US$109.8 million. There were two sub-components:
  (i) funding immediate emergency works (including small emergency works such as spot interventions); and
  (ii) medium-term restoration/rehabilitation works (such as long-term technical solutions to be prepared under
  Design and Build methodology using Output and Performance-Based contracts).

  5. Climate Resilient Rural Road Infrastructure. The estimated cost was US$15.7 million. The actual cost
  was US$14.63 million. There were two sub-components: (i) development of national technical design
  standards and specifications for climate resilient roads; and (ii) developing standards and maintenance
  approaches for the paved and unpaved classified road network and capacity building of local contractors
  and service providers.

  6. Immediate Response Contingency Fund. No funds were allocated for this component. No costs were
  incurred for this component. This component aimed at establishing an immediate response mechanism to
  facilitate rapid financing for disaster response in the aftermath of a national disaster.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  This project was originally designed as a Sector-wide Approach (SWAp), with common financing
  arrangements through a Pooled Fund (PF) with other Development Partners (DPs), common financial
  management and procurement procedures and a sector-wide monitoring and evaluation framework. The PF
  proved to be unworkable in practice and hence the project was restructured to reallocate the remaining IDA
  funding originally intended for the PF, to finance 100% of a subset of activities included in the SWAp.
  Consequently, the project included fewer activities although the remaining original activities were
  implemented by the government and other DPs under parallel financing.

  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1,043.0 million (to be financed through RF, PF with
  DPs and IDA). Following the cancellation of the PF approach and with three Additional Financing approved
  for the project (discussed below), the revised cost estimate was US$282.0 (discussed above). The actual
  cost at closure was US$409.6 million (This included actual IDA disbursement of US$270.6 million and
  borrower contribution of US$139.0 million).

  Project financing. The original project was financed by an IDA credit of US$100.0 million (including
  US$35.0 million to the PF and US$65.0 million in dedicated funding). The PF arrangement stipulated that
  IDA would exercise fiduciary oversight on the PF arrangement. However, some donors decided against the
  PF arrangement and the project was restructured in 2011 to focus only on the IDA financing for the project.
  The original IDA credit for the project was US$100.0 million. A total of US$182.0 million was approved
  through three Additional Financings (AFs). The first AF for US$41.0 million was approved on April 7, 2011;
  the second AF of US$67.2 was approved on December 3, 2013; and the third AF of US$73.6 million was
  approved on March 10, 2015. With this the total IDA Credit for the project was US$282.0 million. The
  amount disbursed was US$270.6 million.

  Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution was estimated at US$139.0 million at appraisal.
  The actual contribution was as planned.



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 15
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  MZ-APL2 Roads & Bridges (P083325)



Dates. The original project became effective on October 5, 2007 and was scheduled to close on June 30,
2011. The project closing date was extended through various restructurings (explained below) and closed
on December 31, 2018, with a 7.5 years delay.

Other changes. The project was restructured seven times during implementation. These changes were
made through the first restructuring on April 7, 2011 with the first AF for the project.

      There was a financing gap due to cost overruns during implementation, due to the steep increase in
       input prices, especially oil. One large civil works project on the National Roads (the Massinga-
       Nhachengue road) was dropped, as a result of the government's decision not to use IDA funds for
       this road (this road was however eventually completed with government financing).
      As indicated above, with the PF arrangement proving to be unworkable, the remaining IDA funding
       originally intended for the PF was reallocated to finance 100% of a subset of activities included in
       the SWAp.
      The targets for the two key outcome indicators were revised upwards.
      The closing date was extended by 18 months from July 1, 2011 to December 31, 2012.

The following main changes were made through the second restructuring on November 2012.

      Funds were reallocated to emergency recovery road works in selected provinces in response to
       severe flooding (December 2011 to March 2012).
      The indicator of direct project beneficiaries was added.
      The closing date was extended by a year from December 31, 2012 to December 31, 2013 for
       completing emergency recovery road activities.

These changes were made through the third restructuring following the second AF on December 2013.

      Due to extreme flooding in the Limpopo River valley in January 2013, which severed many
       communities from the main road network, the second AF was approved.
      Some of the AF was to be used for developing climate resilient road design/construction standards.
      As the proportion of classified roads that were in good/fair condition had declined due to the flood
       damages, the target for this indicator was adjusted downwards (discussed in section 9b).
      The closing date was extended by 36 months from December 31, 2013 to December 31, 2016.

These changes were made through the fourth restructuring on March 2015 after the third AF for the project.

      AF was approved to close the financing gap for the medium-term reconstruction of Gaza province
       roads affected by the 2013 floods.
      The closing date was extended by a year from December 31, 2016 to December 31, 2017.

Through the sixth project restructuring on June 2016, the project funds were reallocated between
disbursement categories.

The closing date was extended by a year from December 31, 2017 to December 31, 2018 through the
seventh restructuring on August 2017, for completing the ongoing civil works activities.



                                                                                                Page 4 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-APL2 Roads & Bridges (P083325)



   Split rating. A split rating was not undertaken for the following reasons. Although the scope of activities
   under the project were revised during the project restructurings, there was no substantial change in the
   overall level of ambition of individual outputs. Subsequent changes to the project shifted some resources
   from systematic maintenance and road rehabilitation under the project to emergency works. The scope of
   the PDO remained relevant to the additional project activities. Further, although indicators were added to
   indicate changes in project design through the various restructurings, these changes were pitched at the
   intermediate level.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Despite economic progress before appraisal that had contributed to reducing
poverty, 50% of the population were still classified as poor. In the road sector, estimates suggested that
while the classified road network (the national and regional roads) could provide potential access
(measured as people living within two kilometers of any road in the network) to 40% of the rural
population, due to the poor condition of roads, only 11% of rural dwellers had access to an all-season road.
Investments to improve the road condition and extend coverage in rural areas was important in the country
context.

Government strategy. At appraisal, the PDOs were consistent with the government program - Programa
do Governo para a Reduqzo da Pobreza Absoluta (PARPA II), issued in 2006. This program established
five goals for the road sector: (i) contribute to expansion of markets in the agricultural sector; (ii) ensure
access to districts with economic potential; (iii) establish connectivity between major regions of the country
and developing the main corridors; (iv) improve the capacity at the provincial and local level for managing
and prioritizing roads civil works; and (v) improve the quality of the roads civil works, including construction,
rehabilitation and maintenance. The PDOs were consistent with the revised Road Sector Strategy,
developed in collaboration with road sector Development Partners (DPs) and the 2007-2009 Integrated
Road Sector Program (PRISE). PRISE supported key aspects of the road strategy and underscored the
need for sustaining the road network by incorporating maintenance into sector investment plans
and capacity building of the implementing agencies. The PDOs continue to be relevant to the government
strategy. The Government program and medium-term strategy articulated in its five-year development plan
- the Plano Quinquenal do Governo (PQG) for 2015-2019, articulated the need for achieving inclusive
growth through promoting employment and competitiveness, through development of economic and social
infrastructure. The PDO was relevant to the Government's Road Sector Strategy for 2015-2019. The three
strategic pillars of the strategy focused on maintenance of the existing road assets, improving interurban
connectivity and enhancing rural mobility.

Alignment with the Bank strategy. The PDOs continue to be well-aligned with the Bank strategy. At
appraisal, the PDOs were well-aligned with one of the three priorities of the Country Partnership Strategy
(CPS) for 2008-2011: sustaining broad-based growth, through increasing mobility and enhancing the
capacity to respond to natural disasters (CPS, page ii). During implementation, the PDOs were consistent
with the two pillars of the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2012-2015: Pillar one highlighted the
need for improving competitiveness and employment through improved provision and management of the
road infrastructure (CPF, page 32); and Pillar two highlighted the need for reducing vulnerability and
increasing resilience adaptation to climate change and reduced risk of natural disasters.The PDOs are

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MZ-APL2 Roads & Bridges (P083325)



               relevant to the two focus areas of the Bank's current CPF for 2017-2021. The first area of the CPF
               highlighted the need for promoting diversified growth and enhancing productivity through improving linkages
               between smallholders and agribusiness and improving access to national and regional markets for
               agriculture and forestry products (CPF, page 25); and the third area underscored the need for improving
               disaster risk management through improving climate risk management (CPF, page 25).

               Previous Sector Experience: The Bank had some experience in the transport sector in Mozambique and
               this project was the second Adaptable Program Lending (APL) in the roads sector. The existing road
               network, although improved under phase 1 of the APL, still provided inadequate connectivity to promote
               development of the national economy. Maintaining road connectivity linking the country’s north and south
               was still a priority from the perspective of economic growth and national unification, much more investment
               was urgently needed to improve road conditions and coverage in impoverished rural areas (ICR para 6).

               Given that the road sector is one of the important sectors for sustaining growth with poverty
               reduction, relevance of the PDO is high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             To improve access of the population to all-season roads through maintenance, rehabilitation and upgrading of
                             the classified road network.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The project activities combined road infrastructure investments with capacity building of
                             the road agencies and the causal links between project activities, outputs and incomes were logical. Capacity
                             building of the National Road Administration at headquarters and in the provinces and the Road Fund, along
                             with technical assistance for programs such as road safety, axle load control and private sector development
                             in the sector, were aimed at improving the capacity for managing the road assets. Rehabilitation and
                             maintenance of the road segments of the national roads and the secondary roads that connected the
                             provincial capitals to the national roads, can be expected to increase the share of the road network in
                             good/fair condition and increase the percentage of rural population with access to all-season roads. The
                             emergency recovery activities in affected areas (such as immediate emergency works, medium-term
                             restoration works and developing climate-resilient standards) were aimed at restoring the road network that
                             were damaged by floods events during implementation. While the key outcome indicators measured progress
                             of the overall program that was financed by other development partners, this undermined an assessment of
                             the Bank-financed activities.


                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-APL2 Roads & Bridges (P083325)



Physical infrastructure

     Two sections of the national South-North corridor, totaling 103 km were rehabilitated and improved as
      targeted. The improvements included: (i) a 7 km dual carriageway asphalt concrete road along
      Jardim-Benfica Road (including median, surfaced shoulders, concrete block sidewalks, two
      footbridges, street lighting, geometric improvements at three junctions) and the use of barriers to
      mitigate traffic conflict; and (ii) a single carriageway of the Xai-Xai - Chissibuca concrete road of 96
      km.
     80% of the planned paved road maintenance program was completed, short of the revised target
      of 100%. 75% of the planned unpaved road maintenance was completed, short of the revised target of
      100% (As indicated in section 2, Bank's support to this component was discontinued following
      the cancellation of the PF arrangement).
     Following the 2012 restructuring, Bank funds were allocated to emergency works in Maputo, Gaza,
      Zambezia, Nampula, Niassa, Cabo Delgado and Tete provinces. In total, 536 km of roads that were
      damaged by floods were rehabilitated. Also, protection works to box culverts and construction of drifts
      to improve climate resilience were carried out. Medium-term restoration works were prepared under
      the Design, Build and Transfer (DBT) methodology using Output and Performance-based contract for
      an additional 198.2 km of the road network.

Institutional Support

     Training was provided to eighty-five staff of the National Road Administration and the Road Fund in
        areas of planning, procurement, financial and project management.
       An update of the Geographic Information System (GIS) of the Highway Information and Management
        System was carried out.
       A survey of the condition of the 6,663 km of paved road network in Maputo, Gaza, Inhambane, Sofala,
        Manica, Tete, Zambezia, Nampula, Cabo Delgado and Niassa provinces was done.
       An assessment of Climate Vulnerability and Identification of Options for Building Climate Resilience
        into Lower Limpopo Roads Network in Gaza was completed as targeted for emergency recovery
        works.
       National road design standards and specifications that were suited to the geological situation of
        Mozambique were completed and capacity building programs for local contractors and service
        providers was conducted.
       A Flood Response System was established in the National Road Administration for effective
        implementation of emergency works approved under AF for the project.

Outcomes.

     The share of the total classified road network that was in good/fair condition increased from 64% at
      the baseline in June 2007 to 72% at project closure in December 31, 2018. This slightly exceeded the
      revised target of 71%.
     At appraisal in 2006, 11% of the rural population were within two km of an all-season road (Rural
      Accessibility Index (RAI)) and this was expected to increase to 17% in June 2011 (original closing
      date). During the first AF (April 2011), the baseline and end target were revised upwards to 25.7% and
      32.7% respectively, due to an error in the methodology for measuring RAI. The outcome targets were
      further revised in November 2012, December 2013 and March 2015 to reflect improvements in RAI or


                                                                                                Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                MZ-APL2 Roads & Bridges (P083325)



                                    the impact of flooding as the case may be, and the final target of 40% was set in March 2015. In late
                                    2016, Mozambique (one of the pilot countries) adopted a new spatial methodology to calculate RAI.
                                    Based on this, the percentage achieved at closure was 29.3% However, using the old methodology,
                                    the percentage of rural population within two km of all-season road was assessed at 40.9% as
                                    targeted.
                                   According to the latest survey in 2015, roads were accessible to 4.7 million beneficiaries, short of
                                    the original target of 6.6 million (this target was set 2012), of these 45% (2.1 million) were women
                                    beneficiaries.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The key outcomes were for the most part, realized. Given that the key outcome indicators measured progress
                            of the overall program that was financed by the Bank with other development partners, the extent to which
                            this project contributed the outcomes is difficult to be ascertained, it is reasonable to conclude that the project
                            significantly contributed to realizing the outcomes.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted at appraisal and at closure for national roads
   rehabilitation activities (Jardim-Benfica roads and Xai-Xai Chissibuca road segments), using the Bank's Highway
   Development and Management (HDM -4) model. These activities accounted for 44% and 42% of the cost at
   appraisal and actual cost respectively. The project benefits were assumed to come from reduction in road user
   costs in terms of vehicle operating costs and passenger travel times. The average ex post Economic Rate of
   Return (ERR) was 41% (26% for the Jardim-Benfica road and 56% for the Xai-Xai - Chissibuca road) as
   compared to the average ex ante ERR of 36% (54% for the Jardim Benfica road and 18% for the Xai-Xai -
   Chissibuca road). The ICR does not provide reasons as to why the ex-post ERR for Jardim-Benfica road was
   lower and that of; Xai-Xai – Chissibuca road higher than the ex-ante ERR.

   An economic analysis of the seven medium-term restoration works earmarked under emergency works for the
   Gaza Province Roads, was conducted using the Roads Economic Decision Model (RED) for low-traffic volume
   roads. This component accounted for about 43% and 39% of the appraisal estimate and actual



                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-APL2 Roads & Bridges (P083325)



cost respectively. The average ex post ERR was 23% as compared to the ex ante EIRR of 32%. The ICR
provides no reasons for why the average ex post ERR was lower than the ex ante ERR.

Administrative and Operational issues. At appraisal, the program was conceived with a pooling fund (PF)
arrangement, with nineteen development partners, with joint approaches for financing, financial management
and procurement procedures. The proposed arrangement stipulated that IDA would exercise fiduciary oversight
on the PF arrangement through prior review of the procurement of contracts above certain thresholds. This
arrangement proved to be unworkable and caused delays on the expected funds flow for the overall
implementation of the program and the project had to be restructured in 2011 to focus on the IDA
financing. There were cost overruns with the actual cost of national road rehabilitation activities increasing by
over 60% relative to the appraisal estimate, due to the increase in input costs for fuel. This led
the government decision not to use IDA funds for a road segment (This road was however eventually completed
with government financing). There were delays in financial reporting and inadequate oversight in the initial years
of the project, due to the difficulties in establishing an integrated financial management system. There were
delays during implementation due a combination of factors, including frequent changes in leadership at the
National Roads Administration and the Road Funds, delays associated with getting approval of contracts by the
Administrative Tribunal and procurement delays and in the case of the medium-term restoration works, delays in
finalizing the climate resilient designs and slow contractor mobilization. The delays were exacerbated by factors
outside the project's control such as, security situation in parts of Inhambane and Sofala provinces and
macroeconomic downturn which caused sharp reductions in public expenditure in the road sector, which in turn
impacted road maintenance.

In sum, efficiency is modest, mainly in view of the administrative and operational inefficiencies.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the government and Bank strategy is high. Efficacy of the single objective - to improve
access of the population to all-season roads through maintenance, rehabilitation and upgrading of the classified
road network - is substantial, as the key outcomes were for the most part, realized. While it is difficult to
ascertain the extent to which the outcomes could be attributed to the project given the complementary activities

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-APL2 Roads & Bridges (P083325)



financed by other development partners, it is reasonable to conclude that the project significantly contributed to
realizing the outcomes. Efficiency is modest, mainly in view of the administrative and operational inefficiencies
during implementation. Taking these ratings into account, outcome is moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main risks to development outcome are:

Macroeconomic risk resulting in lack of funding. There is a substantial risk that the road maintenance
activities could be undermined due to lack of government funding due to macroeconomic factors. The ICR
(paragraph 96) notes that funding for road maintenance has been declining in recent year, with maintenance
expenditure on roads and bridges declining by 45% between 2015 and 2017.

Natural disaster risk. The project exposed ANE to methods for improving the climate resilience of the road
network and supported the development of technical specifications for mainstreaming of climate resilience
aspects into civil works design. However, there is substantial risk associated with natural disasters given
the high vulnerability of Mozambique to flood disaster and that future emergencies may further cause
diversion of road maintenance funding for emergency restoration works.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of the second phase incorporated lessons from the previous APL. The key lessons included:
  (i) strengthening implementation capacity of the National Roads Administration at the head office and in
  the provinces; and (ii) using locally available material (sand asphalt) for construction of roads. Several
  risks were identified at appraisal, including constrained implementation capacity of the National Roads
  Administration, risk of implementation delays arising from bureaucratic procurement approval processes,
  and financial management risks. Mitigation measures incorporated at design included: appointment of
  key managerial and technical staff and placing the main responsibility for financial management under
  the Road Fund (as most of the staff of the Road Fund were financial specialists). The implementation
  arrangements were appropriate, with clear delineation of responsibilities between the Ministry of Public
  Works and Housing (for strategic oversight), the Road Funds (for project implementation and financial
  responsibility) and the National Road Administration (for project execution). Given that many activities
  were financed under a Pooling Fund arrangement with Development Partners, the project was prepared
  in coordination with other donors. The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary
  compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  There were moderate shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry:


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-APL2 Roads & Bridges (P083325)



        The project underestimated the risks associated with the Pooling Fund arrangements. Although,
         there was buy-in from the Development Partners at the time of appraisal, especially with regard to
         the fact that IDA policies were to be used for governing the pooled funds, it proved to be
         challenging during implementation and resulted in implementation delays and the arrangement
         needed to be cancelled through project restructuring.
        The M&E design was focused more on the sector program, with few indicators at the project level
         and the capacity building efforts were not reflected in the results matrix. Using targets and
         indicators for the entire program made it difficult to assign attribution to the specific contributions
         of the IDA financing for the project (discussed in section 9a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 On average, two supervision missions per year were carried out over the project lifetime of twelve years.
 Following the recommendations of the Mid-Term Review held between March and September 2009, the
 team appropriately rescoped the project in the light of the failure of the pooled fund mechanism and
 associated delays in disbursements (ICR, paragraph 90). The Bank was responsive at the time of the
 cyclonic events of 2012 and 2013 and supervision team acted quickly and included emergency road works
 as well as climate resilient designs for future natural disaster. The reporting in the Implementation Status
 Results Reports was candid and provided the management sufficient opportunity to provide solutions within
 the general framework of the Bank's engagement. For example, as the second AF had already identified a
 funding gap, it made it relatively easy to access funds through the third AF once funds became available
 (ICR, paragraph 62). The proximity of the Bank's fiduciary staff helped in anticipating problems associated
 with the gaps in coordination and engagement and be proactive in assisting the government to resolve
 them (ICR, paragraph 62).

 There were moderate shortcomings in supervision. One, despite the change in the scope of the project
 after the dropping of the pooled funding arrangements, the project kept the same PDO indicators of the
 sector program and did not directly link them to IDA funding, thus undermining monitoring of the project
 performance. Two, while the Bank did respond to the emergency and financed emergency works, during
 the latter years of implementation, the project veered away from development of priority road links to basic
 network restoration activities.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-APL2 Roads & Bridges (P083325)




a. M&E Design
 The M&E design was consistent with the broader road sector Performance Assessment Framework
 developed by the sector stakeholders. This was in line with the SWAp approach adopted by the
 development partners and the government. The two key sector outcome indictors - the increase in the
 percentage of roads in good/fair condition, and the increase in the percentage of rural population within two
 km of an all-season road, were appropriate for monitoring sector performance. There was no indicator for
 capacity building activities, although this was a substantial aspect of the project.

 During the various restructuring, indicators to indicate the changes in project design were reflected. These
 were pitched at the intermediate indicator level. An indicator associated with measuring the number of
 direct project beneficiaries was added through the restructuring of the project in 2012. Following the
 approval of AFs, targets were modified to reflect the revised scope of the project.

 The sector outcome indicators were however too broad to establish a direct linkage with IDA financing. The
 various restructuring missed the opportunity to drop the SWAp approach and revise the PDO indicators to
 ensure that they are linked to the funding provided This undermined the ability to monitor project
 performance. Following the cancellation of the pooled fund arrangement, the project focused on the
 outcomes to which IDA was accountable.




b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E was executed by the specialized Reporting and Monitoring Unit (UMASE) of the Road Fund.
  The ICR (para 76) notes that the indicators were collected on a regular basis and disseminated through
  quarterly and semiannual progress reports.The output indicators served as signals on how the project
  was progressing towards achieving its targeted outputs. The indicators were revised following the AFs to
  reflect the revised scope of the project.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E reports were discussed during the Joint Semi-Annual Review Meetings of PRISE (Programa
  Integrado do Sector de Estradas (Integrated Road Sector Program)) . The data and results from
  analyses were therefore embedded in the decision-making process. The M&E system was used to
  identify gaps and inform decision at the sector level.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MZ-APL2 Roads & Bridges (P083325)



  The project was classified as a Category B project under World Bank safeguard policies. Three safeguard
  policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Cultural Property (OP 4.11);
  and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) (PAD, page 24).

  Environmental assessment. Environmental assessment for the three road sections financed by the project
  was conducted at appraisal. The assessment concluded that the environmental impacts of the project were
  expected to be limited in extent and of temporary duration. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was
  prepared at appraisal to address environmental issues during implementation (PAD, page 76). The ICR
  (paragraph 81) notes that throughout the project, environmental compliance was satisfactory, however, no
  details were provided.

  Cultural Properties. This safeguard was triggered due to the presence of a mosque and two graves close
  to the project site. A strategy was developed at appraisal to either minimize or avoid any impact on these
  properties (PAD page 79). The ICR (para 80) notes that the restoration civil works did not include works
  located in, or in the vicinity of the recognized cultural heritages sites.

  Involuntary Resettlement. A Resettlement Policy Framework and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was
  developed and publicly-disclosed at appraisal to accommodate the displacement of individuals, their
  structures and their resettlement; and stipulated compensation for the Project Affected Persons (PAD, page
  79). Provision was also made for ensuring that the grievances of project affected persons were addressed
  as soon as possible (PAD page 22). The ICR (paragraph 82) notes that project implementation was
  generally carried out in line with the resettlement policy framework and there was effective engagement with
  the project affected people throughout the project implementation period. The Environmental and Social
  Unit of ANE showed a strong performance in the implementation of the RAP. For the rehabilitation work, no
  land acquisition was required and there was no loss of other assets or crops. An external audit of the project
  concluded that the implementation of the RAP was satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. A financial assessment of the implementing agencies - the Roads Fund and the
  National Road Administration - was conducted and a Financial Management Action Plan was prepared at
  appraisal. The assessment concluded that the financial management arrangements were satisfactory,
  subject to the measures agreed on and documented in the Action Plan (PAD, page 59). The ICR
  (paragraph 84) notes that financial management performance was lagging in the initial years, due to a
  combination of factors, including: (a) delayed submission of project audit reports due to challenges relating
  to improving the financial management system of the Road Fund; and (b) complexity of the pooled funding
  arrangement. These issues were resolved, and the audit reports were submitted in a timely fashion since
  the third year of implementation. The ICR notes that audit opinions were unqualified throughout project
  implementation.

  Procurement management. An assessment of the procurement capacities of the implementing agencies
  and a procurement plan was prepared at appraisal. The assessment concluded that the overall
  procurement risk was moderate (PAD, page 67). The ICR (paragraph 83) notes that an independent audit
  determined that ten contracts totaling about US$1,436 million had been declared as mis-procured and
  ineligible for payment, due primarily to lack of understanding of the requirements of pooled funding
  arrangements and governing guidelines. Of this amount, US$430,600 was allocated to IDA as ineligible.

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-APL2 Roads & Bridges (P083325)



   The dropping of the pooled funding arrangement during the first AF meant that the entire project from then
   onwards was subject to IDA procurement procedures. The ICR notes that since then there were no
   procurement issues as ANE took steps to build capacity for procurement. For the emergency works, the
   Flood Response Team carried out procurement satisfactorily.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. Commitment of partners to procedures and guidelines for management of joint
arrangements (such as pooled funding) need to be secured prior to project appraisal. In this
project, the application of Bank procurement guidelines by the Development Partners was too
challenging, and the proposed pooled funding arrangement fell through as the other development
partners could not agree to have IDA guidelines governing the pooled funding arrangement.

2 . Introduction of new methodologies and approaches should be accompanied by required
resourcing to enable effective learning and capacity building. The introduction of Output and
Performance Based Road Contract under Design Build and Transfer methodology, although new to
Mozambique, was successfully implemented in this project on account of the steps taken to ensure
effective learning. The establishment of a flood response team, a firm to provide technical
assistance and additional supervision support in the field, established a cycle of learning that
ensured project delivery.



                                                                                                  Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MZ-APL2 Roads & Bridges (P083325)



3. Project designs should ensure that local regulations are accounted for during project
preparation and negotiated prior to project approval. For example, the approval of contracts by
the Administrative Tribunal was a case where the local regulation was being implemented at
variance with the Financing Agreement. This issue had been reported during the implementation of
the first phase of this project and government had undertaken to exercise greater oversight on the
procedures to ensure no procurement delays. However, this assurance did not materialize,
and contributed to procurement delays.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise and well-written. It candidly discusses the problems associated with the pooled funding
arrangement with other development partners. The ICR also provides a concise description of the way the
project evolved in response to the natural disasters that struck Mozambique. The ICR is consistent with the
guidelines and draws reasonably good lessons from implementing this project.

However, there were some shortcomings: (a) the description of the project cost provided in different parts of the
text is somewhat confusing (although this may be due to the dropping of the pooled fund arrangement); (b) the
ICR does not provide reasons for difference in ex-post and ex-ante ERR; (c) the discussion on the
implementation of environmental and social safeguards is limited; and (d) does not provide reasons for why the
measurement of direct beneficiaries was suspended due to issues related to methodology and whether there
was a new survey done at closure.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 15
