     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM-Water Resources Development (P114949)



                                                                             Report Number: ICRR0021977

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P114949                                 ZM-Water Resources Development

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Zambia                                  Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52390                               30-Nov-2018                                        25,795,503.57

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Apr-2013                             30-Nov-2018

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         50,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                          29,661,907.46                                             0.00

 Actual                                      25,795,503.57                                             0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Ranga Rajan               Fernando Manibog            Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 6) and the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 6) is:

   "To support the implementation of an integrated framework for development and management of
   water resources."



                                                                                              Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM-Water Resources Development (P114949)



   This assessment is based on the two sub-objectives: (1) To support the implementation of an integrated
   framework for development of water resources: and (2) To support the implementation of an integrated
   framework for management of water resources.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   This project was designed as a "framework" project. (In these projects, only the safeguards frameworks are
   prepared at appraisal and detailed safeguards instruments are to be developed, based on the feasibility
   studies conducted in the first year of implementation. The advantages of using such an approach is usually
   linked to flexibility during implementation that, in principle, could lead to better selection of project locations.
   The disadvantages are the unforeseen risks relating to project design and possible resettlement issues,
   since there are no detailed assessments at appraisal). There were three components. (PAD, pages 6-7).

   1. Water Resources Management. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$8.0 million. The actual cost
   was US$4.9 million. The actual cost of this and other components were lower than the appraisal estimate,
   due to the significantly reduced scope of project activities during execution (discussed in section 2e and 4).
   This component aimed at building capacity for strengthening management of water resources.
   This component supported the following: (i) capacity building for managing the hydro-meteorological and
   groundwater monitoring networks and strengthening their monitoring systems: (ii) developing flood
   forecasting and early warning systems: (iv) preparing consolidated catchment and basin-level water
   resources development plans and strategic water assessments: and (iv) implementing arrangements for
   allocating, licensing and monitoring water resources.

   2. Water Resources Development. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$30.0 million. The actual cost
   was US$13.4 million. Activities in this component include: (i) developing/rehabilitating small-scale water
   resources infrastructure (100 small dams and other small civil works for retaining water, reducing erosion
   and enhancing recharge); (ii) updating the 1995 Dam Development Master Plan for priority
   investments; (iii) studies for future medium- and large-scale water investments; (iv) supporting
   environmental and social assessments; (iv) community mobilization; and (v) implementing a nationally
   managed groundwater development program.

   3. Institutional Support. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$12.0 million. The actual cost was US$6.3
   million. This component aimed at strengthening the institutional capacity for managing surface water and
   groundwater. Activities included capacity building for: (i) supporting the institutions established under the
   2011 Water Resources Management Act and implementing the provisions of the Act; (ii) building capacity
   for negotiations, conflict resolution, monitoring and compliance with international water instruments; (iii)
   enhancing inter-agency coordination; (v) overall project management; and (vi) developing a training
   program.




                                                                                                          Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM-Water Resources Development (P114949)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost appraisal was US$50.0 million. The estimates were revised down to
   US$29.6 million following cancellation of part of the credit (discussed below). The actual project cost was
   US$25.7 million.

   Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA credit of US$50.0 million. US$20.3 million was
   cancelled for reasons discussed below. With this, the revised estimate was US$29.6 million. The amount
   disbursed was US$25.7 million. There was parallel financing for complementary activities by the German
   state-owned development bank (KfW).

   Borrower contribution. No borrower contribution was planned at appraisal. There was no borrower
   contribution during implementation.

   Dates. The project approved on April 25, 2013, became effective on December 24, 2013 and closed as
   scheduled on November 30, 2018.

   Other changes. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) held on April 19, 2017, identified non-compliance with the
   World Bank's safeguards policies and poor quality of the dams constructed under the project. The
   review recommended corrective measures for safeguards compliance (discussed in section 10). As the
   project remained in safeguards non-compliance, the Bank issued a threat of suspension on January 29,
   2018. Lack of timely implementation of corrective actions, led the Bank to suspend the loan on March 26,
   2018, and this suspension remained in effect until project closure. Following the partial suspension, the
   project activities focused solely on remedial works associated with safeguards compliance.

   There were two Level 2 restructurings. The first restructuring on October 17, 2018, cancelled
   the undisbursed balance of the IDA credit at the government's request. In doing so, the
   government committed to undertaking activities for safeguards compliance, as obliged under the Financing
   Agreement.

   The Bank allocated US$100,000 from the IDA credit to pay compensation to project-affected people
   identified in the Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP), at government request, through the second
   restructuring on November 30, 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Economic growth in the years before appraisal was urban-centered, with 74% of the rural
population classified as poor. The water sector issues in the country included frequency of droughts and
floods, hydrological variability and seasonal water shortages, that were exacerbated by growing demand for
water from the major sectors of the economy and inadequate water infrastructure. Despite Zambia's
strategic location in the head waters of major international rivers such as the Congo and Zambezi, its water
resources remained untapped, with installed hydropower capacity at only 27% of the potential.

Government strategy. The PDOs were relevant to the government's priorities. The government’s "Vision
2020" broadly articulated the need for inclusive growth and economic diversification. At appraisal, the Sixth

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ZM-Water Resources Development (P114949)



               National Development Plan for 2011-2015, underscored the need for water sector investments in rural
               areas. The National Water Policy issued in 2010 articulated the need for an Integrated Water Resources
               Management approach. The government followed this through, by enacting the Water Resources
               Management Act of 2011. This legislation translated the provisions of the National Water Policy into
               enforceable legal provisions and established the Water Resources Management Authority as an
               independent water regulator for sector planning and granting water permissions for surface, groundwater
               and international waters. Zambia's current Seventh National Development Plan for 2017-2021, identifies the
               water sector as a priority sector.

               Alignment with the Bank strategy. The PDOs are well-aligned with the Bank' strategy. At appraisal, the
               PDOs were relevant to the Bank Strategy for Africa, articulated in Africa's Future and the World Bank
               Support to it, issued in 2011, and the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Zambia for 2008-2011. The
               Bank strategy underscored the need for closing Africa's infrastructure gap and building resilience to
               the effects of climate change. The CAS acknowledged the importance of managing water resources for
               addressing rural poverty issues (CAS, page 26). The PDOs were also aligned with two of the three focus
               areas of the Bank's current Country Partnership Framework for 2019-2023. The first area highlighted the
               need for even territorial development and ensuring that rural communities are resilient to climate and
               environmental shocks. The third area highlighted the need for building resilient institutions through better
               sharing of natural resources in the region (CPF, page 29). The Bank has a long history of supporting water
               supply projects, including through Bank support to small-scale irrigation schemes.

               However, the design of this project was overly ambitious, by covering many different and independent
               activities under each of its three activities. (ICR, paragraph 53). The logistics associated with wide
               distribution of project sites made it difficult to conduct efficient supervision by an individual consultant.

               Overall, taking into account the high priority of the water resources sector and the project's close alignment
               with the Bank and government strategies, the relevance of the project's objectives is rated as substantial
               albeit the project's design was ambitious.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             To support the implementation of an integrated framework for development of water resources

                             Rationale

                                                                                                                           Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ZM-Water Resources Development (P114949)




Theory of change. The activities included water infrastructure investments and institutional strengthening
activities and the causal links between activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes
were monitorable in principle. Completing an infrastructure inventory and rehabilitating small scale water
infrastructure for retaining water, reducing erosion and enhancing recharge, together with building capacity
for medium and large-scale water investments, were expected to result in improving water storage in rural
areas. However, as discussed in section 3, the project design was overly ambitious, with too many activities
in each component.

Outputs (ICR, pages 10-11 and pages 32-.

      No dams were constructed (target 100 dams). The ICR (paragraph 23) notes that although ten dams
         were built, they were not certified when the project closed. Ancillary infrastructure was constructed at
         only two of the dam sites at closure.
        The inventory of the water infrastructure was not completed as targeted.
        No exploratory well fields were developed when the project closed (target four).
        Four drilling rigs for exploratory purposes were acquired under the project.
        Although guidelines for small dams were finalized in 2018, this activity was not completed with Bank
         financing as envisioned, but under a Water Facility Grant from the African Development Bank (AfDB).
        No water infrastructure investments were under preparation when the project closed (target five).

Outcomes (ICR, pages 28-29).

      Given that none of the dams were certified at project closure, no water storage facilities were
       established in the rural communities (target 100).
      The ICR (page 33) notes that there were no estimates on the number of direct beneficiaries when the
       project closed.

The ICR (paragraphs 41- 42) notes that a beneficiary survey was conducted between February - March 2019
on 185 people. The methodology entailed interviews with beneficiaries of four dams, regarding their situation
before and after project interventions. The main conclusions of the survey were: (i) 85% of the respondents
reported benefits due to better access to water during the dry season; (ii) agricultural benefits varied between
sites, with slightly over a third (37%) of the respondents reporting an increase in income, due to better crop
yields; and (iii) about 46% of the respondents reported an increase in income due to livestock activity and
about 72% of the respondents reported seeing an increase in fish yield.

However, only a fifth of the respondents surveyed were assigned a plot on the irrigated area and
plots inundated due to the impoundment of two dams (Chilbashi and Chikowa) had not yet been reassigned
under customary land arrangements, which had a negative affect on the incomes of the affected households.

Given that the outcomes were not realized, and the evidence provided on the beneficiaries were inconclusive,
efficacy is negligible.



Rating

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ZM-Water Resources Development (P114949)



Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

To support the implementation of an integrated framework for management of water resources

Rationale


Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, their outputs and outcomes were logical, and
the intended outcomes were measurable. Capacity building for managing the hydro-meteorological and
groundwater monitoring networks, the development of flood forecasting and early warning systems, the
preparation of catchment and basin-level water resources development plans, and the establishment of
arrangements for allocating, licensing, managing and monitoring water resources, were all expected to lead to
improvements in the management of water resources. These outcomes were aimed at contributing to the
long-term outcomes of improving protection against floods and droughts and reducing pressure of
the groundwater and surface water resources.

Outputs (ICR, pages 11-13 and pages 30-32).

      No catchment plans were developed for managing water resources (target six plans).
      There is no evidence that the water resources management authorities were financially stable when
       the project closed.
      No operational Water User Associations (WUAs) were created (target 120).
      Three courses on Hydrology, Hydrogeology and Dam Safety were held as targeted.
      Although data was collected to improve accuracy of hydrological forecast, there was no software or
       hardware infrastructure to analyze the data at closure.
      Of the ten reports submitted to the Ministry of Mines, Energy and Water Development, only five were
       accepted. These reports included improving the process for the operationalization of the Water
       Resources Management Authority (WARMA), the Department of Water Resources Development
       (DWRD) and the Ministry of Water Development Sanitation and Environmental Protection (MWDSEP).
      Four technical training events were conducted by the University of Zambia Integrated Water
       Resources Management Center as targeted.
      No flood risk zones were delineated (target six). No aquifer management plans were developed
       (target six).
      One hundred-gauge plates were acquired and most of them had been installed by the Water
       Resources Management Authority (WARMA).

Outcomes (ICR, page 28).

      100% of the water permits were reported as having been converted from water rights as compared to
       the target of 90%. The ICR (page 30) notes however that the conversion from water rights to permits
       could not be validated by the Bank.



                                                                                               Page 6 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                ZM-Water Resources Development (P114949)




                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Almost all the activities were not completed and none of the outcomes were realized. Overall efficacy is
                            negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                               Low achievement


          5. Efficiency


   Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was not conducted at appraisal, as the project was prepared as a
   framework project and investments were to be identified during preparation. According to the PAD (pages 11-
   12), expected project benefits were to come from: (i) improvements in communities' resilience to hydrological
   and climatic variability impacts; and (ii) the beneficial role that small reservoirs could play in safeguarding local
   livelihoods and sustaining communities through multiple uses (such as, due to enhanced water
   security, increased agricultural yields of smallholders, opportunities for fish farming, water for livestock and
   enhanced effects of groundwater recharge). At closure, an economic analysis was not conducted, given that
   most of the activities were not completed.

   Administrative and operational issues. Lack of clarity on the roles of the departments, delays on decisions
   relating to staff assignments, understaffing and weak implementation capacity of the Project Management
   Team, contributed to delays during implementation. These were exacerbated by factors over which the project
   had no control such as presidential elections October 2014 (following the President's death) and again in August
   2016. The lack of compliance with the Bank’s social and environmental policies culminated with the partial
   suspension of the Bank financing. Most of the activities were not completed and none of the outcomes were
   realized. Dam safety and involuntary resettlement issues were still pending when the project closed.


   Efficiency Rating
          Negligible


          a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
            and the re-estimated value at evaluation:


                                                                                                                             Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZM-Water Resources Development (P114949)




                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDOs to the government and Bank strategy is substantial. Efficiency of the two objectives -
to support implementation of an integrated framework for development of water resources and to
support implementation of an integrated framework for management of water resources - is negligible. as none
of the outcomes were realized. Efficiency is negligible.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



Technical risk. There is substantial technical risk, given that none of the dams built under the project
were certified at project closure. None of the activities associated with developing exploratory wells,
catchment plans, installing hydrological networks and developing water users associations to ensure
sustainability were completed. Likewise, sustainability of the Lidar Data developed under the project is
contingent upon having access to proper software and hardware infrastructure, which is currently
unavailable.

Institutional risk. It is not clear whether there are operational and maintenance arrangements at the
provincial, district and community level that would support or enhance sustainability of the dams.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  The project was prepared based on Bank's global experience with water resource development projects
  and Bank support to small-scale irrigation schemes in Zambia. Lessons incorporated at design, included
  securing communities' engagement through early consultations. Several risks were identified at

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM-Water Resources Development (P114949)



  appraisal, including high/substantial risks associated with government's commitment to institutional
  reforms, weak implementation capacity and fiduciary risks. Mitigation measures incorporated at design,
  included close supervision and training on financial management for the relevant entities. With mitigation
  measures, the project risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD, page 54). Appropriate
  arrangements were made at appraisal for monitoring and evaluation, fiduciary management,
  and safeguards compliance, for a designed as a framework project (discussed in section 9a and 10a and
  b).

  There were major shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. One, as discussed in section 3, the project's many
  different and independent activities under each of its three components was overly ambitious. Two, it is
  not clear if the project was ready for implementation. The ICR (paragraph 50) notes that the Bank
  approved a Project Preparation Advance (PPA) of US$2.9 million, eight months before project approval,
  to support project preparation. Only three percent of these funds were disbursed and only two (out of five)
  activities under the PPA were completed when the project became effective, namely, preparation of an
  environmental and social management framework for small-scale water resources infrastructure, and a
  training plan approved by the Bank. Three, the project underestimated the risks associated with
  safeguards compliance. The social and environmental safeguards risks were rated as moderate at
  appraisal. Lack of compliance with safeguards and dam safety considerations (due to the poor quality of
  works and weak criteria for site selection) eventually led to partial cancellation of the credit. Four, the
  mitigation measures relating to the institutional reforms, which were not backed with financial covenants
  or disbursement conditions, proved to be inadequate. And five, the project underestimated the risk
  associated with not having dedicated full-time staff to the project. The Project Management Team was
  staffed with civil servants seconded to the project and there were no full time M&E, financial management
  and safeguards staff, which were required conditions of project effectiveness.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


 During the four-year implementation period, seven Implementation Status Results Reports (ISRs) and five
 Aide Memoires (AMs) were filed. The supervision team was proactive and appropriately recommended
 corrective measures for safeguard compliance, following the recommendations of the Mid Term Review
 (MTR) on April 19, 2017. The measures included issuing a Threat of Suspension of on January 29, 2018,
 as the project remained out of safeguards compliance, and subsequently suspending part of the loan on
 March 26, 2018. As indicated in section 2e, the Bank also allocated US$100,000 from the IDA credit to pay
 compensation to project affected people at the government's request, through the second restructuring on
 November 30, 2018.

 However, there were major shortcoming in supervision. One, although the lack of due process on
 safeguards was first recorded in a June 2016 aide memoire, this issue was not flagged as a serious
 concern until a year later. The required Environment Management Plan and Abbreviated Resettlement
 Action Plan were to be prepared early during implementation; however, they were prepared and
 disclosed only during the final phase of the project. This resulted in non-compliance with

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM-Water Resources Development (P114949)



 safeguards requirements. Two, the criteria followed for prioritizing dam sites were weak, as some dams
 were not appropriate for meeting the needs of the communities. For example, the ICR (paragraph 64)
 notes that the Nabowa dam would have been better served with a weir rather than a dam, and the dam
 was also remote and difficult to access. Three, the official reporting systems did not flag important aspects
 of the project. The ICR (paragraph 91) notes that the financial management ratings for ISRs were rated as
 moderately satisfactory, although only three percent of the PPA was disbursed. Four, the hand over
 process of a Task Team Leader (TTL), which happened at a critical juncture of project implementation in
 late 2015 (when some key activities such as construction of dams were under consideration),
 was suboptimal, as the handover process neither included an overlap period nor a joint mission. And five,
 despite the recommendation of the Operations and Advisory Services (OAS) review to schedule the MTR
 in early 2016, the MTR was held a year later in August 2017, due initially to the change in TTL and
 subsequently to repeated postponements by the client (ICR, paragraph 92).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's results framework was aligned with the project activities and the key M&E outcome indicators
 were for the most part, appropriate. Indicators pertaining to establishing water storage facilities in rural
 communities and increasing the number of water infrastructure investments were appropriate, for
 monitoring performance with respect to development of water resources. Converting water rights to permits
 were appropriate for monitoring performance with respect to management of water resources. Baselines
 and targets were defined at appraisal. As indicated in section 3, the targets for the number of dams to be
 constructed under the project was clearly ambitious. The reporting system, developed by the Ministry of
 Mines, Energy and Water Development, for monitoring national water resources initiatives, was to be used
 for monitoring project performance (PAD, paragraph 31).



b. M&E Implementation


  The ICR (paragraph 66) notes that the Project Management Team had a M&E Specialist. However,
  although the operational manual contained a check list to facilitate M&E, only one quarterly and annual
  report were received by the Bank team during implementation. Since M&E results and reports were not
  received on a regular basis, implementation progress could only be determined during mission meetings
  with the PMT.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM-Water Resources Development (P114949)




c. M&E Utilization


  The (meager) results of the M&E activities were used for monitoring progress. The ICR (paragraph 68)
  does not provide details but notes that data collection was weak during implementation. None of the
  outcome indicators were monitored as the project activities were not completed during implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


   The project was classified as a "Category B" project under the World Bank safeguard policies. Six
   safeguard policies were triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Pest Management (OP
   4.09); Physical and Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12); Safety of
   Dams (OP/BP 4.37); and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). Since the project was a
   framework project, only the framework for Environmental and Social Management, Pest
   Management, Physical Cultural Resources Management, and resettlement management was prepared
   and publicly disclosed at appraisal. The existing regulations in the 2010 Food and Agriculture Organization
   (FAO) Technical Guide for Small Earth Dams was to be used for compliance with safeguards on Dam
   Safety (PAD, paragraph 62).

   Environmental Assessment, Pest Management, Physical and Cultural Resources, and Safety of
   Dams. At closure, the project was not in compliance with the environmental, pest management, physical
   and cultural resources, and dam safety safeguards policies. The Mid Term Review identified non-
   compliance with the Bank’s safeguard policies and poor quality of the ten dams constructed under the
   project, with respect to safety considerations. The MTR recommended corrective measures for resolving the
   issue (such as, hiring and deploying safeguards specialists to implement the required instruments for
   compliance with environmental and social safeguards, dam safety screening, reducing the number of dams
   to be constructed under the project to ten, using the technical consultant for supervising the dams and prior
   review for all ongoing and future tender for all dams). Since the corrective actions were not undertaken and
   the project remained out of safeguards compliance, the Bank issued a Threat of Suspension, which
   remained in effect until the project closed.

   Involuntary Resettlement. The ICR (paragraph 81) notes that of the ten dams constructed under the
   project, Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) were required for six dams build under the project.
   ARAPs for the six dams were prepared and publicly-disclosed only at closure. The ICR (paragraph 82)
   notes that the Bank agreed to a request by the Government to restructure the project to allow up to


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZM-Water Resources Development (P114949)



   US$100,000 to finance cash compensation to the Project Affected People (PAP). Cash compensation
   payments to the PAP were still outstanding when the project closed.

   Projects on International Waterways. The PAD (paragraph 64) notes that notification of the project was
   sent at appraisal to all riparian states within Zambezi River and Congo River Basin (that is, Angola,
   Botswana, Democratic Republic of Congo, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Tanzania and Zimbabwe). The
   riparian states raised no objections.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


   Financial management. A financial management assessment of the implementing agency - the Ministry of
   Mines, Energy and Water Development (MMEWD) - was conducted at appraisal. The assessment
   concluded that the management arrangements were deemed to be satisfactory and the financial
   management risk was rated as moderate (PAD, paragraph 48). The ICR (paragraph 70) notes that
   according to the 2016 Auditor General’s report, contract management for construction of the dams was
   inadequate. During implementation, there were ineligible expenditures. There were delays in submission of
   audit reports in the initial years, as an unqualified accountant was assigned to the project. These issues
   were resolved when the project recruited a qualified and dedicated accountant in March 2016.

   Procurement management. A procurement capacity assessment was conducted at appraisal. The
   assessment concluded that the procurement risk was High, due to the limited staff at the MMEWD given
   the potential increase in work load (PAD, paragraph 49). The ICR (paragraph 72) notes that an
   Independent Procurement Review conducted in November 2018 revealed a series of procurement issues
   from preparation to closure, including poor records keeping and management, poor quality of bidding
   documents, deficiencies in the criteria used in evaluating and comparing bids for small
   contracts, disqualification of bids for minor deviations, and payments for works contracts without the
   consultants’ verification and approval. The ICR (paragraph 73) notes that records on contractor’s payments
   were incomplete and inconclusive.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                               Highly
Outcome                                             Highly Unsatisfactory
                               Unsatisfactory

                                                                                                Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ZM-Water Resources Development (P114949)



Bank Performance                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Negligible            Negligible

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons that are presented here with some adaptation of
language:

1. A shared understanding between the government and the bank is especially required for a
project designed as a framework project. Most activities in this project were subject to substantial
delays due to the inadequate understanding of the implementing agencies
regarding the Bank's safeguards and fiduciary requirements. Further, to support effective
implementation of framework projects in a context of weak implementation capacity, it would be help
to lay out clear milestones at the start through the use of disbursement triggers. For instance, a list
of investments in accordance with clear prioritization criteria could be a first-year milestone and as a
disbursement condition in the Financing Agreement.

2. Involvement and better clarification of the roles of other ministries can be helpful in
securing project ownership in projects where many ministries are involved. Many of the
project’s outputs and outcomes in this project—such as ancillary infrastructure of the small-scale
infrastructure—were linked to other ministries such as agriculture, fisheries and forestry.
Better collaboration would have helped in clarifying the roles and responsibilities of the ministries.

3. Projects implemented in vast geographical areas could benefit from regular supervision
by local consultants. The activities in this project were spread over a geographically vast area. The
logistics of supervision by a single consultant proved to be very challenging. To mitigate the risks
and manage the complexity, the project could have been strengthened with local consultants visiting
the sites regularly and providing guidance to the Project Management Team.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



The ICR is well-written and evidence-based. The ICR is candid in discussing the environmental and social
issues encountered during implementation. It is also honest in acknowledging the shortcomings in supervision.
The various parts of the reports are well integrated. The ICR is consistent with the guidelines, both with respect


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZM-Water Resources Development (P114949)



to ratings and the performance narrative. One shortcoming in the ICR is needless repetition in different parts of
the text.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 14
