     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SV Education Quality Improvement (P126364)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0021815

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P126364                                   SV Education Quality Improvement

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 El Salvador                               Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-81100,TF-10361,TF-14166              31-Dec-2017                                         59,716,220.99

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Dec-2011                               31-Dec-2018

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              60,000,000.00                                   228,680.00

 Revised Commitment                               59,716,220.99                                   128,817.40

 Actual                                           59,716,220.99                                   128,817.40




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz        Salim J. Habayeb              Joy Behrens                   IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (page 4), the project objectives were as follows: Improve access,
   retention, and graduation rates for students in the Lower Secondary Education and Upper Secondary
   Education of the Borrower's public schools adopting the Inclusive Full Time School (IFTS) Model. The
   statement of objectives in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 6) and the Implementation Completion
   and Results Report (ICR, page 7) were identical.



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SV Education Quality Improvement (P126364)



   Although the project objectives remained the same throughout the project period, key outcome targets were
   revised downward and therefore a split ratings approach is applied in this review.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Adoption of the IFTS Model (Appraisal: US$65.25 million; Actual: US$ 61.60 million): This component
   aimed to support implementation of five elements of the Inclusive Full-Time School (IFTS) Model, including
   teacher and school director training on the IFTS pedagogical model, provision of educational materials,
   rehabilitation and furnishing of educational facilities, teacher salary payments to cover extension of the
   school week from 30 to 50 hours per week, and supplemental funds for extracurricular activities,
   transportation, and minor rehabilitation. The project restructuring in July 2015 resulted in the following
   changes to the component: teacher training was shifted from direct implementation by the Ministry of
   Education to a cascade training-of-trainers model; teacher compensation and transportation modalities were
   revised; school feeding added; and use of extra time payments to teachers to expand the supply of upper
   secondary teachers.



   2. Improvement of MINED's Institutional Capacity and the Schooling System's Governance (Appraisal: US$
   4.0 million; Actual: US$ 4.5 million): This component aimed to strengthen the Ministry of Education's
   (MINED) policy-making, planning, implementation, and monitoring capacity. Institutional support was
   provided in the following areas: teacher recruitment and evaluation, education standards, student
   assessment, monitoring and evaluation, communications to increase involvement of local communities,
   piloting a new governance model based on clusters of schools, and an impact evaluation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

          The project cost was appraised at US$ 70.6 million, later revised to US$ 64.8 million. The actual
           cost was US$ 66.3 million.

   Financing




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SV Education Quality Improvement (P126364)



        The project was financed by an IBRD Loan of US$60.0 million and a Trust Fund for Statistical
           Capacity Building grant of $130,000, both aggregating at US$60.1 million, out of which US$59.7
           million were disbursed.

   Borrower contribution

        The planned Borrower contribution was US$ 10.4 million, later revised to US$ 4.7 million. The
           actual Borrower contribution was US$ 6.6 million.

   Dates

        December 2011: The project was approved by the Board.
        May 2012: The project became effective.
        January 2013: The project implementation arrangements were modified, due to an internal
           reorganization in the Ministry of Education. A separate project implementation unit was established,
           supported by project funds.
          July 2015: The project was restructured to reflect changes in the project design and results
           framework. The number of school clusters targeted for full IFTS implementation was decreased from
           101 to 40, although the remaining 61 clusters still benefitted from in-service teacher training,
           educational materials, minor civil works, and capacity building, in preparation for full IFTS
           implementation at a later stage. The key project indicators, which originally captured results only
           from lower secondary, were revised to capture results from both lower secondary and upper
           secondary. The targets for these indicators were also revised downward to reflect the narrowed
           scope of schools.
          October 2016: The Mid-Term Review was conducted.
          June 2017: The project closing date was extended from December 2017 to December 2018, due to
           implementation delays.
          December 2018: The project closed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
El Salvador was experiencing slow recovery from recent external shocks and sluggish economic growth,
which had contributed to high levels of unemployment and insecurity, particularly among youth. This
vulnerable segment of the population was continually confronting poverty and organized crime and
violence, and therefore, improving the quality of education and increasing access to post-primary
education were high priorities for the government. Coverage of primary education was high, but dropout
rates accelerated before students finished lower secondary education (Grade 9). According to the PAD
(page 1-2), of the students that start in grade 1, only 39 percent finished basic education, 28
percent enrolled in upper secondary education, 22 percent completed upper secondary education, and only
12 percent enrolled in tertiary education. Among the poorest quintiles, only 60 percent of 16 year olds and
20 percent of 18 year olds were attending school. Moreover, education outcomes in secondary education
were poor, attributable to under-resourced small schools (lacking specialized teachers, equipped


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SV Education Quality Improvement (P126364)



               classrooms), two-shift classrooms that limit learning time, 25 hour teacher work week, and lack of teacher
               support.

               The government's ongoing education strategy included launching the Inclusive Full-Time School
               (IFTS) Model as the first step towards a more comprehensive reform of the secondary school system. This
               model was based on implementation of a similar model in other Latin American countries. The IFTS Model
               introduced pedagogical reform as well as a new school governance model through creating clusters of
               schools. The project thus responded to the need for improved access to and quality of post-primary
               education, particularly by supporting the government's reform efforts in implementing the IFTS model.

               The Bank's Country Partnership Framework for FY16-19 also identified attainment of secondary school
               education as a key objective, referring to poor educational outcomes and high rates of attrition as key
               concerns. The Country Partnership Framework indicators included improved transition rate between lower
               and upper secondary education and the number of school systems that adopt the IFTS model, both of
               which are included as indicators for this project.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve access rates for students in the Lower Secondary Education and Upper Secondary Education of the
                             Borrower's public schools adopting the Inclusive Full Time School (IFTS) Model.

                             Rationale
                             The premise underlying this project was that improvements in school infrastructure, increased availability of
                             education materials, extending the school day, training teachers and school directors, and providing
                             transportation stipends -- all elements of the Inclusive Full Time School (IFTS) model – were expected to
                             improve access to and retention in school, as well as to improve graduation rates. Support to strengthen
                             MINED's institutional capacity was also likely to help achieve improvements in access, retention, and
                             graduation rates. This theory of change was overall reasonable and plausible, although the scope of the
                             project, in terms of number of schools and support for the full spectrum from access to lower secondary to
                             graduation from upper secondary, was somewhat ambitious given the timeline and extent of changes in the
                             educational approach.

                             "Improved access" was defined as the number of students enrolled in 7th grade (lower secondary) or 10th
                             grade (upper secondary) as a proportion of the total number of 6th grade and 9th grade students,
                             respectively, promoted the previous year. The calculation of the indicator was later slightly modified to align
                             with UNESCO's definition of effective transition rate.


                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SV Education Quality Improvement (P126364)




Outputs

In the original project design, 29 municipalities were selected based on needs and feasibility. Within these
municipalities, 270 schools that offer lower and upper secondary education were reorganized into 201
schools that would implement the full IFTS model. An estimated 34,017 lower secondary and 7,038 upper
secondary students attending these schools were expected to directly benefit. During actual implementation,
163 schools fully adopted the IFTS Model (revised target: 213), whereby at least four of the defined elements
of the IFTS Model were met. These schools were then grouped into 101 "school clusters," as part of a new
approach to governance and consolidation of resources. As mentioned above (section 2, Dates), at the July
2015 restructuring, the number of school clusters targeted for full IFTS implementation was decreased from
101 to 40, although the remaining 61 clusters still benefited from some services.

      Extensive renovation of 36 "full" IFTS schools with fully integrated system infrastructure. In
         addition, "part" IFTS schools (schools that implemented the IFTS model in part, but not
         fully) improvements included: rehabilitation/construction of 718 auxiliary structures such as kitchens,
         libraries, bathrooms; furnishing of 441 schools, and minor repairs in 230 schools. However, this
         activity was not fully completed until close to the project end.
        Provision of education materials to 195 schools, including computers, projectors, library books, sports
         equipment, and art supplies.
        Financing of extra time payments to teachers, which resulted in additional hours of class time for lower
         secondary education. The number of students in 7-9th grade that have 30 or more weekly hours of
         pedagogical activities increased from 4,410 at the first year of project period to 9,842 by project
         closing.
        Provision of transportation stipends. The number of students receiving transportation stipends
         increased from 4,161 at the first year to 9,759 by project closing.
        Training and certification of 1150 master trainers and 1,169 teachers on pedagogical reforms.
        Training and certification of 436 school directors on the IFTS model.
        Design and implementation of a communications strategy for the IFTS model, including creation of
         communication portals for each school cluster to share achievements and provide information
         updates.
        Design of information technology platform to support MINED's management of its education programs.

Outcomes

*Note: After the July 2015 restructuring, when the project scope was reduced from targeting 101 school
clusters for full IFTS implementation to targeting 40 school clusters, baselines for key indicators were revised
to include only the 40 school clusters; in this revision, the revised baseline figures were given for 2015, rather
than 2011. Keeping in mind that the Bank’s split rating methodology calls for achievements across the entire
project period to be compared to the original targets as well as to the revised targets, a baseline figure from
the project start in 2011 for the 40 school clusters (as a sub-set of the original 101 school clusters) would
have enabled a more accurate assessment of achievement of objectives under the revised targets. In
assessing the achievement of objectives, therefore, this ICR review looks to the results for both sets of
indicators reported in the ICR.



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SV Education Quality Improvement (P126364)




      The access rate for lower secondary education for the original scope of 101 school clusters decreased
       from 96.3% in 2011 to 95.1% in 2017, falling short of the target of 98.8%. The access rate for the
       revised scope of 40 school clusters marginally increased from 96.6% in 2015 to 96.7% in 2017.
      The access rate for upper secondary education for the revised scope of 40 school clusters increased
       from 78.0% in 2015 to 87% in 2017, surpassing the target of 78.0%.

Achievement is rated Negligible due to a decrease in access rate for lower secondary education for the
original scope of 101 school clusters.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve access rates for students in the Lower Secondary Education and Upper Secondary Education of the
Borrower's public schools adopting the Inclusive Full Time School (IFTS) Model. (REVISED TARGET)

Revised Rationale
The same theory of change described above under the original Objective 1 also applies here.

Outputs

See outputs reported above, under Objective 1.

Outcomes

See "Note" above under Objective 1 Outcomes.

      The access rate for lower secondary education marginally increased from 96.6% in 2015 to 96.7% in
       2017, thus achieving the revised target of 96.6%. Due to the declining trend of this indicator at the
       national level (as stated in the ICR (page 11) although no specific data are cited), maintaining the
       baseline level was assessed as a positive development.
      The access rate for upper secondary education increased from 78.0% in 2015 to 87.0% in 2017,
       surpassing the target of 78.0%.

An important element of context in interpreting achievement of this objective is that infrastructure
development -- one IFTI elements envisioned to contribute to improved access – was not completed until the
end of the project. This timing weakens the case for attribution or contribution of the project’s activities to the
outcomes observed. However, even with this caveat in mind, achievement is rated Substantial based on the
outcomes noted above.



Revised Rating

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SV Education Quality Improvement (P126364)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve retention rates for students in the Lower Secondary Education and Upper Secondary Education of
the Borrower's public schools adopting the Inclusive Full Time School (IFTS) Model.

Rationale
The theory of change described above under the original Objective 1 also applies here.

"Improved retention" was defined as the proportion of students in grades 7-9 (lower secondary) and grades
10-11 (upper secondary) that remain in school for the entire academic year.

Outputs

See outputs reported above under Objective 1.

Outcomes

See "Note" above under Objective 1 Outcomes.

      The retention rate for lower secondary education for the original scope of 101 school clusters declined
       from 95.1% in 2011 to 93.7% in 2017, falling short of the target of 98.4%. The retention rate for the
       revised scope of 40 school clusters increased from 91.0% in 2015 to 93.8% in 2017, achieving the
       target to maintain the rate at 91.0%.
      The retention rate for upper secondary education marginally increased from a baseline of 92.5% in
       2015 to 92.8% by 2017, achieving the target to maintain the rate at 92.5%.

Achievement is rated Negligible due to a decrease in retention rate for lower secondary education for the
original scope of 101 school clusters.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve retention rates for students in the Lower Secondary Education and Upper Secondary Education of
the Borrower's public schools adopting the Inclusive Full Time School (IFTS) Model. (REVISED TARGET)

Revised Rationale
The same rationale described above under the original Objective 1 also applies here.




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SV Education Quality Improvement (P126364)



Outputs

See outputs reported above under Objective 1.

Outcomes

See "Note" above under Objective 1 Outcomes.

      The retention rate for lower secondary education for the revised scope of 40 school
       clusters increased from a baseline of 91% in 2015 to 93.8% in 2017, achieving the revised target to
       maintain the rate at 91%. This translated into 529 additional children per year that remain in the school
       system. The ICR (page 13) suggested that this achievement in lower secondary can be attributable to
       the project, as the impact evaluation data indicated that the project schools (sub-sample of 174
       schools) experienced a decrease in dropout rate of 5.8%, compared to 8.1% in control schools.
      The retention rate for upper secondary education marginally increased from a baseline of 92.5% in
       2015 to 92.8% by 2017, achieving the target to maintain the rate at 92.5%.

Achievement is rated Substantial based on increased retention rates for lower secondary and upper
secondary.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve graduation rates for students in the Lower Secondary Education and Upper Secondary Education of
the Borrower's public schools adopting the Inclusive Full Time School (IFTS) Model.

Rationale
The same rationale described above under the original Objective 1 also applies here.

"Improved graduation rates" was defined as the proportion of 11th grade students that graduate at the end of
school year.



Outputs

See outputs reported above under Objective 1.

Outcomes

See "Note" above under Objective 1 Outcomes.



                                                                                                  Page 8 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SV Education Quality Improvement (P126364)




      The graduation rate for lower secondary education for the revised scope of 40 school
       clusters increased from 69.0% in 2015 to 71.4% in 2017, achieving the target to maintain the rate at
       69%. This translated into 597 additional children per year that successfully completed their school
       year. The findings from the impact evaluation also indicated that the project contributed to graduation
       rates in lower secondary in project schools (sub-sample of 174 schools) of 90.2%, compared to the
       graduation rate in non-project schools of 87.7%.
      The graduation rate for upper secondary education for the original scope of 101 school clusters
       decreased from 75.0% in 2011 to 73.8% in 2017, falling far short of the target of 91.7%.

Achievement is rated Negligible due to a decrease in graduation rate for upper secondary education for the
original scope of 101 school clusters.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve graduation rates for students in the Lower Secondary Education and Upper Secondary Education of
the Borrower's public schools adopting the Inclusive Full Time School (IFTS) Model. (REVISED TARGET)

Revised Rationale
Outputs

See outputs reported above under Objective 1.

Outcomes

See "Note" above under Objective 1 Outcomes.

      The graduation rate for lower secondary education increased from 69.0% in 2015 to 71.4% in
       2017, achieving the target to maintain the rate at 69%. This translated into 597 additional children per
       year that successfully completed their school year. The findings from the impact evaluation also
       indicated that the project contributed to graduation rates in lower secondary in project schools (sub-
       sample of 174 schools) of 90.2%, compared to the graduation rate in control schools of 87.7%.
      The graduation rate for upper secondary education for the revised scope of 40 school clusters
       increased from 71.5% in 2015 to 75.9% by 2017, surpassing the target to maintain the rate at 71.5%.
       There were inconsistencies with findings of an experimental impact evaluation which found that
       graduation rates for upper secondary in project schools were lower than in control schools, although
       M&E Section 9 below discusses the questionable quality of the impact evaluation.

Achievement is rated Substantial due to evidence of maintained graduation rates for lower and upper
secondary education.




                                                                                                 Page 9 of 17
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 SV Education Quality Improvement (P126364)




                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy under the original targets is rated Negligible due to decreases in access and retention rates in
                            lower secondary and decrease in graduation rate in upper secondary for the original scope of 101 school
                            clusters.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Overall efficacy under the revised targets is rated Substantial due to three almost fully achieved objectives.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The economic analysis at appraisal (PAD, Annex 6) provided an internal rate of return estimate and a cost
   benefit analysis for the project. Costs were calculated as the total project costs. Benefits were calculated
   according to the benefits accrued to the students who stayed in the school system, rather than dropping out,
   thereby completing lower and/or upper secondary education and receiving higher wages. The internal rate of
   return was estimated at 13% for the low case scenario, and the net present value at US$ 8.4 million, again
   under the most conservative salary differential estimate.

   The economic analysis in the ICR (Annex 4) more narrowly focused on the interventions in Component 1
   (implementation of IFTS model) and did not include Ministry-level capacity building activities in Component 2
   (according to the ICR (Annex 4), this was due to the difficulty in measuring the economic benefits of the latter
   interventions). Benefits were similarly calculated according to additional years of education that lead to higher
   productivity and wages. Costs were calculated as the project costs for Component 1 and recurrent costs for
   maintaining school infrastructure. As the interventions were implemented at different points in time over the
   project period and to a varying extent by the participating schools, beneficiaries were grouped according to the
   interventions by year. For example, educational materials and minor rehabilitation were implemented early on,
   but teacher training and renovations did not take place until year four. Also, some schools only implemented one
   or two elements of the IFTS Model, while others implemented all elements. These beneficiary groups thus

                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SV Education Quality Improvement (P126364)



ranged from 5,899 students who benefitted from all elements in 2018, to 41,068 students who benefitted from
teacher training only. The estimated impact - the additional years of education gained through an intervention -
was also noted according to the specific element of the IFTS model.

Based on the above, the net present value was calculated as US$64.1 million and the internal rate of return as
8.9%. A sensitivity analysis was also conducted.

There were moderate shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation due to implementation delays stemming
from Presidential elections that led to leadership changes in the Ministry of Education, the Ministry's change in
strategic vision, security issues, land titling issues, changes in specifications for infrastructure, long turnaround
times in procurement, and fiscal constraints and bureaucracy that led to delays in providing counterpart funds.

Based on favorable returns, but with moderate shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation, efficiency is
rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        100.00
 Appraisal                                                   13.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        92.90
 ICR Estimate                                                8.90
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the project objectives is rated High due to strong alignment with government strategy and Bank
strategy. Efficacy is rated Negligible under the original objectives based on decreases in access and retention
rates in lower secondary and decrease in graduation rate in upper secondary for the original scope of 101
school clusters.. Efficacy is rated Substantial under the revised objectives due to evidence demonstrating that
outcomes were almost fully achieved in access, retention and graduation rates. Efficiency is rated Substantial
based on favorable returns, but with moderate shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation,

Project under original targets

Overall outcome is rated Unsatisfactory due to High Relevance of Objectives, Negligible Efficacy,
and Substantial Efficiency.



                                                                                                        Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SV Education Quality Improvement (P126364)



Project under revised targets

Overall outcome is rated Satisfactory due High Relevance of Objectives, Substantial Efficacy, and Substantial
Efficiency.



According to harmonized OPCS/IEG guidelines on restructured projects, the overall outcome is weighted
according to the amount of the Loan that disbursed before and after the restructuring. At the time of
restructuring in July 2015, US$13.86 million, or 20.9%, of the Loan had disbursed. Therefore, the original
project numerical rating is 0.418 (0.209 x 2 (Unsatisfactory)) and the revised project numerical rating is 3.955
(0.791 x 5 (Satisfactory)), therefore the combined rating is 4.373, which rounds down to Moderately
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financing was received from the Millennium Challenge Corporation to further expand the IFTS model to an
additional 45 clusters (349 schools), which is providing not only financial support but continuing critical
institutional capacity development. Despite a change in presidential leadership, the IFTS model remains a
high development priority for the government. However, there was uncertainty about whether students
successfully transitioning from lower secondary to upper secondary were provided adequate sustained
support through to graduation.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project objectives and design were strongly aligned with country conditions and strategy at project
  appraisal. The approach to the project design - to draw upon success with the IFTS Model in other Latin
  American countries and pilot the Model in El Salvador with the aim to scale up nationally - was
  appropriate given the extensive reforms in the school system introduced by this Model. Also drawing
  upon experience with prior Bank education operations in the country, in which several prior projects failed
  to reach effectiveness due to insufficient political support, the project team prepared the project quickly
  (six months from concept to approval) in order to capitalize on the existing high level of support from the
  then-Minister of Education. However, the quick preparation also set the stage for some shortcomings in
  project readiness, as a thorough on-the-ground assessment of the infrastructure needs of schools did not
  take place, leading to an underestimation of renovation requirements and costs for this activity. The risk
  of violence (and its effect on infrastructure development and access to schools) was appropriately
  recognized as a critical risk, though it is unclear whether more effective mitigation measures could have
  been identified given the exogenous nature of the risk. The M&E design was outcome-oriented (as

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SV Education Quality Improvement (P126364)



  reflected in the key indicators that measured actual outcomes rather than outputs), although there were
  some shortcomings in the choice of indicators (see Section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Given the pilot nature of the project approach, the Bank team paid close attention to learning lessons from
 implementation during the early project period, including both strategic issues and operational
 bottlenecks: shifting from MINED-led teacher training to a cascade model, modifying the teacher
 compensation and transportation stipend modalities, and adding school feeding and teacher extra time
 payments. Project restructurings were well-utilized to reflect these changes, including in the results
 framework. There were some implementation delays due to the following issues: change in leadership at
 MINED, delays in confirmation of land titles, revisions to infrastructure plans due to underestimation of
 needs, inefficiencies in procurements, and delays in provision of counterpart financing for certain activities
 due to national fiscal constraints and bureaucracy. The project was also affected by a sharp increase in
 violence and crime, due to the ending of the gang ceasefire agreement. Of note, the Bank team placed a
 strong emphasis on effective M&E, including raising additional funds to complement existing M&E data and
 provide additional evaluative assessments. This included a grant from the Spanish Fund for Latin America
 and the Caribbean (SFLAC), executed by MINED, to finance five studies that would inform implementation;
 a Trust Fund Statistical Capacity Building grant to develop educational indicators and build capacity.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were clearly stated. The original M&E design had a clear outcome-orientation with
 both rigorous monitoring arrangements and an evaluative component. Baseline data was established at the
 project outset, with appropriate revisions during project restructuring. However, there were some
 shortcomings in the original results framework. Although the project objectives encompassed both lower
 secondary and upper secondary education, the key project indicators were not disaggregated to reflect
 both sub-sectors. Targets were also later deemed unrealistic, due to actual declining trends for those
 indicators at the national level due to macro factors such as deteriorating economic conditions, migration
 and increased crime and violence. The methodology to calculate access rate was also later redefined to
 align it with the UNESCO definition of effective "transition" rate.


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SV Education Quality Improvement (P126364)



 The M&E design also included an evaluative assessment, through an experimental impact evaluation;
 however, capacity to undertake this evaluation was overestimated and the robustness of the findings to
 fully inform project performance, given it was not a full-fledged impact evaluation, is questionable. Also, an
 institutional culture that did not give importance to rigorous measurement of impact contributed to limited
 ownership of this evaluation from MINED. The ICR (page 19) suggested that an evaluation of the pilot
 program through a rigorous process evaluation may have been a more appropriate approach.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E data collection was effectively supervised by the project team to emphasize the importance
  of reliable and good quality data. As reported above, the results framework was modified during the
  project period to more accurately reflect project achievements and ensure realistic targets. Although the
  full experimental impact evaluation could not be carried out as planned, the project team was able to use
  the data collected to conduct a semi-experimental evaluation to measure the impact of the
  individual/bundled activities under the IFTS model, comparing the data of a set of control schools using
  propensity score matching. The ICR (page 14) suggested that the poor outcomes in upper secondary
  graduation may have been driven by the fact that once more students graduated from lower secondary
  due to project support, some of the students that moved on to upper secondary were unable to keep up
  with the requirements and therefore did not graduate. However, the quality of the experimental impact
  evaluation is questionable given the lack of comprehensiveness of the study. The Bank team also
  secured additional funds to conduct studies to supplement M&E data, including (i) an assessment of the
  reform approach to improving governance and accountability; (ii) a proposal of standards of efficiency in
  school management, student learning, and governance; (iii) a proposal to create a control panel for
  school management; (iv) a communication strategy; and (v) a study on the implementation of providing
  lunch to students in the IFTS Model. There was also a phone survey to directors from the project
  schools to understand the reasons for the low student take-up of the extended school day. However, the
  activity to implement a student-level information system was not completed.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reported the following examples of the use of M&E: the project's impact evaluation contributed
  to dialogue with MINED to raise awareness about the importance of evaluating the project rather than
  only monitoring results; the Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building funds were used to develop
  educational indicators and raise awareness about the importance of evaluating education policies; the
  results of the telephone survey led to the revision of the content taught during extra-curricular hours.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SV Education Quality Improvement (P126364)



  The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project due to minor civil works. With the
  project restructuring in July 2015 that led to more in-depth infrastructure activities, the potential
  environmental impact increased but there was not an increase in environmental monitoring. The Bank team
  and MINED subsequently agreed on the use of an environmental monitoring tool to ensure closer
  supervision and developed a Project Management Plan for 19 of the 36 construction works to address
  issues. By the end of the project period, the environmental safeguards performance was considered
  satisfactory, with all 36 infrastructure works having been environmentally certified. The Bank team also
  provided training to the MINED staff and the construction firms on environmental monitoring.

  The project design also triggered OPBP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples and therefore an Indigenous Peoples
  Plan was developed. Implementation of the Plan had some initial delays due to difficulties in hiring an
  organization to implement the Plan. However, once implemented, the Project supported MINED to develop
  a program on the indigenous Náhuat language and identity, an activity not originally considered in the
  Project’s design. The ICR noted that this was a significant achievement because it marked the first time in
  El Salvador that MINED offered an institutionalized teacher training on "Náhuat language and cultural
  identity," thus helping to preserve a dying language.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management: The ICR reported that the project was in compliance with financial management
  requirements. Audit reports were submitted in a timely manner, with no major qualifications, although
  there were some issues with internal controls including documentation of transfers and some ineligible
  expenditures. These issues were resolved with support from the Bank team.

  Procurement: The Bank team provided training to MINED's procurement staff and close supervision to
  ensure quality control. The ICR reported that procurement arrangements and performance were adequate
  throughout most of the implementation period and that efficiency in the procurement processes improved
  significantly over time, reducing the internal turnaround times for each step. No major procurement
  problems were reported.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  According to the ICR (p. 18), and as discussed above in Section 10a, the project supported the
  development of a program on Náhuat language and cultural identity, and institutionalized teacher training,
  thus contributing to preserving a language that was disappearing.



d. Other
  --




                                                                                                Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SV Education Quality Improvement (P126364)



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
                                  Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pg. 23) provided several lessons, including the following:

        There is trade-off between speed of preparation and technical soundness of project design.
         For this Project, a swift preparation was required to take advantage of the political window of
         opportunity. This short preparation timeline, however, did not allow for the use of
         the capacity-building trust funds to inform project design nor for a full diagnostic of the
         infrastructure needs of beneficiary schools, which led to an underestimation of the costs and
         the depth of the interventions needed.

The following lessons were also identified by IEG:

        M&E capacity as well as an institutional culture that values rigorous assessment is critical to
         effective M&E implementation. In the case of this project, the country’s capacity to
         implement an experimental impact evaluation was overestimated. As reported in the ICR
         (page 19), although MINED was able to collect data for monitoring purposes, "the
         institutional culture did not give importance to rigorous measurement of impact" and thus
         there was limited ownership from MINED. Despite several trainings and intensive support for
         the impact evaluation’s design and implementation, the data collected was not sufficiently
         robust to be used as intended.
        Continuous support to upper secondary students from initial access/transition from lower
         secondary all the way through to graduation greatly facilitates the objective to improve
         graduation rates. In the case of this project, project activities were largely focused on lower
         secondary education, in order to increase likelihood of lower secondary students continuing
         on to upper secondary, where sustained support is also needed.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No




                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SV Education Quality Improvement (P126364)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was concise and results-oriented. The theory of change was sound and aligned to development
objectives. However, the Efficacy ratings were not correctly determined under the split evaluation, where the
achievements for both original and revised objectives (with revised targets) should be measured over the whole
project period. The quality of the evidence and analysis was notable for triangulating findings from both project
monitoring systems and supplemental evaluations, although there were some inconsistencies in the findings
that could not be explained by the ICR team without further investigation. The ICR economic analysis was also
notable in that it improved substantially upon the more general analysis conducted for project appraisal,
including pinpointing the numbers of students that benefitted from specific interventions during the specific
phases of the project period, and the varying degrees to which each participating school implemented the IFTS
model. The Lessons section was somewhat generic, missing an opportunity to draw specific lessons to inform
future operations on the provision of secondary education.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
