     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RIJEKA Gateway II (new FY09) (P102365)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021817

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P102365                                    RIJEKA Gateway II (new FY09)

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Croatia                                    Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-76380                                 15-Dec-2014                                            97,113,790.71

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Dec-2008                                31-Dec-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           122,500,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                            122,429,017.62                                                 0.00

 Actual                                         97,113,790.71                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Hiroyuki Yokoi              J. W. van Holst              Ramachandra Jammi                IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the Project is “to develop the capacity, financial performance, and quality of services in the
   port of Rijeka to meet growing traffic demand, through public-private partnerships, while facilitating urban
   renewal by enabling the relocation of port activities” (Loan Agreement, page 5; Project Appraisal Document,
   page 4)

   For the purpose of the ICR Review, the objective was split into “to develop the capacity, financial
   performance, and quality of services in the port of Rijeka to meet growing traffic demand, through public-

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RIJEKA Gateway II (new FY09) (P102365)



   private partnerships” (Objective 1) and “to facilitate urban renewal by enabling the relocation of port activities”
   (Objective 2). The Objective 1 is parsed to consist of three outcomes --- capacity building at the port, financial
   performance, and quality of services. The assessment of the overall outcome of Objective 1 is organized
   around these three outcomes.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  31-May-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component A: Port Terminal Development (Appraisal cost: US$105.8 million, Actual cost: US$150.7
   million)

   This component included two activities: (i) extension of the existing Brajidica Container Terminal (BCT) by
   about 330 meters with an additional capacity of 200,000 Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit (TEU); (ii) construction
   of a 400 meter long Zagreb Container Terminal (ZCT) with a capacity of about 225,000 TEU. The
   construction and procurement of superstructure and equipment would be financed by a concessionaire. The
   increase in the cost was primarily due to higher than expected cost estimates for the ZCT and repartition of
   the financing structure between Rijeka Gateway I (former project) and this project.

   Component B: Port Service Enhancement (Appraisal cost: US$10.0 million, Actual cost: US$8.1 million)

   This component involved four activities: (i) support in selection of a concessionaire; (ii) equipment and
   technical services for information flow integration and secured port access; (iii) enhanced environmental
   response with the development of a comprehensive port environment protection plan and purchase of a
   waste collection vessel; (iv) technical studies to prepare for the Masterplan implementation. During the first
   restructuring, the second component of the port community system was canceled because the Croatian
   Customs and the Port Concessionaires had already purchased their own systems, leading to the reduction
   in the cost.

   Component C: Project Implementation (Appraisal cost: US$21.5, Actual cost: US$6.2 million)

   This component included: (i) supervision of civil works activities; (ii) audit services for the project; and (iii)
   support in procurement and project management.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RIJEKA Gateway II (new FY09) (P102365)



   Project Cost: The estimated project cost was US$144.64 million. The cost was revised to US$149.02
   million, and the actual cost was US$123.70 million (ICR, p. 6).

   Financing: The appraisal estimated that the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
   would finance a US$122.50 million loan. The actual IBRD’s disbursement was US$97.11 million (ICR, p 6).

   Borrower Contribution: The estimated financing by the Government of Croatia wasUS$22.14 million, while
   the actual spending was US$26.59 million (ICR, p 6).

   Dates: The project was approved on December 11, 2008, and became effective on July 14, 2009. The
   project undertook three restructurings:

   First restructuring (January 2014) was aimed to extend the project period until June 15, 2017.
   Accordingly, the PDO indicators on the container throughputs (Rijeka port container capacity and container
   traffic), PRA operating ratio, and proportion of dry cargo handled by operators with a private majority
   ownership were amended and to be achieved by the adjusted closing date of June 15, 2017.

   Second restructuring (July 2016) was to reallocate disbursement categories and to change disbursement
   percentages.

   Third restructuring (May 2017) involved several changes. The Project Development Objective (PDO) was
   revised to “to develop the capacity, financial performance, and quality of services in the port of Rijeka to
   meet growing traffic demand, through public-private partnerships” by eliminating “while facilitating urban
   renewal by enabling the relocation of port activities” because there was no supporting activity on urban
   renewal. Accordingly, associated indicators were dropped, namely, areas for urban development available
   and selection of a private developer to redevelop the Delta/Port of Baros area. Tthe project closing date was
   extended until December 31, 2018 to allow for the completion of the Zagreb Container Terminal within the
   project life, and to support the Government through the concessionaire selection (Restructuring Paper
   (2017) para 10).

   The third restructuring lowered the level of ambition for the project. This review will therefore include one
   split rating of outcome.



   The project was closed on December 31, 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Alignment with strategy: The objective of the project aligns with the Bank’s strategy. The Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) 2014-17, which was the latest CPS at the time of closing, sets out the two main
pillars: (a) create space for the private sector, while improving the role of the state as a service provider and
(b) improve its regional cooperation. The PDO supported both of the pillars through PPP based port
operations and the port’s function of improving regional connectivity. In addition, the most recently approved

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       RIJEKA Gateway II (new FY09) (P102365)



Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2019 – 24, aims to (i) build essential institutional capacity and (ii)
catalyze private sector investment or leveraging additional resources. The project has been supportive of
the CPS/CPF by attracting a private concessionaire and enabling private financing to the port operations.



Country context: The objective of the project was highly relevant to the country context. At the time of
appraisal, the country’s objective was to join the European Union (EU), and the development of Pan-
European transport corridors was the key strategy to enable the country to achieve convergence to the EU.
One of the corridors - Corridor Vb (today called as EU Mediterranean Corridor) – originated from the Rijeka
Port, one of the two international ports in the country. According to the IEG’s interview with the Bank task
team, Croatia needed to meet the key criteria in the EU Transport Policy to be able to join the EU, one of
which was access to the sea. The Port of Rijeka, which handled over 90% of container traffic in the country,
needed to ensure access to the sea, however the port experienced inadequate infrastructure provided
inefficient services.

The port observed a significant container traffic growth by 58 percent from 2005 to 2007, hitting 720,000
TEU in 2007, almost equivalent to its capacity of 770,000 TEU. To accommodate the growing demand of
cargoes, the port needed several measures: expansion/construction of the berths; improvement of the port
layout; enhancement of the storage space management; improved cargo handling productivity. The port
development Masterplan (2008) defined strategic priorities of these investments through public-private
partnerships (PPP) modality, which the Port of Rijeka Authority (PRA) owned infrastructure while the private
concessionaire provided superstructure and equipment.

The PDO was aimed to address this infrastructure shortage, financial sustainability, and quality
improvements, thereby contributing to country’s convergence strategy to the EU.



Previous sector experience: The Bank has been involved with the Rijeka Port development through the
Rijeka Gateway program, under which the Bank supported port restructuring and modernization; port/city
interface redevelopment; and international road improvements. The project was developed based on
experience and provided infrastructure under the Rijeka Port development.



Taking the alignment with the strategy, country context, and sector experience into consideration, the
review concludes the relevance of the original objective is high. Despite the elimination of the second
objective as part of the third restructuring, the objective remained highly relevant because the country’s
prime focus was on accession to the EU for which the project contributed to assuring Croatia’s access to
the sea by improving port container capacity and efficiency rather than the urban renewal interventions.
Thus, this review retains the relevance of the revised objective as high.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 16
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  RIJEKA Gateway II (new FY09) (P102365)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To develop the capacity, financial performance, and quality of services in the port of Rijeka to meet growing
               traffic demand, through public-private partnerships.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change:

               The PDO intended to achieve two sets of objectives, first of which was to develop the capacity, financial
               performance, and quality of services in the port of Rijeka to meet growing traffic demand. The activities that
               contributed to the capacity improvement (capacity was implicitly referred to as the port container capacity)
               were made through the extension of the Brajdica Container Terminal (BCT) and construction of Zagreb
               Container Terminal (ZCT). Financial performance was designed to be improved through enabling a PPP
               arrangement for port operation, where the project supported the selection of a concessionaire. Quality of
               services was planned to improve the information system, environmental management, and the preparation
               and implementation of the Masterplan (ICR p 12).

               The project revised the PDO by dropping the second objective (urban renewal) and its associated indicators
               as described in the Restructuring Paper 2017, para 16. This triggered a split rating mentioned at the end of
               Section 2e of this review. Hence, this assessment of Objective 1 reviews the achievement of the original
               Objective 1 and the revised Objective 1.

               Outputs:

                     The ICR reported that the construction of Zagreb Terminal infrastructure was completed up to 97%.
                        An IEG’s interview with the Bank task team confirmed that the construction was completed in May
                        2019. Achieved.
                       The construction of the Brajdica Container Terminal extension was completed. Achieved.
                       The ICR described that the quality of the supervision of works on the two terminals was satisfactory.
                        Achieved. However, it should be noted that the ICR’s assessment was based on the quality of
                        supervising engineers’ progress reports, while there was no objective measurement provided of the
                        actual works.
                       An environmental protection plan was developed. Achieved.
                       One concession agreement was negotiated compared with the target of two. The BCT is being
                        operated by the Adriatic Gate Container Terminal (AGCT), for which the contract was signed in 2011.
                        According to the task team, the ZCT terminal is in the process of selecting the concessionaire and it is
                        scheduled to be signed by 2020 Q1. Expected to be achieved.
                       The following technical studies were completed according to the IEG’s interview with the Bank task
                        team.
                       Environmental Impact Assessment for Reconstruction of railway stations at Rijeka and Rijeka Brajdica
                        related to the construction of new (Zagreb Pier) and extension of existing (Brajdica) container terminal.


                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RIJEKA Gateway II (new FY09) (P102365)




      Economic and justifiability study: Assessment of the efficiency of the port system for reception of ship-
       generated waste and cargo residues on the area of the Port of Rijeka Authority.
      Development of Options for Improving Rail Freight Services to the Rijeka Port Area.
      Technical Assistance in Implementation of EU Funds, including Cost-Benefit Analysis, Project Study
       and Preparation of other Application Documents.



Outcome:

1) Container Handling Capacity

      Rijeka port container capacity was increased from 150,000 TEU to 400,000 TEU against the target of
       750,000 TEU. The lower container capacity was due to incompletion of the Zagreb terminal
       construction. According to the Bank task team, the construction of the Zagreb terminal was completed
       in May 2019, thus the target was achieved. Achieved.
      Container terminal productivity was increased evidenced by an increase in the box move per crane
       per hour from 18 to 22. Achieved.
      Container traffic was increased from 145,000 TEU to 260,000 TEU against the target of 300,000 TEU.
       The ICR pointed out that it was highly likely to meet the target once the ZCT became operational (ICR
       p 21). According to the Bank task team, the selection of the concessionaire has been in progress and
       bids for the contract will be opened by the end of February 2020. Once the concessionaire is selected
       and a contract signed the port at Rijeka will be able "to meet the growing traffic demand" and therefore
       highly likely to achieve the target. Expected to achieve target.

2) Financial performance

      The PRA’s operating ratio (ratio of operating expenses to total operating revenue) was reduced from
       153% to 93.2% against the target of 120%. Exceeded.

      Subsidies for interest as a percentage of operating revenues were reduced from 46% to 0.3% against
       the target of 10%. Exceeded.
      The private sector invested US$117 million against the target of US$71 million. Exceeded.
      A portion of dry cargo port activities carried out by operators with private majority ownership was
       increased from 29% to 76% against the target of 65%. Achieved.

3) Quality of services

      Not measured in the Results Framework. Nevertheless, there were several improvements in the
       quality of intermodal connectivity. The PRA (together with a Railway Infrastructure Company) obtained
       the grant financing from the EU for the construction of two intermodal yards as a result of the project
       support on Environmental Impact Assessment for Reconstruction of railway stations Rijeka and Rijeka
       Brajdica related to construction of the new (Zagreb Container Pier) and extension of existing (Brajdica)
       container terminal. The grant covered loading/unloading of containers; reconstruction of the railway
       station Rijeka-Brajdica; the construction of a new track in the connecting tunnel, and project
       management.


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RIJEKA Gateway II (new FY09) (P102365)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To develop the capacity, financial performance, and quality of services in the port of Rijeka to meet growing
traffic demand, through public-private partnerships.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change: The TOC for Objective 1 Revision 1 was the same as for Objective 1. But PDO
indicators for the levels of ambition for port container capacity, volume of container traffic, port operating ratio,
private sector investment, and dry cargo handling by private operators were all raised as documented under
the original Objective 1

Outcomes:

The outcomes listed under the heading of Objective 1 above indicate substantial achievements towards the
revised targets for PDO indicators for Objective 1, Revision 1 at the time of final project closing. The efficacy
of achievements against the revised indicators is therefore rated by this review as substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To facilitate urban renewal by enabling the relocation of port activities.

Rationale
Theory of Change:

The second objective was to facilitate urban renewal by enabling the relocation of port activities. The ICR
noted that the idea behind this objective was to reconfigure the port, relocating some industrial operations
away from the port areas, improving port area accessibility to citizens, tourists, and business leading to a
viable urban development (ICR p 28).

There were an outcome indicator and two intermediate outcome indicators to measure the achievements of
this objective, but there was no activity and hence no achievements against these indicators.



Outputs:


                                                                                                       Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                RIJEKA Gateway II (new FY09) (P102365)




                                   The available area for urban redevelopment was unidentified against the target of 7ha. Not Achieved.
                                   The selection of a private developer to redevelop the DeltdPort of Baross area was not initiated. Not
                                    Achieved.

                            Outcome:

                                   No redevelopment of the urban area was achieved against the target of 7 ha. Not Achieved.



                            Because there were no activities under the project to support the objective, achievements of outputs and
                            outcomes were negligible.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            The objective was dropped as part of the third restructuring in May 2017.

                            Revised Rationale
                            The objective was dropped as part of the third restructuring in 2017. Accordingly, the PDO indicator and
                            intermediate outcome indicators were also eliminated and outputs and outcomes were negligible.



                            Revised Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The efficacy of the first objective “to develop the capacity, financial performance, and quality of services in the
                            port of Rijeka to meet growing traffic demand, through public-private partnerships” was substantial. This
                            conclusion was based on port container capacity building which was substantially improved. Enhanced
                            financial performance was also substantially achieved, but any change in the quality of port services was not
                            measured. The achievement of Objective 1 before restructuring was therefore assessed as substantial. After
                            restructuring the project’s achievements against the revised Objective 1 was also substantial because the
                            original and revised outcome indicators were achieved. The efficacy of the second objective “to facilitate
                            urban renewal by enabling the relocation of port activities” was negligible before restructuring due to the
                            absence of any achievements that approached the original second objective. Given the restructuring decision


                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RIJEKA Gateway II (new FY09) (P102365)



  in 2017 to drop the second objective, this review rates the overall efficacy of Objective 2 as negligible before
  and after restructuring.

  The challenge that the country faced was to increase the Rijeka port container capacity and efficiency to
  assure Croatia’s access to the sea which was a condition of the EU annexation. This was the project’s most
  important objective. Therefore, this review concludes that the overall efficacy of the project’s achievements is
  substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic and financial analysis: The project calculated the Economic and Financial Rate of Return both at
appraisal and in the ICR, both applying a 12% discount rate. For the economic analysis, the PAD estimated
EIRR at 15.9% and NPV at US$59 million, while the ICR's estimate was 13.0 % and US$13 million respectively.
Two reasons were provided in the ICR to explain the decrease in both EIRR and NPV: (i) slowdown of the global
economy due to the 2008 global financial market crisis, decreasing cargo traffic; (ii) the construction delay and
non-delivery of the ZCT, reducing the economic/financial benefits. For financial efficiency, the appraisal
estimated 12.9% of FIRR and US$4,198 million NPV, while the ICR estimated 11.2% and US$4,108 million.
This decrease was also attributed to the delay in the ZCT construction.

The task team explained to IEG that the IRR and NPV included future revenues to be generated from the ZCT,
which will be operational in 2020. The figures were generated by the financial model used in the PAD keeping all
the assumptions made at appraisal stage, except for updated container traffic and timing of ZCT construction.
The analysis was based on expectations since no hard evidence on projected container throughputs was
provided in the efficiency analysis. Using the same assumptions as at the appraisal stage was optimistic for the
derivation of the economic and financial benefits of the project.

Aspects of design and implementation: The ICR recognized that there were design/implementation
shortcomings in the project. First, the timeline of the project was too optimistic. The designed year of
commissioning the Zagreb terminal was four years, which was not sufficient given the time for construction
completion and selection of the concessionaires and their investments in superstructure and equipment (ICR,
page 72). As a result, the project’s closing date was extended by 4 years. Second, technical difficulties
hampered the project’s progress. According to the ICR, geotechnical uncertainties such as boulders and
compacted stones slowed the progress of construction at the Zagreb terminal. In the former Rijeka Gateway
project, similar technical problems (e.g., soil condition) were observed, though it would not be possible to
eliminate such uncertainties under the ground and water. There were a few other binding factors raised in the
ICR that affected the project’s efficiency, such as the financial health of the contractor, delays in completing
connector roads, and the failure of the first concessionaire selection for the operation of the ZCT.

This review rates the overall efficiency of this project as modest.




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RIJEKA Gateway II (new FY09) (P102365)



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   91.30
 Appraisal                                                15.90
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   91.30
 ICR Estimate                                             13.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Original objectives Relevance to the country context and the Bank’s strategy was high. Overall efficacy was
substantial given the sound results of the port capacity improvement against the negligible performance of the
urban renewal. Efficiency was modest due to the lower estimated economic and financial performance
compared to the estimate in the PAD, and inefficient implementation factors. Hence, the outcome of the original
objectives was moderately satisfactory.

Revised objective. The relevance of the objective was high. Efficacy was substantial given the expected
increase in the container throughputs. Efficiency remained modest. The outcome of the revised objective was
therefore moderately satisfactory.

Taking into account the ratings discussed above and weighing by the shares of disbursements before and after
the 2017 restructuring the project’s overall outcome is clearly moderately satisfactory. The standard table for
the derivation of a project’s overall outcome confirms the rating of moderately satisfactory.

                             Original                       Revised
1)   Relevance               High                           High
2)   Efficacy
     Objective 1             Substantial                    Substantial
     Objective 2             Negligible                     Negligible
     Overall Efficacy        Substantial                    Substantial
3)   Efficiency              Modest                         Modest
4)   Outcome Rating (value) Moderately Satisfactory (4)     Moderately Satisfactory (4)
5)   Amount Disbursed ($m) 70.27                            24.9
6)   Disbursement (%)        74%                            26%
7)   Weight Value (4 x 6)    2.96                           1.04
8)   Total Weight (sum of 7) 4.00
9)   Overall Outcome RatingModerately Satisfactory (4.0)

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RIJEKA Gateway II (new FY09) (P102365)




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical and Operational Risks: For the BCT, the PRA had a concession agreement with the
concessionaire, which required the concessionaire to maintain infrastructure (except one meter of quay wall),
superstructure, and equipment. There is a little technical and operational risk associated with operating the
BCT. For the ZCT, the construction has been completed and the selection of the concessionaire is
underway. The selection has been progressing given the fact that the current stage has already passed
Expression of Interest and requested submission of proposals (as of October 2019 according to the interview
with the Bank task team). The current estimate of the initiation of the ZCT operation is scheduled in 2020 Q1.

Another risk can be the connection of D403 connector roads and a rail link (government projects), both of
which have not been completed. A current estimate is that the D403 road is scheduled to call for the
proposal by the end of October 2019 and to be completed by 2022. For the rail link, the construction works
have been started and completion is expected by 2021 Q3. Until these transportation networks are
completed, the trucks from/to the port will use the existing road, which will disturb the traffic around the port
area, potentially affecting the deterioration of the port services and its operation.



Financial Risks: Financial risks are modest. The PRA has improved its fiscal position. A debt service
coverage ratio (DSCR) remained stable at 1.3; the operating ratio has significantly improved as stated in the
efficacy section; and the institution has managed operational expenses with their own revenue while
minimizing the government subsidies. Uncertainty remains in the on-going process of selecting the
concessionaire for the ZCT. The PRA needs to conclude the concession agreement with the successful
bidder within a reasonable range of the financing plans.



Institutional Risks: The institutional risks are low. The contractual agreement with the concessionaire is
clearly defined in the concession agreement, which will be replicated in the ongoing selection of the
concessionaire for ZCT.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RIJEKA Gateway II (new FY09) (P102365)



  The project was carefully designed. The project was informed by the achievements of the first Rijeka
  Project, and properly appraised from the technical and financial points of view. The risks of the
  construction were identified based on earlier experience. As indicated in the ICRR, the project design
  could have been improved by accommodating more time for the construction and assuring systematic
  linkages between the PDO, outcomes, outputs, and activities of the results framework including the
  activities contributing to the urban renewal outcome.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Bank’s supervision was moderately satisfactorily performed. The Bank conducted supervision missions,
 developing aide memoires. The Bank adjusted itself by adapting an implementation logic given the various
 stakeholder’s involvement. For example, when the Bank realized that the port communication system had
 already been procured by the customs, the Bank dropped the activity but ensured the working relationship
 between the PRA, contractors, and custom department (ICR p 15).

 A decision on dropping a part of the PDO on facilitating urban renewal was poorly executed. A restructuring
 paper (2017) mentioned that facilitating urban renewal by enabling the relocation of port activities was
 dropped because there were no activities financed with project resources. This could be attributed to the
 weak quality at entry, while there is no evidence in the ICR that the Bank attempted to nudge relevant
 institutions and authorities to better contribute to the urban renewal agenda.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 As stated in the quality at entry, the results framework could have been improved. In addition to the
 insufficient causal theory among PDO, outcome, and output, several issues involved in it. First, some
 outcome indicators showed the immediate result of the activities, which should have been regarded as the
 output. For example, an increase in Rijeka port container capacity should have been the output indicator
 because the indicator would have been immediately achieved once the construction of the container berths
 was completed. Second, there were some activities that were not measured in the results framework such
 as the preparation of the masterplan implementation. Third, there was an indicator that was not
 measurable. The quality of supervision works was not objectively defined and measured.


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RIJEKA Gateway II (new FY09) (P102365)




b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was moderately satisfactory. The team has monitored major indicators around port
  capacity and financial performance, which were well captured in the ISR and Restructuring papers. The
  revision of some indicators on container volume was made during restructuring taking account of the
  significant changes in the global trade market (ICR p 18).



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E was periodically utilized at several points. All the performances and indicators were documented in
  the aide memoires. The PRA adequately monitored the relevant indicators (ICR p 26).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental Category A and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies on
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Projects on
   International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). The Environment Impact Assessments (EIAs) incorporated a
   comprehensive environmental monitoring plan including sea-sediments, sea quality, noise, etc. With
   environmental monitoring and reporting, no significant environmental incompliance was
   reported. OP/BP7.50 was initially triggered, but the exception was applied due to the limited impact to the
   immediate basin of Rijeka.



   Although no social safeguards were triggered, the Bank monitored the land acquisition and resettlement
   triggered by the government’s project on D403 road civil works. As a result the 2017 restructuring
   introduced the following legal covenant (ICR p 27): “The Guarantor through its ministry in charge of
   transport shall ensure, or cause, to the satisfaction of the Bank the carrying out of such D403 Road civil
   works and any land acquisition and/or resettlement required therefore in a manner compliant with
   environmental and social impact mitigation processes and documentation (including the preparation of a
   Resettlement Policy Framework by not later than September 30, 2017), duly disclosed and consulted, all
   satisfactory to the Bank.” ICR noted that at the time of the project completion, the Resettlement Policy
   Framework was in preparation (ICR p 27) given the slow progress of the project.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RIJEKA Gateway II (new FY09) (P102365)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management

   Project financial management was satisfactory, as reported by the ICR. Quarterly Interim un-audited
   Financial Reports have been acceptable and financial audits of the project account and the PRA have also
   been acceptable during the project implementation (ICR p 27).



   Procurement

   Although not clearly stated in the ICR, procurement performance was satisfactory according to the latest
   ISR. Although the delay in procurement was observed, there were no issues against the Bank guidelines
   reported in the ICR. The project rating on procurement has been either moderately satisfactory or
   satisfactory throughout the project, confirming the acceptable standard of procurement compliance.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   NA



11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                                                                              The construction of the Zagreb
                                                                              terminal was completed shortly
                                                                              after the ICR was completed,
                                                                              contributing to the increase in
                                                                              the port capacity. Similarly, the
                                                                              concessionnaire of the Zagreb
                               Moderately
Outcome                                             Moderately Satisfactory   terminal is under selection and
                               Unsatisfactory
                                                                              an agreement is to be completed
                                                                              in early 2020, which is highly
                                                                              likely to increase the container
                                                                              throughputs. Thus, the first
                                                                              objective was expected to be
                                                                              substantially achieved.
                                                                              Quality at entry had
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                              shortcomings in developing the


                                                                                                Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       RIJEKA Gateway II (new FY09) (P102365)



                                                                                   results framework. There were
                                                                                   also shortcomings in
                                                                                   supervision.
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR listed eight lessons which were predominantly concerned with challenges and pitfalls
related to the timely implementation of large infrastructure projects such as geological conditions,
the weather, economic recessions, ensuring effective institutional collaboration, and identifying
aspects that are outside the control of entities responsible for the project. These lessons were
elaborated using the experience of this project’s implementation at Rijeka and they could be useful
for similar projects in the Bank and elsewhere, but they were without a doubt lessons that have been
learned many times already in a wide range of projects.

However, one of the lessons in the ICR referred to the cancelled urban renewal project. This was
more novel than the others but not elaborated. This review takes the opportunity to expand on the
lesson in the ICR.

An explicit theory of change or causal framework provides a clear basis for implementation

The project aimed to improve the capacity, financial performance, and quality of services in the port
of Rijeka but it was also intended to facilitate urban renewal in the area close to the port. The project
was explicitly designed to improve the capacity and financial performance through the construction
of the terminals as well as mobilizing private investments to attract container traffic and improve the
competitiveness of the port. However, the strong focus on these two issues in the project’s results
matrix diminished the attention to the remaining objectives - urban renewal and quality of services.
For example, the ICR noted (page 25) that the responsibility of addressing urban renewal was not
assigned to the Borrower, and there were no activities financed with project resources to this
objective. The lesson is that a results framework or theory of change needs to be designed in a way
that indicates the causal chain between project inputs through intermediate outcomes to the various
project objectives and identifies the institutions that make the causal chain effective and facilitate the
project’s implementation. Unless project objectives are clearly stated in a project’s theory of change
it is unlikely that they will attract the attention needed to be successfully achieved.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



                                                                                                      Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RIJEKA Gateway II (new FY09) (P102365)



While much of the ICR was succinct and to the point, the discussion of the project’s restructuring which
included numerous unnecessary references to the earlier Rijeka Gateway I project was tedious and unclear.
The relevance section was, however, well structured, but it could have been more compelling if the
criticality of the project around EU convergence had been described. The Theory of Change (TOC) had some
weaknesses because there were inadequate links to the assessment of efficacy. For example, the TOC clearly
demonstrated the causal links of the project to the quality of port services, but no basis was provided to assess
the enhanced quality of these services. Similarly, there were shortcomings in the results chain for facilitating
urban renewal at the port. The efficiency section was clear, candid, and reflective. Lessons were
comprehensive but they were somewhat too focused on the challenges of implementing large infrastructure
projects rather than, for example, the reasons why the PPP model (landlord model) contributed successfully to
the increase in productivity and financial performance of the Brajidica container terminal, and the reasons why
the urban renewal failed as part of this project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 16
