     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RESULTS-BASED HEALTH (P120435)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0021974

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P120435                                    RESULTS-BASED HEALTH

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Kyrgyz Republic                            Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-13310                                   30-Jun-2017                                           10,986,864.30

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Apr-2013                                31-May-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            11,000,000.00                                    11,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             11,000,000.00                                    10,986,864.30

 Actual                                         10,986,864.30                                    10,986,864.30




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Salim J. Habayeb             Joy Behrens                     IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Grant Agreement (p. 5), the project's objectives were "to pilot performance-based payments
   and enhanced supervision for quality of maternal and neonatal care in randomly selected rayon hospitals; and
   to strengthen the Recipient's and healthcare providers' capacity in performance-based contracting and
   monitoring and evaluating for results." The statements of the objectives were identical in the Project Appraisal
   Document and ICR.



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RESULTS-BASED HEALTH (P120435)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project contained two components:

   1. Pilot performance-based payments and enhanced supervision for quality of care (appraisal: US$9.6
   million; actual: US$9.57 million). This component was to finance a randomized controlled trial that aimed to
   assess two alternatives for improving the quality of secondary care at the rayon hospital level: (1) an
   enhanced supervision scheme using a balanced scorecard (BSC) to assess quality at the facility level,
   together with a performance-based payment made against facility performance on a quarterly basis; and (2)
   an enhanced supervision scheme using a BSC alone without performance-based payments. The project
   was to finance the performance-based payments and operating costs for the Mandatory Health Insurance
   Fund (MHIF) to manage contracts with health facilities. Data were to be collected from three groups -- 20
   rayon-level hospitals operating under each alternative, and 20 hospitals as a control group -- and analyzed
   by an independent impact evaluation. The component was also to finance a pay-for-performance pre-pilot at
   the primary health care (PHC) level, beginning in the second half of the project's implementation period, to
   leverage the lessons and experience of the hospital pilot, and to inform the design of a PHC pay-for-
   performance scheme in the future.

   2. Strengthen the government's and providers' capacity in performance-based payment reform and
   monitoring and evaluation (M&E) for results (appraisal: US$1.4 million; actual US$1.41 million). This
   component was to finance training and other technical assistance to the Ministry of Health (MOH), MHIF,
   and providers to develop their capacity in performance-based contracting and to conduct peer review and
   self-monitoring and evaluation for results. Support was to be specifically aimed at increasing effectiveness
   and efficiency in purchasing, regulation, and quality control of health care services, and in M&E. The
   component was also to support project coordination, management, and monitoring.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was to be financed by a US$11 million grant from the Multi-Donor Health Results Innovation
   Trust Fund managed by the Bank. The trust fund was also to make US$1 million available for an impact
   evaluation of the hospital pilot, not included in total project costs. Actual financing and total costs were
   US$10.98 million. No borrower contribution was expected or made.

   The project was approved on April 18, 2013; became effective on July 29, 2014; underwent a mid-term
   review in September 2016; and closed on May 31, 2019, almost two years later than its originally scheduled
   closing date of June 30, 2017. It was restructured twice:

         In June 2017, the closing date was extended to September 30, 2018, to account for initial delays in
          project effectiveness, align with the closing of the Second Health and Social Protection (SWAp2)
          Project on December 31, 2019, and allow more time for potential scaling up of primary care results-
          based financing (RBF) to more districts. At this restructuring, the results framework was modified to

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       RESULTS-BASED HEALTH (P120435)



                           adjust indicators, including extending the reporting timescale for monitoring reports and peer
                           verification records as well as adding some indicators to measure improvements in health care
                           quality that were expected as a result of performance-based financing.
                          In December 2018, the closing date was again extended, to May 31, 2019, to give more time to
                           prepare for takeover of RBF, allow for procurement of computers, allow a further round of RBF-
                           related indicators to be collected for SWAp2, and permit alignment with a new Program for Results
                           (P4R) operation (Primary Health Care Quality Improvement Program, US$37 million, 2019-2025).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Despite a series of innovative health reforms beginning in 1995, the Kyrgyz Republic at appraisal was
continuing to experience poor maternal and child health and was off track to meet its Millennium
Development Goals for maternal, child, and infant mortality. This subpar performance tended to be a
consequence of poor quality of care rather than access barriers. Although the country had introduced
capitation payments for PHC providers and diagnosis-related groups (DRGs) for hospitals under previous
reforms, providers were still not held directly responsible for results. This project's objectives, under the
umbrella of the ongoing health SWAp, were highly relevant as part of the effort to improve the quality of
maternal and child health services. The focus on rayon-level hospitals was appropriate, as this was where
most maternal deaths were occurring (ICR, p. 20).

The objectives were also highly relevant to government and Bank strategy. The government's "Unity, Trust,
Creation" program for 2018-2022, the first element of the country's overall Sustainable Development
Strategy to 2040, contained an explicit focus on improving health care quality. The Bank's 2011 Interim
Strategy Note for the Kyrgyz Republic contained three priorities, two of which -- improving governance and
effective public administration and reducing corruption; and increasing social stabilization through social
services, community infrastructure, and employment -- were supported by the project. The
objectives remained highly relevant to the Bank's Country Partnership Framework being developed at
closing (CPF, 2019-2022), which expressed concern that the country's MCH outcomes were lagging behind
those of neighboring countries in Central Asia and the Southern Caucasus due to low service quality. This
project was intended explicitly to lay the groundwork for a larger P4R project that is a key element of the
current CPF.

The ICR (p. 11) argued that the output-oriented nature of the objectives was a minor shortcoming.
However, given the nature of the project -- to pilot a new performance-based contracting mechanism, the
first of its kind in the region, that may or may not have produced hoped-for improvements in quality of care -
- an explicitly outcome-oriented objective may have been premature.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High




                                                                                                                 Page 3 of 12
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  RESULTS-BASED HEALTH (P120435)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Pilot performance-based payments and enhanced supervision for quality of maternal and neonatal care in
               randomly selected rayon hospitals

               Rationale
               Both of the project's objectives are explicitly output-oriented, pitched at an appropriate level for a project
               intended to pilot a new mechanism of provider incentive and reimbursement. The theory of change held that
               Bank financing for the pilot scheme, including piloting of the BSC and of results-based financing for
               performance-based payments, would facilitate its implementation. Over the longer term, the implementation
               of the pilot was to lead to informed decisions about adjustment and possible scale-up of the scheme, and
               ultimately improved quality of maternal and neonatal care.



               Outputs

               The performance-based contracting model was introduced to more than the planned number of maternity and
               neonatal care hospitals. Contracts were signed with 22 treatment group hospitals, exceeding the target of 20,
               and were updated annually based on modifications introduced to the BSC. A system of enhanced supervision
               was similarly introduced. A National Steering Committee, RBF Secretariat, and RBF Technical Team were
               established as conditions of project effectiveness. The National Steering Committee was meeting twice
               annually by project closure, meeting the target. The extended RBF team met four times in 2018, exceeding
               the target of three annual meetings.



               Outcomes

               All treatment hospitals received quarterly performance-based payments in accordance with their level of
               performance, as agreed in the performance-based contracts, meeting the target. 22 eligible rayon hospitals
               received the authorized performance-based payments within two weeks after the MHIF's receipt of the RBF
               payment into its bank account, achieving the target of 22. This outcome is clearly attributable to the project,
               as no other concurrent RBF program was in place for maternity services.

               42% of quarterly peer verification records for rayon hospitals were submitted to the MHIF within 30 working
               days after the end of each quarter, achieving the target of 42%. Ten hospitals completed counter-verification
               in the last round, exceeding the target of eight hospitals doing so every six months.

               Although observable health care quality outcomes were not a part of the project's theory of change, the ICR
               presented evidence that quality of care at the treatment hospitals improved as a result of participation in the
               pilot. The average quarterly quality (BSC) score of hospitals included in the treatment group (performance-
               based contracting plus BSC) increased from 9.3% in 2014 to 81.5% in 2018, exceeding the target of 75%.

                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 12
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RESULTS-BASED HEALTH (P120435)



These scores increased so rapidly after the beginning of project implementation (significant improvement was
noted after only six months) that the project, at the 2017 restructuring, added additional indicators to measure
further the actual quality improvement at the participating hospitals. The average BSC score for hospitals in
the treatment group changed: for red blood cell availability, from 19% in 2014 to 73% in 2018, essentially
meeting the target of 75%; for maternity departments, from 5% in 2014 to 72.5% in 2018, not quite meeting
the target of 85%; for pediatric/neonatal departments, from 21.3% in 2014 to 80% in 2018, meeting the target.
The ICR (p. 12) reported a summary of the impact evaluation's findings on quality gains, noting statistically
significant improvements along some dimensions and no change on others. In the latter case, the ICR
speculated, baseline scores were already high, and/or the sample size was too small or follow-up time too
short to have expected observable change.

The Borrower's ICR (p. 43) reported that the BSC scores for hospitals that adopted the BSC but not
performance-based payments also improved over the project's lifetime, from 8.6% in 2014 to 70.8% in
2018. Scores for the control group (no BSC, no performance-based payments) remained unchanged until
they were included in the project in 2017, at which point their average scores quickly rose from 12.3% (late
2016) to 66% (2018). The ICR did not discuss the positive impact of the BSC alone in the absence of the RBF
mechanism.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen the Recipient's and healthcare providers' capacity in performance-based contracting and
monitoring and evaluating for results

Rationale
The theory of change held that technical assistance and capacity development for MOH, MHIF, and
participating providers would strengthen their ability to implement performance-based contracting and M&E.



Outputs

The project provided technical assistance to strengthen the purchasing capacity of the MHIF in preparing,
negotiating, and managing performance-based contracts with providers, to enhance the regulatory and
stewardship role of the MOH, and to strengthen quality control of the MOH/MHIF with a focus on M&E
capacity building, conducting facility and user surveys, independent verification, and auditing
mechanisms. Managers and staff at 40 rayon hospitals were trained on the BCS, verification and counter-
verification mechanisms, monitoring arrangements, financial management, and procurement. Information
systems were strengthened at all participating rayon hospitals (including those in the control group).




                                                                                                  Page 5 of 12
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                RESULTS-BASED HEALTH (P120435)



                            Outcomes

                            Quality Committees were formed or enhanced at participating hospitals (in both the BSC + RBF group, and
                            the BSC-only group), meeting monthly to address clinical concerns (such as adverse events) and share best
                            practices (ICR, p. 12).

                            The impact evaluation baseline survey was completed before the start of the project, and the impact
                            evaluation was conducted as planned. MOH and MHIF produced quarterly monitoring reports within three
                            weeks after the end of each quarter, meeting the target. MOH and MHIF have committed to continuing and
                            extending the BSC and RBF, adopting these tools into their standard systems nation-wide.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project successfully and fully implemented the pilot, as planned, collecting sufficient data and performing
                            adequate analysis to inform a decision on scale-up. Targets for implementation of the pilot and development
                            of capacity to do so were met.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The PAD (p. 12) stated that the nature of the project -- pilot testing alternative schemes for improving quality,
   and evaluating the effectiveness of different approaches -- made it difficult to estimate a cost-benefit ratio or
   economic rate of return. Similarly, the project was expected to have minimal fiscal impact, as it was financed
   entirely by the Bank. The ICR's analysis (Annex 4) also noted that it was not possible to quantify all benefits
   potentially generated by the RBF, and therefore it focused on the health gains from better primary care for
   pregnant women. It found a benefit-cost ratio of 2.83 over a 15-year period (2019-2033), using a discount rate of
   4.5%; an internal rate of return (IRR) of 29%; and a net present value (NPV) of US$40.64 million. A sensitivity
   analysis found the lower-bound benefit-cost ratio to be still favorable, at 2.44, with an IRR of 23% and NPV of
   US$31.97 million.

   The ICR (p. 15) reported that there were no accounts of deviation from project design or wastefulness during
   implementation. There was a fifteen-month delay between project approval and effectiveness due to lengthy
   parliamentary ratification procedures and Bank fiduciary and procurement reviews, but on balance, this is
   considered a minor shortcoming. The ICR (p. 19) also noted minor shortcomings in procurement at the hospital

                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RESULTS-BASED HEALTH (P120435)



level involving delayed payments to suppliers and failure to take advantages of opportunities for savings through
group procurement.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     89.00
 ICR Estimate                                              29.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated High, as the project's objectives were highly responsive to country context and to Bank and
government strategy. Their output orientation was appropriate to their level of risk, the project's relatively short
time frame, and its function as a pilot. One of the objectives was substantially achieved, and the other was
highly achieved. The project successfully and fully implemented the pilot, as planned, collecting sufficient data
and performing adequate analysis to inform decisions on scale-up. Targets for implementation of the pilot and
development of capacity to do so were fully met. Efficiency is rated substantial, based on favorable findings from
the economic analysis and evidence of only minor shortcomings in implementation efficiency. These ratings are
representative of only minor shortcomings overall, producing an Outcome rating of Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The MOH and MHIF are committed to institutionalizing the project's approach across the sector. The ICR (p.
14) reported that that the BCS and RBF innovations are spreading to other hospital departments in
participating hospitals and to non-participating hospitals, and into primary care (with an RBF pilot having
been extended to the primary care level during the last 18 months of the project). There is now strong
interest in systemic change that would extend RBF to primary care, recognized by SWAp2. The MOH and
MHIF decided in May 2018 to dedicate 5% of the health budget to RBF across all health care facilities
(except those at the tertiary level), based on the project's findings, and have requested technical assistance


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RESULTS-BASED HEALTH (P120435)



to develop a health care quality index for all types of facilities (ICR, p. 17). The project's focus on quality was
reported to have sparked enhanced interest in quality of care in nursing and medical training (ICR, p. 14).

There are, however, technical risks associated with MHIF's capacity to manage continued implementation of
BSC and RBF. Specifically, some key MHIF staff reported that there is insufficient familiarity with clinical
work to implement the BSC and verification. In response, trainings are already in place, and the BSC is being
simplified, reportedly without compromising robustness (ICR, p. 22).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  While the project may have been ambitious and high-risk, given its context in a post-Soviet system "not
  primed for performance-based incentives" (ICR, p. 16), it was well positioned with effective input- and
  activity-based payments systems already in place. A pre-pilot had been completed in one oblast (region).
  The project drew key lessons from previous projects in the Kyrgyz health sector, as well as RBF health
  operations in other countries adapted well to the Kyrgyz context (PAD, pp. 8-9): the need to account for
  unpredictable government budgets (accounted for here by planning for the project to finance the full cost
  of the pilot); and the need to ensure adequate MOH capacity to oversee and steer the sector (accounted
  for here by incorporating capacity strengthening into the project). The design of the RBF smartly allowed
  hospitals significant freedom in how they could use RBF payments. Rather than disrupting the existing
  payment system (based on DRGs), it added a performance element to it (ICR, p. 20). Risk assessment
  was thorough (PAD, Annex 4), gauging only country risk as high and overall implementation risk as
  substantial (due mostly to the high level of country risk). Mitigation measures included ring-fencing the
  project, including strict procurement and financial management practices, and continuing to support the
  government's ongoing recovery and stabilization programs.

  Preparation featured consultation and dialogue with a wide range of stakeholders, including development
  partners (with whom cooperation was already strong through two SWAps), professional associations, and
  village health committees. A web-based data visualization tool on project progress helped build project
  visibility. However, the ICR (p. 17) noted that there were no mechanisms to directly involve patients,
  parliamentarians, media, or the public in project preparation. Additionally, the ICR (p. 21) noted that the
  Working Group during preparation may have been too large, making MHIF feel like "one of many invited
  experts" rather than the future principal owner and implementer of the RBF and BSC.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team maintained focus on results throughout implementation, as evidenced in its responsiveness
 to M&E findings (see Section 9c). The same task team leader was in place throughout the project's
 timeline. Supervision missions provided useful advice and support, and monitoring documents were

                                                                                                         Page 8 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RESULTS-BASED HEALTH (P120435)



 complete and candid. The project was restructured to take into account early evidence of success,
 adopting the BSC at control group hospitals when its benefits became clear, and to incorporate more
 outcome-oriented indicators, perhaps later than was appropriate (ICR, p. 21). There was some concern
 about the adequacy of transition arrangements, with some MHIF staff reporting under-preparedness to take
 over management of the RBF and BSC (ICR, p. 22).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Given the project's explicit purpose as a pilot, its M&E plan was intensive and multi-layered, including
 routine measurements of implementation of the performance-based payments and BSC, as incorporated
 into the project monitoring framework, and regular measurement of hospital performance through the BSC.
 Routine project-level data collection was to be the joint responsibility of the MOH and MHIF. The BSC
 included two aspects: structural elements important for institutional functioning, and clinical processes. The
 BSCs were to be implemented through a quarterly peer evaluation process that would trigger the
 performance-based payments, as well as a biannual counter-verification mechanism based on multi-stage
 random sampling of a subset of rayon hospitals. A planned impact evaluation (PAD, Annex 6) was to
 assess improvements in the quality of care at rayon hospitals under the entire RBF package and with the
 BSCs alone, as well as the cost-effectiveness of the RBF package. Its qualitative elements were designed
 to gain insight into the effectiveness of RBF specifically in the Kyrgyz setting.

 Key outcome indicators were well defined and were accurate and comprehensive measures of
 achievement of the objectives. Indicators, baselines, and targets were clearly articulated and specified. The
 PAD's results framework (pp. 18-20) logically connected planned outputs to anticipated outcomes.



b. M&E Implementation
  All elements of the M&E framework were implemented as designed. Interim findings from the impact
  evaluation were widely disseminated.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were regularly used to inform mid-course corrections. For example, as implementation
  proceeded and the main constraint on quality of care evolved from availability of equipment to providers'
  knowledge, the BSC was adjusted accordingly, adding new elements on clinical skills and clinical
  management competence. When the success of the BSC approach became evident, it was quickly

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RESULTS-BASED HEALTH (P120435)



  adopted at rayon hospitals in the control group. M&E findings and utilization contributed to the
  institutionalization of BSC and RBF, in both primary care and secondary care (ICR, p. 22).



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project did not trigger the environmental safeguard, as it did not finance large rehabilitations or new
   construction, and was rated Environmental Assessment category C. No other safeguard policies were
   triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management (FM) was rated Moderately Satisfactory in Implementation Status and Results
   Reports throughout the project. Oversight of the project's FM was the responsibility of the MOH. Transfer
   of RBF funds used pre-existing channels between the Ministry of Finance and hospitals, upon approval of
   the MHIF based on verification of performance. Hospitals were subject to regular FM audits, which were
   reportedly always thorough and timely. Interim Financial Monitoring Reports were of acceptable quality.
   According to the ICR (p. 20), the final independent audit report of August 2019 found reasonable
   assurance that the project's financial statements were clean.

   Procurement encountered no major shortcomings by the central authorities or hospitals. Some minor
   weaknesses were noted at the hospital level, mostly related to delays in paying some suppliers. Capacity
   building measures were implemented to strengthen accounting and internal control functions, though high
   staff turnover remains a challenge (ICR, p. 19).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RESULTS-BASED HEALTH (P120435)



Outcome                        Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 High                 High

Quality of ICR                 ---                  High


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 22-24) contained several insightful lessons, some of which are highlighted here:

Reforms to incentivize improved performance at the facility level, typically seen in higher-
income settings, can work in lower- and middle-income health systems when the necessary
groundwork is laid. In this case, the country had a set of prerequisites -- an experienced single
payer, a culture of strong monitoring and evaluation, and strong support from key champions of
reform -- that facilitated piloting and scaleup of new processes.

Potentially controversial reforms may work best when they complement rather than disrupt
existing institutional and financial frameworks. In this case, the performance-based payments
were layered on top of broader, previously-implemented reforms of provider reimbursement
mechanisms, facilitating clear assessment of their impact and increasing the likelihood of support
among stakeholders.

Thinking early in a project cycle about provisions for mainstreaming a pilot can increase the
probability of sustaining outcomes. In this case, the project could have incorporated more
deliberate and focused transition support.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  This and related projects in the Kyrgyz health sector have been disproportionately successful when compared
  with some other projects in the country, and other health reform projects in the region. Although there are
  ample data specifically on this project's implementation and results, a more intensive study of the factors
  underlying strong performance could produce valuable lessons about what works, in what contexts, and why.
  The ICR itself (p. 23) recommended a longer-term, formal evaluation of the project's sustained development
  impact, which could be usefully paired with assessment of the complementary health SWAp.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                 Page 11 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RESULTS-BASED HEALTH (P120435)



The ICR provided an unusually clear, candid, and straightforward account of the project's activities and
outcomes. It was concise and consistent, both internally and with guidelines. Its narratives and findings
supported its conclusions. It explicitly addressed issues of data quality and attribution. It supplemented data
from the project's results framework with quantitative and qualitative data from the impact evaluation. The
lessons were highly insightful, with attention to sustainability of the project's development impact and its utility
for other results-based projects globally.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                        Page 12 of 12
