     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Dioxins Reduc. from Pulp and Paper (P125528)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022009

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P125528                                  CN-Dioxins Reduc. from Pulp and Paper

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                    Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-11898                                 30-Jun-2017                                         14,823,651.59

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Mar-2012                              30-Jun-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           15,000,000.00                                  15,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            15,000,000.00                                  14,823,651.59

 Actual                                        14,855,211.65                                  14,823,651.59




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                John R. Eriksson            Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) Grant
   Agreement (Schedule 1, page 6) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 3) were:

   (a) to demonstrate the result of the Best Available Techniques/ Best Environmental Practices
   (BAT/BEPs) adoption in four selected non-wood pulp mills: and



                                                                                                Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Dioxins Reduc. from Pulp and Paper (P125528)



   (b) to support China in developing and adopting a long-term action plan to guide the promotion of a
   sector-wide BAT/BEPs adoption.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   There were four components (PAD, pages 4 -5).

   1. BAT and BEP Investment in participating mills. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$73.6 million.
   The actual cost was US$67.6 million. This component aimed at supporting adoption of BAT/BEP in four
   selected non-wood pulp mills (in Guangxi, Hunan, Ningxia and Sichuan provinces), by replacing the existing
   elemental chlorine-based bleaching process with the elemental chlorine-free process, for
   minimizing releases of dioxins and furans (discussed in section three). Activities in this component, included
   construction of production processes and facilities and technical assistance to the participating mills. A
   performance-based financing scheme was to be used to incentivize the mills to carry out BAT/BEP
   investments, complete trial operations and operate the new facility for one-year.

   2. National Action Plan for sector- wide replication. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$2.5 million.
   The actual cost was 5.2 million. This component aimed at creating an enabling environment for replicating
   the BAT/BEP techniques and implementing an action plan for promoting BAT/BEPs, for both wood and non-
   wood-based production in pulp and paper mills.

   3. Monitoring and Evaluation. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.2 million. The actual cost was
   US$1.3 million. This component aimed at independent verification of the sample results at the mills.

   4. Project Management. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$3.6 million. The actual cost was US$2.3
   million. This component aimed at providing technical assistance to the Foreign Environmental Cooperation
   Center of the Ministry of Ecology and Environment and the four Environmental Protection Bureaus
   in provinces.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$81.0 million. The actual cost was US$76.5 million.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CN-Dioxins Reduc. from Pulp and Paper (P125528)



Project financing. The project was financed by an GEF Trust Fund of US$15.0 million. The amount
disbursed was US$14.8 million. There was parallel financing of US$0.50 million from the Swedish
International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA). Of this,US$0.30 million was disbursed.

Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution was estimated at US$65.5 million at appraisal (This
included US$3.5 million from the Ministry of Ecology and Environment (MEE) protection authorities in the
participating provinces and US$62.0 million from the participating enterprises). Their actual contribution at
closure was US$61.7 million (including US$3.7 million from MEE and US$57.7 million from the participating
enterprises).

Dates. The project was approved on March 29, 2012, became effective on June 19, 2012 and was
scheduled to close on June 30, 2017. The project closed two years later on June 30, 2019.

Other changes. There were four Level 2 restructurings.

These changes were made with the first restructuring on November 14, 2014: Two of the originally
selected mills, the Ningxia Zhongye Meili straw-based mill and the Hunan Yueyang reed-based
mill, withdrew from the project for reasons associated with market conditions. These mills were replaced by
two other mills, the Henan Baiyun straw-based mill and the Hunan Linyuan reed-based mill. Intermediate
indicators were revised to set baselines and targets for these mills.

A third participating mill, the Guangxi Pumiao bagasse-based mill withdrew late in the project, after it
had completed the BAT/BEP investments for strategic business reasons (the additional cost of air pollution
control faced by the mill led the Pumiao's parent company to close the mill). The ICR (paragraph 27) notes
that it was decided not to seek replacement with an equivalent mill as this would lead to implementation
delays. These changes were made with the second restructuring on June 2016, in the wake of the Guangxi
Pumiao mills decision to pull out of the project:

      Component costs were adjusted to reflect the drop in co-financing.
      Some activities were added, such as additional technical assistance to support BAT/BEP investment
       planning, and expanding support to bioassay monitoring from four to eight laboratories.
      Some targets for intermediate indicators were scaled down in the face of changing circumstances
       following the consolidation of the industry, with many small pulp and paper mills closing down in the
       years since approval.
      The closing date was extended by a year in view of the implementation delays.

The third restructuring on June 2018, extended the closing date by three months to September 30,
2018, with the expectation that a full restructuring and longer extension would be prepared and approved
subsequently.

The main changes made with the fourth restructuring on September 18.

      The original design envisioned that the government would provide technical assistance to the
       enterprises. As this implementation modality was not attractive to the enterprises, a sub-project
       activity was added for providing technical assistance to the enterprises, through funding
       reallocated between categories.
      The target for the intermediate indicator associated with the number of selected mills developing
       BAT/BEP plans was decreased from four to two in view of the funding constraints: and

                                                                                                Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Dioxins Reduc. from Pulp and Paper (P125528)



         The project closing date was extended by nine months to June 30, 2019 for completing activities
          associated with issuance of the National Action Plan.

   Split rating. As discussed above, although the activities were implemented only in three mills, this was due
   to the late withdrawal of a mill from the project, after it had substantially completed the BAT/BEP
   investments. Given that the project activities were consistent with the original PDOs which were
   unchanged, (and there was no augmentation of resources), there is no split rating of objectives in this ICR.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. The rapid economic development under a resource-intensive growth model before
appraisal, had led to significant environmental pollution and ecological degradation. Committed to reversing
this trend, the Government made environmental protection a national priority and
internationally China ratified many conventions, including the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic
Pollutants (POPs), for which China had implemented a National Implementation Program (NIP). This
program provided a blue print for reducing POPs by 2025. The Stockholm Convention listed twenty-
eight chemical substances as POPs and this included unintentionally produced POPs, such as dioxins and
furans. The NIP identified the pulp and paper industries as a priority sector for reducing POPs because: (i)
The sector was a major source of water pollution in 2006, accounting for 15% of industrial wastewater and
33% of national industrial oxygen demand discharge: (ii) The sector had high energy consumption: and (iii)
The sector was expected to have high growth rates in the next decade. Further, the importance of non-
wood (commonly, straw, reed, bamboo and bagasse) in the pulp industry was particularly important, given
that China relied more heavily than most other countries on non-wood to produce pulp.

Government strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with the government strategy. The 12th Five Year
Plan (FYP) for 2011 -2015, articulated the need for "intensifying environmental protection'
and "controlling discharge of pollutants". Before appraisal in 2008, the Government issued wastewater
discharge standards for paper and pulp industries. requiring all new mills established after August 1, 2008
to meet stricter discharge standards, including a water consumption standard, and for the first time, an
effluent standard on dioxins. The new standards required all existing mills to meet the required discharge
standards from July 1, 2011. The 13th FYP for 2016-2020 highlighted the need for controlling emissions
from key industrial pollution sectors and controlling emissions from papermaking

Bank strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with the Bank strategy. The third pillar of the Bank's Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2013-2016 explicitly highlighted the need for "promoting greener
growth" through among other things, "demonstrating pollution control measures". (CPS, page i). The
second engagement area of the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2020-2025 reiterated the
need for "promoting greener growth" through "facilitating the transition to a lower carbon energy plan" (CPF,
page i).

GEF strategy. At appraisal, the PDOs were fully aligned with the GEF-5 chemicals strategy. The PDOs
continue to be aligned with the GEF -7 Programming Decisions strategy for 2018-2022 for Chemicals and



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CN-Dioxins Reduc. from Pulp and Paper (P125528)



               Waste Program on Industrial chemicals. This decision highlighted the need for introducing and
               using BAT/BEPs for minimizing and ultimately eliminating releases of unintentionally produced POPs.

               This project in China was the first GEF co-financed project worldwide aimed at promoting BAT/BEP for non-
               wood-based paper pulp production. The Bank had however executed similar projects in China, including the
               program associated with phasing out ozone depleting substances. The PDOs of demonstrating the results
               of BAT/BEPs in four non-wood mills (although one mill was dropped during implementation) and then
               disseminating the results to other non-wood mills, were realistic, The Bank replicated the implementation
               modality of the prior program of using Performance Based Financing to the mills, as the modality was
               proven to be successful. Although the demonstration activities specifically targeted non-wood pulp mills
               given its importance for China, the project's long-term action plan objective included reducing pollutants
               both in wood and non-wood pulp production. The relevance of the PDOs to the government, Bank and GEF
               strategies is high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             To demonstrate the result of the BAT/BEPs adoption in four selected non-wood pulp mills

                             Rationale


                             Theory of Change. Adopting BAT/BEP in selected non-wood mills that employed the most commonly used
                             non-wood fiber material in China (straw, reed, bamboo and bagasse) using the performance-based financing
                             modality, was aimed at demonstrating that the technology for reducing UPOPs, would be economically
                             viable, improve quality and meet the environmental requirements. This involved technical assistance to the
                             mills for adopting the new technology and monitoring performance through independent
                             verification. Dissemination of the results was likely to increase adoption of new technology by other non-
                             wood-based pulp mills. The causal links between the project activities, their outputs and outcomes were
                             logical, and the intended outcomes were measurable.

                                        As a result of the government initiatives before appraisal, many large wood pulp mills had adopted
                                         BAT/BEPs based on elemental chlorine-free technologies. However, few large existing non-wood
                                         mills did so due to the: (i) the high-investment cost and yet-to-be demonstrated benefits: and
                                         (ii) limited local capacity in the provinces for monitoring and enforcement. BAT/BEP investments were
                                         completed in the three non-wood demonstration mills, which exemplified the pulp-making process for
                                         three main types of non-wood fibers (bamboo, reed and straw), as compared to the target of four. (As

                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Dioxins Reduc. from Pulp and Paper (P125528)



       indicated in section 2e, the fourth mill, withdrew from the project and was not replaced). The BAT/BEP
       renovations in the three mills consisted of process improvements tailored to the specific conditions
       and requirements of each mill. The concentration of dioxins at various sampling points at the three
       mills was assessed independently through an accredited laboratory, as targeted.
      The demonstration results were summarized in the "BAT/BEP Design Technical Manual for Non-wood
       Pulp" that was published as a book and disseminated within the industry and used for training mill
       operators and serving as a guide for designing pulp mills in future.
      With the funds from the withdrawal of the Pumiao mill, BAT/BEP investment plans were developed in
       three bagasse-based mills in Guangxi province. This was short of the original target of four but
       exceeded the revised target of two mills.

Outcomes.

      Bioassay monitoring was undertaken in the three mills in 2017, 2018 and 2019, as targeted, to monitor
         the quality of water and water sewerage and assess the environmental impact of new technologies.
         The results showed low levels of dioxins generated from the bleaching process.
        The Chemical Oxygen Compound (COD) discharge per unit of non-wood pulp production from the
         three mills were as follows. The COD discharge at Sichuan Jinfu declined from 10.2 kilograms (Kg)
         COD at the baseline in March 2012, to 1.94 Kg by June 2019. This exceeded the target of 4.83. kg.
         The COD discharge at Huan Linyuan and Henan Baiyun declined from 5.28 and 4.73 kg in June 2016,
         to 1.42 and 1.67 kg by June 2019. This exceeded the target of 4.65 and 3.33 kg respectively (The
         baseline and revised targets for Henan Linyuan and Henan Baiyun were set during the first
         restructuring in November 2014).
        The Ammoniacal Nitrogen discharge per unit of non-wood production in Sichuan Jinfu declined from
         0.72 kg at the baseline in March 2012, to 0.07 kg by June 2019. This exceeded the target of 0.43 kg.
         The Ammoniacal Nitrogen discharge at Hunan Linyuan and Henan Baiyun and Henan Baiyun
         declined from 0.45 kg and 0.21 in June 2016, to 0.10 and 0.12 kg by June 2019. This exceeded
         the target 0.41 kg and 0.15 kg respectively.
        The water consumption per unit of non-wood pulp production in Sichuan Jinfu declined from 72 tons in
         March 2012 to 25.3 tons by June 2019. This exceeded the target of 53.6 tons. The water consumption
         in Hunan Linyuan and Henan Baiyun declined from 52.2 tons and 49.2 tons in June 2016 to 42,3 and
         45 tons by June 2019. This exceeded the target of 52.2 tons and 49.2 tons respectively.
        The toxic equivalent (TEQ) from the releases of Unintentionally Produced Persistent Organic
         Pollutants (UPOPs) releases, following the adoption of BAT/BEP technology in the three non-wood
         fiber mills, reduced from 0.078 TEQ to 0.001 in Sichuan Jinfu by August 2017, exceeding the target of
         0.023 TEQ.
        The TEQ from the releases of UPOPs in Hunan Linyuan reduced from 0.113 TEQ to 0.002 TEQ in
         August 2017, exceeding the target of 0.034 TEQ.
        The TEQ in Henan Baiyun reduced from 0.067 TEG to 0.015 in August 2017, exceeding the target of
         0.020.



Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Dioxins Reduc. from Pulp and Paper (P125528)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

To support China in developing and adopting a long-term action plan to guide the promotion of a sector-wide
BAT/BEP adoption.

Rationale


Theory of Change. Demonstration of the results of the BAT/BEP for non-wood based pulp mills, developing
a National Action Plan and guidelines for reducing pollutants in both the non-wood and wood-based pulp
production, assistance for setting bioassay laboratories and technical assistance to the mills, were likely to aid
in developing and adopting a long-term action plan for promoting a sector wide BAT/BEP in the pulp and
paper industry. These outcomes were likely to contribute to the long-term outcome of reducing releases of
dioxins to the environment.

Outputs (ICR, pages 19-21 and 43-46).

      The Ministry of Ecology and Environment developed the sector wide BAT/BEP “Guideline for Available
         Techniques of Pollution Prevention and Control for the Pulp and Paper Industry" in January 2018 and
         the "Action Plan for Prevention and Control of Water Pollution" issued by the State Council in 2015, as
         targeted. The Action Plan identified the pulp and paper sector as one of the ten key industrial sectors
         targeted for technological upgrade.
        The UPOP's monitoring guidelines for the pulp and paper sector were developed as targeted.
        Three national workshops were held for disseminating knowledge on BATBEPs to mills as targeted.
         One workshop was held for national training on BAT/BEP for the design institutes.
        Five training courses were conducted for the provincial and municipal Environmental Protection
         Bureaus. This exceeded both the original and revised targets of three and four respectively.
        Eight laboratories were established for bioassay-based environmental screening and monitoring
         provincial departments as targeted. The ICR (paragraph 59) notes that this is a cost-effective
         alternative to costly analytical techniques for screening of dioxins and that the project contributed to
         the development of a standard which could codify, recognize and allow the use of that method.
        Public awareness campaigns were conducted to disseminate knowledge about POPs and the
         formation of dioxins in the pulp and paper industry by television, Internet, newspapers and on-site
         promotion with students and residents in communities as targeted.

Outcomes.

      The Chinese Paper Association (CPA) issued the long term "National Action Plan for Dioxins
         Reduction in the Pulp and Paper Industry", on November 23, 2018, as targeted. This plan mandated
         that both the wood and non-wood-based pulp and paper sector be fully free of elemental chlorine
         bleaching by 2025. This plan provided the framework for transformation of the industry during the
         project lifetime.



Rating

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CN-Dioxins Reduc. from Pulp and Paper (P125528)



                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                            Given that the outcomes were largely realized, overall efficacy is substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency


   Economic analysis. The cost effectiveness method was used for the economic analysis of this project, in view
   of the difficulty associated with quantifying the potential environmental and health benefits. The PAD (paragraph
   30) states that there were two technical options accepted worldwide for the wood pulp production: (i) Elemental
   Chlorine Free Bleaching (ECF); and Total Chlorine free (TCF). The ECF option was considered as the least-cost
   approach for non-wood fiber materials for the following reasons: (i) the ECF process
   demonstrated complementarities with the existing assets of the project mills, while the TCF would have required
   much higher investments: (ii) ECF would lead to higher yield and quality: and last but not the least, (iii) there was
   no available data on the TCF option for non-wood pulp production. This was an important consideration in view
   of China's heavy reliance on non-wood to produce pulp.

   Incremental cost reasoning. The GEF Project Identification Form articulated the incremental reasoning
   underlying the request for GEF support. This form outlined the baseline/business-as-usual scenario and value
   added of GEF interventions. Under the business-as usual scenario, China was expected to close small mills and
   mandate improved water treatment for the larger ones. Under this scenario, BAT/BEP for dioxins reduction in
   the non-wood sector would be largely ignored, due to the technology and financial barriers and inadequate
   enforcement. On the other hand, under the GEF alternative, the project was expected to help China to
   effectively restructure its pulp and paper sector, improve the sector's economic and environmental performance
   and minimize unintentionally produced POPs in the pulp and paper industry.

   Leveraging private sector funding. The GEF funding for this project at US$14.8 million. This represented less
   than a fifth (19%) of the actual cost of US$76.5 million. The remainder of the project cost came through co-
   financing from the participating mills. This implies that the GEF financing leveraged private sector financing,
   representing 81% of the actual project cost.




                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Dioxins Reduc. from Pulp and Paper (P125528)



Administrative and Operational issues. There were delays due to abrupt changes in market conditions
(discussed in section 9a), which led to the withdrawal of three of the four originally selected mills (although two
more mills joined later). These delays contributed to project closing two years behind schedule.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDOs to the government, the Bank and the GEF strategies is High. Since the outcomes
were realized, efficacy of the two objectives - to demonstrate the result of the Best Available Techniques/ Best
Environmental Practices (BAT/BEPs) adoption in the selected non-wood pulp mills and supporting China in
developing and adopting a long-term action plan to guide the promotion of a sector-wide BAT/BEP adoption - is
substantial. Efficiency is substantial, despite the minor administrative and operational shortcomings. Overall
outcome is satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical risk. For the demonstration mills that had completed BAT/BEP investments with project support,
there is no risk that they would return to elemental chlorine-based bleaching, as it would not be cost-effective
for them to do so (ICR, paragraph 86).

Environmental risk. Given that, while many but not all non-wood pulp and paper mills have adopted
BAT/BEP, continued monitoring and enforcement are required to ensure that the sector is fully under
Elemental Chlorine Free Bleaching by 2025, as expected by the National Action Plan. Furthermore,



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Dioxins Reduc. from Pulp and Paper (P125528)



continuous support and funding is required for the laboratories that have introduced the bioassay technique
for environmental monitoring of dioxins.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  The project was prepared based on the experience from related projects in China and elsewhere. The
  lessons incorporated at design included: (i) an integrated environmental management approach to
  mainstream POPs reduction with broader environmental concerns: (ii) Using the Performance-Based
  Financing (PBF) modality: and (iii) using the "demonstrate and disseminate" approach for adopting new
  technologies (PAD, paragraphs 19 - 21). The project preparation benefitted from analytical work
  supported by the Canada POPs Trust Fund. The project was prepared by a team which included staff
  with technical skills and safeguards expertise. The project was implemented by the Ministry of
  Environmental Protection (MEP). This arrangement was appropriate, given that MEP was the designated
  national agency for POP activities and for implementing the POPs convention (PAD, paragraph 22).
  Several risks were identified at appraisal, including substantial risks associated with design, given that
  the activities involved introducing new technologies under a Performance-based Financing (PBF)
  scheme. Mitigation measures incorporated at design, included reviewing the mills feasibility studies to
  ensure that the proposed technologies are in line with the BAT/BEP guidelines of the Stockholm
  convention and a PBF agreement signed by the mills (PAD, paragraph 29). The arrangements made at
  appraisal for M&E design and safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in
  section 9 and 10).

  The design underestimated risks associated with stakeholder risk relating to the mills' participation.
  Abrupt changes in market conditions, with a strong decline in yearly production, due in part to the import
  of cheaper wood pulp reduced the market share of bleached non-wood pulp. This directly affected the
  mills' capacity to engage in the project, given that they had to make significant investments. This
  contributed to the withdrawal from the project of three of the four originally selected mills (although two
  more mills joined later).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


 Supervision missions were held twice a year, with 14 missions during the lifetime of the project (ICR, page
 29). The continuity of leadership was maintained, with two Task Team Leaders (TTLs) for most of the
 project implementation period and the second TTL having been co TTL since project initiation. The Bank

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Dioxins Reduc. from Pulp and Paper (P125528)



 also provided day-to-day support during implementation through maintaining a field-based co-TTL during
 implementation. The supervision team worked with the government to select and appraise new mills for
 replacing the mills that withdrawn from the project. and with the support of management restructured the
 project to accommodate the new mills. The Bank was candid with its assessment of progress, by
 downgrading ratings for implementation progress rapidly following the withdrawal of mills and upgrading
 them when implementation improved. The support provided by the team aided in fiduciary and safeguards
 compliance (discussed in section 10a).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 The two key outcome indicators - reduction of unintentional POPs releases in the non-wood fiber mills
 supported by the project and adoption of a long-term action plan for the paper and pulp sector's unintended
 POPs - were appropriate for monitoring project performance. The M&E was envisioned at three levels: (i)
 M&E on dioxins reduction: (ii) M&E on overall environmental performance of the project mills: and (iii)
 project implementation M&E. The M&E design included the following: (i) Monitoring of dioxin
 reductions before and after project investments by a qualified independent laboratory: (ii) verification of the
 overall environmental performance of the mills by an Independent Verification Agency: and (iii) The M&E
 design envisioned collecting data on dioxin releases of non-project financed mills from the four
 Environmental Protection Bureaus.



b. M&E Implementation


  The targets for the dioxins reduction indicator for the demonstration mills were specified during
  implementation because the reference baselines were not available at appraisal. Following the
  replacement of two mills (discussed in section 2e), targets were specified for these mills during
  implementation. The ICR (paragraph 64) notes that M&E was implemented as planned during
  implementation through six monthly project progress reports. During implementation, while the
  independent laboratory was retained to establish the dioxins baseline and verify dioxins releases
  after BAT/BEP renovations, regular reporting results from the local Environmental Protection Bureaus
  were used for verifying release of conventional pollution parameters (such as Chemical Oxygen
  Demand (COD), Ammoniacal Nitrogen and national water effluent standards).



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Dioxins Reduc. from Pulp and Paper (P125528)




c. M&E Utilization


  The ICR (paragraph 65) notes that the results of M&E were used for disbursing payments to the mills
  participating in the PBF scheme. The ICR notes that the project collected improved data on dioxins
  releases from the pulp and paper mills in China. This data was published in academic literature and this
  data was to be used for updating the dioxins inventory for the United Nations Environment Program
  (UNEP)/ Stockholm toolkit.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


   The project was classified as a Category A project for World Bank safeguard policies. Two safeguard
   policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Assessment. The PAD (paragraph 39) notes that positive environmental benefits of the
   project were to come from minimizing the release of dioxins and furans and reduction of pollutant load in
   effluents. The possible negative environmental issues, included issues associated with wastewater and
   waste management, accidental breakdown and environmental risk and safety and health issues during
   implementation. The ICR (paragraph 40) notes that site-specific environmental assessments were
   conducted by accredited Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) institutes for each mill and Environmental
   Management Plans (EMP) were prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 41). The ICR
   (paragraph 68) notes that EMPs for the two new project mills that joined after the 2014 restructuring, EMPs
   were prepared and publicly-disclosed on May 16, 2014. The ICR (paragraph 69) also notes that following
   the restructuring on May 2016, an Environmental and Social Management Framework was developed as a
   supplementary environmental assessment document for the project with enhanced attention to social
   details to guide the design and implementation of the newly introduced activities on technical assistance
   support to BAT/BEP planning.

   The ICR (paragraph 70) notes that there was a wastewater spill incident at the Hunan Lingyuan Paper mill
   during the renovation of its wastewater treatment facilities on December 4, 2016. Lingyuan took immediate
   and effective corrective measures to resolve the issue and with the authorization of the local Environmental
   Bureau, resumed its normal production after two weeks. Nevertheless, the mill conducted a detailed
   investigation to understand the root cause of the action and proposed actions to guide future operations.
   Following the mills’ self-investigation, a special field mission conducted jointly by the government and the


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Dioxins Reduc. from Pulp and Paper (P125528)



   Bank team In November 2017, confirmed the mills’ actions, and there was consistent environmental
   compliance after the accident.

   Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (paragraph 38) notes that land acquisition and involuntary
   resettlement was not expected, as the activities were to be implemented in the existing mills' premises.
   However, this safeguard was triggered, as one of the participating mills (the Guangxi Nanning Sugar
   Company Pumiao Paper Mill) had acquired land for BAT/BEP before project identification in 2010. A due
   diligence review was conducted for this land acquisition at appraisal. The review confirmed that there were
   no adverse effects on local villagers and the affected villagers were satisfied with the compensation
   arrangements. The ICR (paragraph 73) notes that there were no other involuntary resettlement issues
   during implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


   Financial management. The financial management capacity of the implementing agency - Foreign
   Economic Cooperation Office (FECO) in the Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP) - was conducted
   at appraisal. The assessment concluded that although there was financial management risk due to the
   inexperience of the selected mills with Bank-financed projects and the use of the PBF scheme, this risk
   was offset by the extensive experience of the FECO in executing Bank projects. A Financial Management
   Manual was developed at appraisal and the project staff were to be trained during implementation (PAD,
   paragraph 35). With the mitigation measures, financial management risk was rated as Moderate at
   appraisal (PAD, page 19). There were no significant financial management issues during implementation
   and the audit reports were unqualified (ICR, paragraph 75).

   Procurement. A procurement assessment of the FECO in the MEP was conducted at appraisal. The
   assessment concluded that FECO had adequate experience and capacity to address procurement issues
   (PAD, paragraph 36). The ICR (paragraph 76) notes that there were no procurement issues and there was
   no mis procurement during implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                     IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory            Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CN-Dioxins Reduc. from Pulp and Paper (P125528)



Bank Performance                 Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons



The ICR drew seven lessons and recommendations from the project's experience. The following are
three lessons, mentioned in the ICR that have potential implications for other Bank-financed
projects, with some adaptation of language.

1. Upstream analytical work may be particularly important, when addressing new sectors.
This project was prepared based on an analytical study conducted with the support of the Canada
POPs Trust Fund. This work allowed the Bank team and the implementing agency to gain
knowledge of the sector and build networks with industry partners. The lesson is that preliminary
analytical work can aid in quick preparation of the project.

2. A combination of pilot demonstration and enabling environment can aid in sector-wide
transformation. This project relied on a relatively straightforward design, that addressed the two
key barriers that were identified through two complementary components (one focused on technical
demonstration and one focused on sector policy and regulatory framework). The lesson is that
combining demonstration with policy interventions is more likely to be successful in projects where
new technologies are involved.

3. Performance-Based Financing (PBF) sub-grants following commercial practices for
procurement can be an efficient way to engage enterprises. Procurement under the PBF sub-
grants in this project followed commercial practices that were acceptable to the Bank, ensuring value
for money in the process that met the mill's business requirements and was in-line with their
baseline investments. The lesson is that the PBF modality, together with independent and credible
verification, can be an effective way of transferring grant resources to enterprises that were investing
their own significantly larger resources.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Dioxins Reduc. from Pulp and Paper (P125528)



The ICR is well-written and its structure is consistent with OPCS guidelines. Annex four in the ICR provides
useful information on the modalities of GEF financing. The ICR candidly discusses issues pertaining to the
withdrawal of three of the originally envisioned four mills. The ICR also draws useful lessons from the
experience of implementing this project.

There were two minor issues with the ICR. One, there is a discrepancy in the ICR. While the data sheet in page
three of the ICR rates M&E quality as substantial, page 31 of the ICR rates overall M&E quality as high, and
two, the main body of the text is about 32 pages (more than twice the recommended length of 15 pages).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 15
