     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021833

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P114069                                   CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                     Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80590                                30-Sep-2016                                        110,081,966.61

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Jun-2011                               31-Dec-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           150,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            110,081,966.61                                              0.00

 Actual                                        110,081,966.61                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan         Dileep M. Wagle              Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (p.5) dated September 2, 2011, and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD,
   p.2) the project objective was "to improve energy efficiency in selected enterprises in [People’s Republic of
   China] Shandong province, particularly through energy efficiency leasing arrangements, and increase use of
   biomass for power and heat generation."




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)



   The project objective was revised at the second restructuring in September 2016 as follows: "to improve
   energy efficiency in selected enterprises in [People’s Republic of China] Shandong province, particularly
   through energy efficiency leasing arrangements."

   Due to the revision of the project objective, i.e., the deletion of the second sub-objective "to increase use of
   biomass for power and heat generation," a split evaluation of the project outcome will be undertaken in this
   review; however, the first objective will not be evaluated in split, since there is no significant material change
   in this objective, despite a downward adjustment of the corresponding PDO level indicator targets at the
   second restructuring (For detailed explanations, please see the sections on Project Restructurings, Efficacy
   and Outcome below).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  30-Sep-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project had three components:　

   A. Energy Efficiency Sub-Projects. (Appraisal cost: US$266.69 million, International Bank for
   Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan financing US$133.35 million; actual cost:215.89 million,
   actual IBRD financing US$99.26 million)

   Carrying out eligible energy efficiency sub-projects through financial leasing and energy performance
   contracting arrangements. The IBRD loan was to be on-lent to two leasing companies, i.e., Shandong
   Rongshihua Leasing Company (Rongshihua – IBRD loan financing US$64 million at appraisal; actual was
   US$46.23 million) and Guotai Leasing Company (Guotai – IBRD loan financing US$50 million at appraisal;
   actual was US$45.54 million), and one energy services company, i.e., Shandong Luxin Energy Investment
   and Management Company (Luxin Energy – IBRD loan financing US$20 million at appraisal; actual was
   US$7.15 million).

   B. Anqiu Biomass Combined Heat and Power Plant. (Appraisal cost: US$36.00 million, IBRD loan
   financing US$15.91 million; Actual cost: US$18.63 million actual IBRD financing US$10.67 million)

   Construction of a biomass combined heat and power plant, with an installed capacity of two units of 15
   MWe each, in Anqiu of Shandong Province, including, inter alia, the provision of relevant civil works, goods,
   and equipment and the construction of relevant steam network and district heating network.



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)



  C. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. (Appraisal cost: US$0.37 million, IBRD loan
  financing US$0.4 million; Actual cost: US$0.15 million, actual IBRD financing US$0.15 million)

  Strengthening the capacity of the project management office, Rongshihua, Guotai, Luxin Energy, and Anqiu
  Shengyuan Biomass CHP Company (Anqiu) in project management, monitoring and evaluation through
  provision of technical assistance, training and study tours.



  Revised Components

  At the second restructuring in September 2016, Component B was deleted due to the continual failure of
  Anqui in providing counterpart funding despite repeated assurances that they would do so (ICR, p.11).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$316.14 million including US$12.00
  million for physical and price contingencies, US$0.70 million for interest during construction and US$0.375
  million for front-end fee. In December 2018, the project closed with a total cost of US$234.67 million. The
  actual cost was 77.16 percent of the cost estimated at appraisal excluding physical and price contingencies.

  Financing: At appraisal, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan was
  estimated at US$150.0 million including the front-end fee of US$0.375 million. At project closing in
  December 2018, the IBRD financing stood at US$110.08 million. The realization of disbursement was 73.39
  percent.

  Borrower contribution: At appraisal, the borrower’s contribution was estimated at US$166.2 million. At
  project closing, the borrower’s actual contribution was US$124.59 million.

  Restructurings and Dates: There were three project restructurings

        First Restructuring (August 7, 2013): Contrary to the expectation at appraisal, demand for energy
         efficiency financing from large state-owned industrial enterprises, for which national competitive
         bidding rules would apply, was weak because the cost of commercial loans or using their own funds
         was lower than financial leasing offers; demand was mostly from small and medium size commercial
         companies, which had more difficulty raising project financing from commercial banks (Restructuring
         Paper dated June 27, 2013, p.5). Therefore, at this restructuring, "well-established private sector
         procurement methods or commercial practices which have been found acceptable to the Bank" was
         included in the loan agreement as an applicable procedure under the first component, and the prior-
         review requirements were revised to accommodate these changes (Restructuring Paper dated June
         27, 2013, p.5). As a result, commercial practice for procurement was allowed.

  　

        Second Restructuring (September 30, 2016): In this Level I restructuring, the Bank and the
         borrower agreed to drop the second component due to the unavailability of counterpart funds. The
         project objective was revised accordingly by deleting the part corresponding to the increased usage

                                                                                                 Page 3 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)



       of biomass for power and heat generation. The indicators measuring the achievement of this
       objective were also deleted from the results framework; (i) associated cumulative incremental
       amount of electricity (GWh) from biomass-based heat and power generation; (ii) associated
       cumulative incremental amount of electricity and heat (coverage square meter) from biomass-based
       heat and power generation; and (iii) generation capacity of renewable energy (other than
       hydropower) constructed. Furthermore, the end targets for annual energy savings both for overall
       project and for each project implementing company—two leasing companies and one energy
       services company—were lowered 20 percent; the reasons are given as (i) smaller pool of projects at
       creditworthy small and medium size enterprises due to economic downturn; and (ii) substantial
       increase in the cost of energy efficiency investments (Restructuring Paper dated September
       13,2016, p.7). In this restructuring, the scope of the subprojects was extended to cover renewable
       energy projects. Lastly, project implementing companies could not raise sufficient domestic funds to
       finance energy efficiency sub-projects due to economic slowdown, which significantly slowed the
       pace of project implementation; therefore, the disbursement ratio of the World Bank loan proceeds
       was raised from 50 percent to 80 percent and the project closing date was extended by 18 months
       from September 30, 2016 to March 31, 2018 because of slow progress in project implementation
       caused by economic slowdown.

　

      Third Restructuring (March 29, 2018): The difficulty in identifying industrial energy efficiency
       subprojects at creditworthy small enterprises, which were interested in financial leasing model,
       continued through project implementation. The project implementing companies had to refocus on
       state-owned economic enterprises, where identifying and executing subprojects took longer time.
       This resulted in a second extension of the project closing date by nine months from March 31, 2018
       to December 31, 2018. Furthermore, remaining project funds were allocated to the best performing
       project implementing company to support two new sub-projects. This restructuring was expected to
       "enable reaching of the targets for energy saving capacity and funds leveraged for energy efficiency
       project" (Restructuring Paper dated March 28, 2019, p. 2).

　

      Dates: The project closing date was extended twice: by 18 months in the second restructuring and
       by 9 months in third restructuring. As a result, the project closing date was extended by 27 months
       from September 30,2016 to December 31,2018. The reasons for these extensions have been
       outlined above (see: references to the second and third restructuring).



Disbursement Percentages

The following disbursement percentages will be used in deriving the weights to be applied to revised
objectives in Outcome rating.

                       Disbursed Amount              Disbursement Percentage
Project Objective
                       ($ million)                   (%)
Original               55.00                         49.96
First Revision         55.08                         50.04

                                                                                                Page 4 of 19
                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                        CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)



                       Total                110.08                100.00

3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The relevance of the project objectives to country context in China is high. China is one of the largest
greenhouse gas emitting countries in the world. At appraisal, coal comprised about 69 percent of China’s
total primary energy consumption. According to the International Energy Agency, coal’s share among
primary energy sources dropped slightly to around 64 percent in 2017. Therefore, for sustainable economic
growth, China still needs to achieve significant gains in energy efficiency and lower the carbon dioxide
intensity of its economy—carbon dioxide emission per unit of GDP. In this regard, the project objectives are
relevant to the Chinese government’s goal set in its 13th Five Year Plan from 2016 to 2002 to decrease the
carbon dioxide intensity in its economy by 18 percent from 2015 levels by 2020 and to reduce energy
intensity—energy consumption per unit of GDP—by 15 percent in the same time period. It is also relevant
to the goal of Shandong Province to lower coal consumption by 10 percent from 2015 levels by 2020.

At the time of project closing, there was no country partnership strategy in implementation. However,
according to the latest Country Partnership Strategy 2013-16 (p.18-19) before project closing, the project
objective was substantially relevant to the Bank strategy under Strategic Theme One, Supporting Greener
Growth, Outcome 1.1 Shifting to a Sustainable Energy Path. Accelerating energy conservation and
investment in energy efficiency through investment and advisory services at national and local levels that
would enhance the quality of administrative measures and encourage greater reliance on the market to
deliver energy efficiency was listed as one of the areas the Bank would focus to support China’s efforts to
build a secure, sustainable, and cost-efficient energy sector. Furthermore, at the time of project closing, the
project objective was substantially relevant to the Bank priorities defined in the China Strategic Country
Diagnostic (SCD) 2017 Under the pillar of Green Growth for Sustainability, two of the key priorities are
defined as (i) fuller use of market mechanisms to reduce pollution and promote green growth and more
efficient and sustainable use of natural resources; and (ii) the reduction of the use of fossil fuels, through
continued promotion of energy efficiency, renewable energy, efficiency in heavy industries, and green
transportation (SCD, p.73). However, the discussion in the SCD (pp. 60-61) appears to refer to
mechanisms, such as pricing policies that better reflect environmental externalities, taxes and carbon-
trading systems, and not to the use of financial leasing in any form.

At the time of appraisal, the World Bank had already been closely involved in the design and
implementation of energy efficiency programs in China for more than ten years (PAD, p.3). In addition to its
support at the national level, the Bank had been increasingly asked to provide support at the provincial
level. This project was "part of an emerging provincial level support platform which combines [Global
Environment Facility] supported policy and capacity building support with [International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development] supported mechanisms to accelerate adoption of new approaches"
(PAD, p.4).The project, being the first Bank financed financial leasing project in the country to support new
equipment leasing through direct financial lease, had a demonstration aspect, as well. Therefore, given the
Bank’s prior experience in the national and provincial level in China, the project objective was adequately
challenging.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
                                                                                                         Page 5 of 19
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)



               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To improve energy efficiency in selected enterprises in Shandong province, particularly through energy
                efficiency leasing arrangements.

                Rationale
                The first objective was clearly defined. In addition to the short-term objective to improve energy efficiency in
                selected enterprises in Shandong province, the project aimed at demonstrating the use of financial leasing as
                a feasible solution to finance energy efficiency projects. The project design was simple; the project was to
                provide funding to (i) two local leasing companies to finance energy efficiency projects of state-owned
                economic enterprises and small-and-medium size enterprises; and (ii) to one energy services company
                (ESCO) to demonstrate the efficient and effective adoption of the energy performance contracting (EPC)
                mechanism. However, the causal link between leasing and energy efficiency does not emerge
                clearly. Leasing is simply an instrument to facilitate the use of energy efficiency technologies by smaller units
                which would otherwise not be able to afford the investments required (though another alternative could have
                been for the government to have provided direct financial incentives to promote the use of these
                technologies). Towards this end, the project was simply pre-selecting two or three leasing companies to
                provide financial leases to smaller manufacturing or other units, in the expectation that the demonstration
                effect of the success of these projects would help popularize the use of leasing for energy efficiency
                purposes—the theory of change diagram in the ICR (p.8) supports this. There is otherwise no intrinsic
                connection between leasing and energy efficiency. As such, the absence of any indicators to measure these
                demonstration effects is a serious deficiency of the results framework. From this perspective, the theory of
                change for this objective was not robust.

                The project financed a total of 34 energy efficiency sub-projects; 26 through financial leasing and 8 through
                EPC. Of these 34 sub-projects, 21 belonged to private companies and 29 companies were SMEs (for the list
                of companies and projects, please see Annex 6 of the ICR). The PAD did not specify the number of energy
                efficiency sub-projects to be supported by project funds since the selection of sub-projects was to be done
                after project’s effectiveness. The intermediate indicators were designed to measure the investment flows for
                energy efficiency projects by each project implementing leasing company and ESCO. Cumulatively, the
                realization of investment flows was US$215.98 million against the original target of US$268.00 million. The
                breakdown of the cumulative amount per project implementing company is given below (The targets were not
                revised at the second project restructuring):

                      Rongshihua: US$98.39 million against the original target of US$128.00 million
                      Guotai: US$103.43 million against the original target of US100.00 million.
                      Luxin Energy: US$14.16 million against the original target of US$40.00 million



                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)



As a result of these energy efficiency investments, 331,000 tce of energy or fuel was saved at project closing.
The original and revised targets were 397,000 tce and 318,000 tce, respectively. The achievement was
substantial, but it differed significantly per company:

      Rongshihua: 70,470 tce against the original target of 188,000 tce and revised target of 150,000 tce
      Guotai: 239,290 tce against the original target of 147,000 tce and revised target of 118,000 tce
      Luxin Energy: 21,340 tce against the original target of 62,000 tce and revised target of 50,000 tce

The performance of Guotai stands out compared to other two project implementing companies; this was
mostly because of a single energy efficiency project of the Rizhao Co., Ltd. of the Shandong Iron and Steel
Group, which was financed by Guotai. If this project is excluded, the project’s cumulative energy saving drops
from 331,000 tce to 141,400 tce, well below the original target of 397,000 tce and the revised target of
318,000 tce. Rizhao Co., Ltd.’s project accounted for 20 percent of the cumulative investment flows, but 57
percent of the energy saved (ICR, p.17).

Regarding the demonstration effect of the project on the feasibility of financial leasing to finance energy
efficiency projects, the second PDO level indicator of associated cumulative amount of funds leveraged by
the Bank loan, which was US$116.63 million against the original target of US$134.00 million, partially
captures the performance of the project. The ICR (p.16) provides additional evidence for the demonstration
impact of the project; at the start of project implementation, there were five leasing companies and only
Guotai and Rongshihua were active in the energy efficiency sector. At project closing, there were 19 leasing
companies registered in Shandong. A causal link can be established between the demonstration effect of the
project and the increase in the number of the financial leasing companies in Shandong, because the project
was the only one implemented in the province when financial leasing for energy efficiency was at its infancy
(ICR, p.16). It should also be noted that the provincial government’s circular issued in March 2012 provided
incentives to promote the development of financial leasing in the province (ICR, p.16) The project team
commented that while the project had benefited from the energy conservation related provincial policies, it
had also contributed to the formulation and issuance of a series of policies, including the promotion of ESCO
business model.

Despite the large impact of a single project on achieving the performance indicator, the project was overall
substantially successful, before and after the project restructuring, in achieving the project objective to
increase energy efficiency in selected enterprises in Shandong province, particularly through energy
efficiency leasing arrangements and demonstrating that financial leasing is a feasible financing mechanism
for energy efficiency projects. Therefore, the efficacy of the achievement of this objective is rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
"To increase use of biomass for power and heat generation."

Rationale

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)



                            The second objective was also clearly defined. The project was to finance the construction of two units of 15
                            MW equivalent of power generation units fueled by corn stalks and wheat stalks and a steam network for
                            heating. The expected outcome was to increase the share of the biomass, hence avoiding coal, in power and
                            heat generation. The project inputs were sufficient to achieve this goal. A direct causal chain can easily be
                            established between the project activities and project outputs and outcome. The PDO level indicators of (i)
                            associated cumulative incremental amount of electricity (GWh); and (ii) associated cumulative incremental
                            amount of electricity and heat (coverage in m2) from biomass-based heat and power generation fully
                            captured the achievement of this objective. Overall, the theory of change for the second objective was robust.

                            However, as of September 2016, the project was not compliant with the action plan requirement of
                            documenting the availability of counterpart funds sufficient to ensure that the project objective targets could
                            be met. Anqui did not allocate funds for this component. It was also found that such funds would not be
                            available during the life of the project (Restructuring Paper dated September 13,2016, p.6). As a result,
                            although most of the civil works were completed, second component of the project, i.e., the construction on
                            the biomass-fired generation units and the steam network, was cancelled at the second restructuring. As of
                            project closure, no additional work was commissioned for the construction of the power generation units (ICR,
                            p.11).

                            The efficacy of the achievement of the second objective is rated negligible.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The theory of change was weak for the first objective, but robust for the second. The project objectives were
                            clearly defined, and the project outcomes were broadly measurable. The causal link between the project
                            activities, outputs and the achievement of the outcomes related to the first objective was not clear. However,
                            the achievement of the first project objective to improve energy efficiency in selected enterprises in the
                            Shandong Province particularly through financial leasing arrangements was substantial. The achievement of
                            the second objective to increase use of biomass or power and heat generation was negligible, as the
                            corresponding component was cancelled at the second project restructuring due to unavailability of
                            counterpart funds and ineligible expenditure. This also resulted in the revision of the project objective with the
                            second objective being deleted. At the time of the revision, less than half of the project funds were disbursed.
                            Therefore, overall efficacy of the project is rated substantial (A detailed split rating for outcome is given in the
                            Outcome section below).



                            Overall Efficacy Rating



                                                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)



  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis

Three other project design alternatives were considered at appraisal: (i) financing a series of smaller sub-
projects up to the full amount, which was rejected because of complexity, reduction in economies of scale and
increase in transaction costs; (ii) lending through financial banks, which was rejected because the provincial
government preferred to address persistent market failures in the energy efficiency sector through the
demonstration of financial leasing mechanisms; and (iii) blending the project with the Provincial Energy
Efficiency Scale Up Project, which was rejected because the loan would support only one of the three provinces
covered by that project (PAD, p.7).

At appraisal, an economic analysis was conducted for the two components at the project implementing company
level. Although carbon dioxide emission reduction benefits were excluded, other cost-benefit assumptions used
in the analysis were adequate to conduct a robust economic analysis. Costs were assumed as (i) investment in
capital equipment, working capital and long-term leases; (ii) incremental operating costs including wages, plant
maintenance and overheads, and input costs, such as fuel, electricity and water; and (iii) amortization of capital
costs, investment in long-term leases, engineering-procurement-and-construction contracts and connection fees
over the life of the asset. Costs excluded taxes, duties, financial costs and other transfers. Major benefits were
assumed to come from improved energy efficiency and savings over the life of the sub-projects and the
incremental supply of heat and power (PAD, p. 58). Since sub-projects were not identified, an economic analysis
was conducted for three representative energy efficiency subprojects to be used in the overall economic
analysis of the project: (i) boiler renovation; (ii) waste heat recovery; and (iii) motor adjusting speed drives (PAD,
p.69). The main assumptions were energy prices based on market prices, electricity tariff, energy savings from
avoided coal consumption for the boiler renovation and waste heat recovery and avoided electricity consumption
for motor adjusting speed drives, 15 years of equipment life, emission factors and the value per ton of avoided
emission (PAD, p.69). The economic analysis at appraisal resulted in an overall economic rate of return (ERR)
of 23.1 percent and a net present value (NPV) of US$373.00 million at a discount rate of 8 percent (PAD, p.58).

At project closure, an economic analysis, based on the same approach used at appraisal, was conducted for the
first component only, because the second component was cancelled at the second restructuring. The
investment cost and working capital cost estimates were replaced by the actual costs. Furthermore, US$840 per
tce of the annual energy saving unit cost of subprojects estimated at appraisal was replaced by US1,210 per tce
of the actual energy saving unit cost of subprojects. These resulted in much lower ERRs and NPVs per project
implementing company under the first component as given in Table 1 (The ICR did not calculate a cumulative
ERR for this component.)

Table 1: Comparison of Appraisal and Project Closing ERRs and NPVs

Component                                  ERR (%)     NPV (RMB million)
A.1. Rongshihua        Appraisal           20.0        949.1
　                      Project Closing     6.7         -77.71
A.2. Goutai            Appraisal           21.2        709.3
　                      Project Closing     8.6         17.45

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)



A.3. Luxin Energy      Appraisal           35.4        489.2
　                      Project Closing     9.9         11.3

The main reasons for the decrease in economic returns are given as (i) increase in investment cost for energy
savings; (ii) higher default rate than estimated at appraisal; (iii) project implementation delay; and (iv) higher
financing cost for counterpart funding (ICR, p.19).

In financial analysis, net sales and decrease in long-term receivables were taken as benefits, while taxes were
included in the costs. Given the changes made in the other assumptions, as explained above, there was a
decrease in the financial rate of return (FRR) and a large one in corresponding NPVs. Comparison of appraisal
and project closure figures are given in Table 2. (The project FRR and NPV calculated at appraisal were 12.2
percent and US$164.72 million, including the biomass-based heat and power generation component. A project-
based calculation was not made at project closure.)

Table 2: Comparison of Appraisal and Project Closing FRRs and NPVs

Component                                   FRR (%)    NPV (RMB million)
A.1. Rongshihua        Appraisal            9.5        117
　                      Project Closing      8.5        10.6
A.2. Goutai            Appraisal            8.9        165
　                      Project Closing      8.2        3.07
A.3. Luxin Energy      Appraisal            9.6        55.3
　                      Project Closing      8.3        1.4



Operational and Administrative Efficiency

There were major shortcomings in the operational and administrative efficiency of the project. First, project
implementation and the achievement of project objectives were adversely affected by the failure of the
counterpart to provide funds for the biomass-based heat and power generation component. Although Bank
funds were used to finance the completion of the civil works of the biomass-fired power generation units, there
has not been any construction activity after the cancellation of this component. Second, there were differences
in the implementation capacity and internal project processing procedures of the companies conducting energy
efficiency projects, which resulted in delays in project implementation and disbursements (ICR, p.24). Third, the
project implementation was adversely affected by economic slowdown. This risk was identified at appraisal, but
mitigation measures were weak. This resulted in less demand for energy efficiency project financing from SMEs;
therefore, the project implementing companies had to refocus on state-owned-enterprises "where identifying and
executing subprojects took considerably longer" (ICR, p.20). Lastly, the high turnover of staff with experience in
energy efficiency technologies and financing within the project implementing companies resulted in slower sub-
project processing



Overall, due to considerably lower than estimated economic returns and major shortcomings in project
implementation, the efficiency of the project is rated Modest.


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     95.75
 Appraisal                                                 23.10
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

In order to sustain economic growth, China needs to decrease the energy intensity and carbon dioxide intensity
of its economy. Therefore, energy efficiency applications and increased use of renewable energy sources, such
as biomass, for heat and power generation, are highly relevant to the country context. However, these
were substantially in line with the Bank’s priorities for China as defined in the Strategic Country Diagnostic, the
only Bank document available at the time o project closing. Hence, the relevance of objectives is rated
Substantial. The achievement of the first project objective to improve energy efficiency is rated Substantial
before and after the project restructuring in September 2016. The second objective, to increase use of biomass,
was deleted in the second restructuring due to the unavailability of counterpart funds. The achievement of this
objective is rated negligible. Efficiency is rated Modest due to lower than estimated economic returns and
shortcomings in operational and administrative efficiency. Since the project objective was revised, a split rating
is applied (please see the table below). The overall outcome rating is barely Moderately Satisfactory.

                                                        Objectives after
　                               Original objectives
                                                        revision
Relevance of Objectives         Substantial
Efficacy                        　
Objective 1:                    Substantial             Substantial
Objective 2:                    Negligible              N/A
Efficacy                        Modest                  Substantial
Efficiency                      Substantial
                                Moderately              Moderately
Outcome Rating
                                Unsatisfactory          Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value            3                       4
Amount Disbursed (US$
                                55.00                   55.08
million)


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)



Disbursement (%)                49.96%                  50.04%
Weight Value                    1.4988                  2.0016
Total weights                   3.5004 (rounds up to 4)
Overall Outcome Rating          Moderately Satisfactory (4)
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

One potential risk to the sustainability and the replicability of the project outcomes would be the
worsening of the local or the national economy. The project was successful in demonstrating that
financial leasing is a feasible mechanism to finance energy efficiency projects with relatively small amount of
capital. However, if the economy slows down and energy consumption decreases, companies would be less
willing to invest in costly energy efficiency projects in the absence of direct financial incentives from the
authorities.

A change in national or local policies favoring cheaper energy from fossil fuels might also pose a
risk to the sustainability of gains from energy efficiency projects, but the likelihood of this policy
change is very low. If electricity tariffs are lowered or the cost of primary energy from fossil fuels becomes
cheaper, companies, especially SMEs, would have no incentive to implement energy efficiency project.
However, given China’s efforts to lower the energy intensity of the economy and lower greenhouse gas
emissions, it is not very likely that the Chinese government or the Shandong provincial government will
reverse their energy efficiency and renewable energy policies.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The objectives were clearly defined and strategically relevant to the country context and the priorities of
  the Bank. The theory of change was weak for the first objective, but robust for the second. The PDO level
  indicators were broadly sufficient to capture the achievement of the project outcomes. The project design
  benefited from lessons learned of other similar Bank and Global Environment Facility (GEF) projects,
  such China Energy Conservation Projects I and II, and China Energy Efficiency Financing Projects I and
  II (PAD, p.6) in local risk mitigation and project valuation methods, and selection criteria for energy
  conversation sub-projects. The project design also incorporated the findings of an ESMAP-financed
  Review and Assessment of Biomass-fired Power Development in China (PAD, p.7) in fuel supply
  arrangements, technical requirements for boilers, and developmental plans to guide local biomass power
  proposals.

  The economic analysis conducted at appraisal was sound, even though it was not known which sub-
  projects would be financed. The operations manual included a detailed technical evaluation framework
  according to which sub-projects would be evaluated for selection (PAD, p.32-33). Project implementation
  arrangements were in place; the World Bank and Asian Development Bank Energy Conservation Project

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)



  Management Office (PMO) established in 2009 was responsible for the overall management of the
  project. Rongshihua, Guotai, Luxin Energy, and Anqiu were the project implementation units and fully
  responsible for implementing their respective sub-components, including procurement, financial
  management, monitoring and evaluation, and project reporting (PAD, p.9). Fiduciary aspects were sound;
  the procurement capacity of the project management office and the financial management systems of the
  project implementing companies were assessed to be adequate (PAD, p.15). Although the overall impact
  of the project on environment was expected to be positive, due to the potential temporary adverse
  environmental impact of the project activities, such as dust, noise, disposal of solid waste, and
  interruption of traffic, the project was classified Category B and the Involuntary Resettlement safeguard
  policy was triggered.

  However, despite a detailed fiduciary assessment of the project implementation units, the project
  implementation capacity, including administrative and financial management capacity of Anqiu, the
  company responsible for the construction of the biomass-fired power and heat generation units, was not
  adequately assessed, which eventually resulted in the cancellation of the second component and the
  revision of the project objectives. Furthermore, the risk stemming from economic slowdown was
  underestimated and it was expected that economy would recover back to its pre-financial crisis, which did
  not materialize (PAD, p.11 and ICR, p.23). Lastly, the exchange rate risk was not addressed at appraisal;
  the project funds were denominated in US dollars and the actual contracts were signed in the Chinese
  currency of renminbi. The fluctuations in exchange rate adversely affected financial costs and returns on
  capital (ICR, p.23-24 and 42).

  Overall, the quality of entry is rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project team closely monitored project implementation through formal missions and regular
 interactions with the project management office (PMO) and the Shandong provincial government. Upon the
 project team’s request, the PMO and project implementing companies submitted detailed project
 implementation reports and reports on the performance of sub-projects. This resulted in speeding up
 project implementation, especially towards the later stages of the project (ICR, p.26). When it was clear
 that counterpart funds were not available for the biomass-fired power generation units, the project team
 cancelled that component and revised the project development objective. In order to allow private
 companies to benefit from the project funds, project was restructured to allow commercial practice for
 procurement. According to the borrower feedback, the project team’s flexible management of the project
 was crucial for the success of the project, and the project team provided strong support and advice to the
 PMO and project implementing companies in procurement and financial management (ICR, p.42). The
 project team’s supervision of the fiduciary aspects of the project was adequate; there were two ineligible
 expenditures by Anqiu and Shengyuan, which were refunded to the Bank (ICR, p.28). The project team’s
 supervision of safeguard policies was adequate (ICR, p.27).

 Overall, quality of supervision was moderately satisfactory.


                                                                                                 Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were clearly defined, but a clear causal link could not be established between project
 activities, outputs and expected outcomes for the first objective. The PDO level indicators were adequately
 designed to capture the achievement of both objectives, except the indicator of cumulative amount of funds
 leveraged by the Bank loan, which was not linked to the theory of change, but partially related to the
 demonstration effect of the project. The indicators were measurable and achievable. The three companies
 implementing the energy efficiency component of the project were fully responsible for project M&E. A
 variety of methods for measurement and verification (M&V) of energy savings from the implementation of
 energy efficiency projects were defined in the operation manual. The quality of M&V was to be ensured by
 a senior engineer or a professional with equivalent qualifications (ICR, p.26). In terms of design, the M&E
 framework was sufficient to assess the achievement of the project objectives.



b. M&E Implementation
  The indicators included in the results framework were measured by the project implementing companies.
  Rongshihua and Guotai staff calculated the amount of energy saved based on data provided by the sub-
  project implementing companies; Luxin Energy hired a third party for data collection. Because of high
  staff turnover or companies going out of business, on-site visits could not be conducted for 7 sub-projects
  out of 34 (ICR, p.25). The project management office prepared annual progress reports with inputs from
  the three project implementing companies. However, the project team commented that there were
  shortcomings in M&E implementation and aggregation of data, and there was a need for third party M&E
  for additional layer of data reliability and certainty. The PMO completed the procurement of a consulting
  firm in September 2015; however, the contract had to be terminated since the consulting firm was on the
  debar list of the Bank. In November 2017, Shandong Coal Energy Saving Technology Service Center
  was hired as the verification agency.

  Due to the cancellation of the biomass-based power and heat generation component, related indicators
  were also deleted in the second restructuring in September 2016. At the same restructuring, the targets
  of the PDO-level indicators capturing the achievement of the first objective were decreased by 20 percent
  because of the continued impact of the economic slowdown on the implementation of energy efficiency
  projects by SMEs. However, the project implementing companies did not monitor the performance of sub-
  projects as frequently as requested (ICR, p.26). Upon the follow-up of the project team, the PMO and the
  project implementing companies started reporting M&E findings on a monthly basis. It was only in the




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)



  later stages of project implementation that the PMO collected comprehensive data and information from
  the three project implementing companies and prepared detailed project progress reports.



c. M&E Utilization
  PMO communicated the M&E findings to the provincial government agencies and the three project
  implementing agencies for project decision-making. M&E findings were used to revise the project
  objectives and reallocation of funds among project implementing companies. M&E data was also used to
  provide evidence of the achievement of the project objective to increase energy efficiency in selected
  enterprises.

  Despite some modest shortcomings in implementation, the M&E system as designed, implemented and
  utilized was generally sufficient to assess the achievement of the project objective and test the causality
  in the results chain. Therefore, the M&E quality is rated substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and triggered
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The project outcome was to have a positive impact on the
   environment; however, a potential temporary adverse environmental impact of project activities in the first
   component, such as dust, noise, disposal of solid waste, and interruption of traffic, was expected. An
   environmental screening and management framework (ESMF) was developed by the project implementing
   companies to screen sub-projects to be financed by the project and to ensure compliance with the Bank
   and national environmental safeguard requirements (PAD, p.16). For the second component, public
   consultations were conducted during environmental assessment (EA). The EA showed that greenhouse gas
   emissions from the biomass-fired heat and power generation unit would meet relevant national and
   provincial standards and would be complying with the Bank’s environmental, health and safety standards.
   Both the EA and ESMF were disclosed at the PMO’s office and the Bank’s Infoshop (PAD, p.16). The ICR
   (p.28) states that "no construction activities that would cause adverse environmental and social impacts
   were conducted" during project implementation. The project team confirmed that the project was in
   compliance with the environmental safeguard policy.

   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): It was expected that some energy efficiency sub-projects might
   require limited land acquisition for the construction of heat pipelines outside the plants. A resettlement policy
   framework was prepared should there be any land acquisitions. None of the 34 energy efficiency sub-
   projects required new land acquisition. However, some sub-projects related to Rizhao Co, Ltd., of
   Shandong Iron and Steel Group were implemented on recently acquired land. For such projects, due
   diligence reviews were conducted, and the land acquisition procedures were found to be in compliance with

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)



  the national and provincial regulations and the Bank’s policy on involuntary resettlement (ICR, p.27).
  Similarly, a separate due diligence review was conducted for the land acquisition that had already been
  completed for the construction of the biomass-fired heat and power generation units before the start of
  project implementation. This review, too, found that land acquisition procedure was compliant with the
  national laws and regulations and the Bank’s policy on involuntary resettlement (PAD, p.17).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management
  The financial arrangements were sound; the Ministry of Finance (MoF) of the Chinese government was the
  borrower of the loan, which was on-lent to the Shandong provincial government. The loan proceeds were
  further on-lent to two leasing companies and one energy services company to finance energy efficiency
  sub-projects, and to Anqiu to finance the biomass-fired power and heat generation units. Project
  accounting and financial reporting followed the regulations issued by the MoF and complied with the
  requirements set in the loan agreement. At project closing there was no overdue auditing report.

  However, there were major shortcomings in the provision of counterpart funding for the second
  component, which adversely affected the project’s progress. The counterpart funding was never made
  available for this component, as a result of which the second component of the project, i.e., the
  construction of the biomass-fired power and heat generation units, was cancelled. Furthermore, two
  instances of misuse of funds were discovered during audits. Anqiu forged documents to claim
  US$924,056. The amount was refunded to the Bank and the balance US$5.28 million was cancelled at the
  second restructuring. The second incident related to Rongshihua. An amount of US$17.46 million was
  disbursed to ineligible activities, which was not compliant with the procurement requirements specified in
  the Operation Manual and the Bank’s guidelines. The project team confirmed that the amount was
  refunded to the Bank after project closing. The ICR (p.28) states that "[i]n both cases, the non-compliance
  cannot be interpreted as genuine misunderstanding of the agreed requirements and procedures as
  specified in the legal agreement and Operation Manual."

  Procurement
  During project preparation and implementation, members of staff from the project management office
  (PMO) attended workshops on financial management and procurement. Additional programs were
  organized in the project area to train the staff of project implementing companies on procurement (ICR, p.
  21). At the first restructuring, procurement rules were revised to include commercial practice of
  procurement. This allowed private companies to benefit from financial leasing for their energy efficiency
  projects. Overall, the procurement followed the procurement requirements specified in the Bank’s
  guidelines and Operation Manual, except for the two ineligible expenditures explained in the above
  paragraph.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None.



                                                                                                Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)




d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The first lesson is taken from the ICR with some adaptation of language. The second one is derived
from the ICR.

Inadequate risk analysis at appraisal, which results in underrating important risks, can
adversely affect project implementation and the achievement of the project objectives. The
two major risks identified at appraisal, i.e., the macroeconomic downturn and obstacles in subproject
development pipeline, were rated as moderate. However, the difficulty in identifying industrial energy
efficiency subprojects at creditworthy small enterprises, which were interested in financial leasing
model, continued through project implementation. The situation worsened as a result of economic
downturn. This necessitated two project restructurings in which renewable energy projects
were added to the project scope as eligible subprojects, the disbursement ratio of the World Bank
loan proceeds was raised from 50 percent to 80 percent—because project implementing companies
could not raise sufficient domestic funds—and project closing dates had to be extended due to slow
project implementation. Furthermore, project's focus had to shift from large state-owned economic
enterprises (SOEs) to small enterprises, and in the latter part of project implementation back to large
SOEs, again, to achieve project objectives. However, this resulted in longer project implementation
since identifying and executing subprojects at SOEs took longer time. If the large subproject
implemented by Shandong Iron and Steel Group Rizhao Co., Ltd, which is a SOE, had not been
implemented, the project would have most likely fallen short of achieving the project objective.

If the implementation capacity of leasing companies is not adequately addressed, projects
promoting financial leasing might face problems during implementation and not fully
achieve their objectives. One of the barriers which adversely affected project implementation was
the capacity of the project implementing units (PIUs). Guotai had sufficient capacity to implement
financial leasing operations through leveraging its large balance sheet and originating projects as a
result of its extensive network; it also increased the number of staff working in its energy saving
industry department. On the other hand, despite having a considerable technical strength and

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)



reputation, Rongshihua was faced with implementation delays and procurement issues. Some
subprojects identified by Rongshihua had to be dropped because of failure to obtain requisite
guarantees needed for counterpart funding or non-compliance with the procurement requirements
under the legal agreement and the operation manual. Despite disbursing 100 percent of its loan
amount, Rongshihua could not reach the energy saving target, because it had to finance several
solar photovoltaic subprojects, which had low energy saving capacity, to compensate for not being
able to finance energy efficiency projects. Furthermore, the high staff turnover rate within PIUs with
expertise in energy efficiency technology and financing, especially towards the end of the project
implementation, weakened the project implementing capacity of the PIUs and resulted in significant
project implementation challenges.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is candid about the shortcomings of project design and implementation and provides a comprehensive
overview of the project. The narrative is internally consistent and follows the Bank guidance. It supports the
ratings. The discussion of efficacy is aligned to the achievement of the project outcomes, which were
adequately captured by the PDO level indicators. The discussion is not restricted to the achievement of the
targets; it includes information outside of the project documents to show the demonstration impact of the
project. The discussion on efficiency clearly shows what the project’s shortcomings were in achieving project
outcomes in an efficient way. The discussion on fiduciary aspect was adequate.

However, the discussion on quality at entry is weak; it does not support the rating. Discussion on safeguards
was confusing, which required further clarification from the project team. Lessons and recommendations are
generic; as an operation meant to promote the use of leasing to support energy efficiency projects, there is no
lesson reported in the ICR related to the actual financial leasing business.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CN-Shandong Energy Efficiency (P114069)




                                                                       Page 19 of 19
