     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Safety Net and Skills Development (P143915)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021885

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P143915                                    Safety Net and Skills Development

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 South Sudan                                Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52840                                  31-Dec-2017                                         19,353,760.64

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Jun-2013                                28-Feb-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               21,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                                21,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                            19,353,760.64                                           0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Judyth L. Twigg               Joy Behrens                   IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 5), the project objective was to provide access to income
   opportunities and temporary employment to the poor and vulnerable and put in place building blocks
   for a social protection system.

   The Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 5) and the Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR,
   page 6) stated the same project development objectives (PDO).


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Safety Net and Skills Development (P143915)



   As a key project activity (job skills development for youth) and corresponding key indicator were dropped,
   reflecting a reduction in the scope of the project, the project is subject to a split ratings assessment.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Social Protection System and Project Management (Appraisal: US$ 5.5 million; Actual: US$ 2.7 million):
   This component aimed to develop basic features of a social protection system and build Government
   capacity to implement the proposed project. Activities included: technical assistance with the drafting of a
   social protection policy; development of basic operational tools including a targeting mechanism to identify
   potential beneficiaries, beneficiaries registry, an integrated Management Information System (MIS) to
   monitor progress made by programs at the beneficiary level, a payment transfer and accountability system
   intended to ensure secure, predictable and timely payments to beneficiaries, and development of M&E tools
   including regular assessments and Community Score Cards. Capacity building activities included:
   establishing a Technical Support Team (TST) at the federal, state and county levels; contracting NGO and
   private sector partners to implement the Public Works and Skills Development components; designing a
   communications campaign.

   2. Public Works (Appraisal: US$ 11.0 million; Restructuring: US$ 15.5 million; Actual: US$ 16.7 million):
   This component aimed to provide income for youth and women from poor households through
   temporary/seasonal wages linked to participation in public works. The temporary work would consist
   of ten days/month for three months in rural counties and for four months in urban counties. These paid labor
   intensive public works would help build, repair, or maintain local infrastructure that would benefit the
   community at large.

   3. Skills Development (Appraisal: US$ 3.5 million; Restructuring and Actual: US$ 0): This component aimed
   to to provide youth from poor and vulnerable households with access to livelihood opportunities through
   comprehensive skills development (technical, entrepreneurship and life skills) training. A market
   assessment/skills gap study and youth needs assessment study would be conducted in the six targeted
   counties. At the end of the training period, implementing partners would also provide support to
   beneficiaries to start or engage in income generating activities.

   An unallocated amount of US$ 1.0 million was also included at project appraisal for unexpected costs.

   At the time of project restructuring, Component 3 (Skills Development) was dropped, in order to rapidly
   scale up income-generating activities, in response to the outbreak of violence in July 2016. Funds from
   Component 3 and also the unallocated portion of US$1.0 million were reallocated to Component 2 (Public
   Works).


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Safety Net and Skills Development (P143915)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

         The project cost at appraisal was US$ 21.0 million; the actual cost was US$ 19.4 million.

   Financing

         The project was financed entirely by an IDA Credit of US$ 21.0 million, of which US$ 19.4 million
           were disbursed. The ICR did not report on whether the remaining balance was cancelled.

   Borrower contribution

         There was no planned Borrower contribution.

   Dates

         June 2013: The project was approved by the Bank Board.
         November 2014: The project became effective.
         September 2017: The project was restructured, due to changing circumstances on the ground
          arising from the outbreak of violence in July 2016. Component 3 (Skills Development) was dropped
          and funds from this dropped component and the US$1.0 million unallocated component were
          reallocated to Component 2 (Public Works). The target for the number of beneficiaries was
          increased, while the key project indicator on developing a targeting mechanism to identify youth for
          the skills development training was dropped. Lastly, the project closing date was extended from
          December 2017 to December 2018.
         January 2018: The Mid-Term Review was conducted.
         December 2018: The project closing date was extended from December 2018 to February 2019 to
          allow for completion of activities.
         February 2019: The project closed.



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The country of South Sudan achieved its independence in 2011; since then, the post-independence
period has been marked by high volatility and significant barriers to economic growth and human
development. Incidences of violence and tension have continued with neighboring Sudan and amongst
militia groups, driven in part by competition over natural resources. Disparities in income and access to
resources, climactic shocks, food shortages, poor quality of social services and infrastructure, and lack of
employment opportunities have also been significant causes of instability. Given the poverty and
vulnerability of the South Sudanese population, and the continuing social, political, and economic instability
faced by the country, there was an immediate need for interventions to address short-, medium- and long-

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Safety Net and Skills Development (P143915)



               term challenges. There was a need to bridge the gap from the limited livelihood opportunities (both in the
               agricultural sector and in the private sector) through the transition period of re-establishing basic social
               services and infrastructure and, ultimately, to an expanded economy with more employment and livelihood
               opportunities. Therefore, this project aimed to provide labor-intensive public works to generate temporary
               employment, while at the same providing valuable infrastructure development. These aims remained highly
               relevant as the country faced macroeconomic collapse, high inflation, and increasing food prices over the
               project period. The project also aimed to increase the government's capacity to deliver social protection
               programs in the longer term.

               No social protection sector program was established in South Sudan during the early period of its
               independence, therefore the project aimed to support the development of a policy. The South Sudan
               Development Plan for 2011-2013 identified the importance of social protection in reducing risk, vulnerability,
               poverty and exclusion in the newly independent country. The Bank's strategy paper for South Sudan at
               appraisal - the Interim Strategy Note for FY2013-14 - highlighted the creation of jobs and livelihoods, under
               the umbrella of a social safety nets approach, as a focus area, although no specific outcomes were
               identified. At completion, the PDO remained well aligned with the strategies outlined in the World Bank’s
               Country Engagement Note (CEN) FY18-19 for South Sudan, namely: (a) support to basic services for
               vulnerable populations, and (b) support to food security, livelihoods and basic economic recovery. The CEN
               acknowledged that social protection interventions were critical to supporting livelihoods and generating
               early economic recovery.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Provide access to income opportunities and temporary employment to the poor and vulnerable (ORIGINAL
                             indicators/targets)

                             Rationale
                             As indicated in the theory of change, the project's outputs included development of public works projects in
                             order to create short-term employment opportunities for the poor. Another output was to establish a skills
                             development program, including a market assessment and support for training providers, to increase
                             employability of the poor and vulnerable. A participatory, inclusive and transparent community-based
                             targeting process at the Boma level would identify beneficiaries for the public works and skills development
                             programs. These initiatives were envisioned to contribute to increasing access to income opportunities and
                             temporary employment to the poor and vulnerable, particularly women and youth.

                             Outputs


                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Safety Net and Skills Development (P143915)




     Creation of 4,032,670 days of work (original target: 2,190,000; revised target: 3,600,000) through 517
      public works projects (original target: not set; revised target: 150). The public works nature of the
      projects focused on community assets (roads, clearing of drainage channels, general cleaning of
      public assets, trash collection) and innovations in group farming in rural areas. Beneficiaries reported
      that the works increased mobility and access to markets, improved delivery of social services, and
      reduced incidents of communicable diseases.
     Capacity building support to local structures through training, workshops, and coaching (as reported
      by the project team), including in the following areas: vulnerability assessment and mapping,
      teamwork, reporting, conflict resolution, community mobilization, business cycles, payment
      processing, and record-keeping.

However,

     The skills training assessments/program were not implemented as planned.
     The skills development evaluative studies were not conducted as planned.
     Community-level communication campaigns were ad hoc, rather than standardized and systematic
      (as reported by the project team), leading to implementation challenges in localities with the
      inadequate communications.



Outcomes

     53,163 participants were employed in public works projects and received income, far surpassing the
      original target of 25,000. Of these, 74.0% were female. According to the ICR (page 18), meaningful
      participation of women in the public works activities was achieved through: (a) participation of women
      in the selection of public works activities; (b) work activities and payment sites in close proximity to
      participants’ houses; (c) assignment of work tasks based on physical ability (the ICR expresses this as
      "light and appropriate work for women"), including consideration for pregnant and lactating mothers
      included in the work norms; (d) selection of work hours taking into account women’s household
      obligations; (e) provision of work site shelter for children during work hours; and (f) zero tolerance
      towards violence.
     The percentage of beneficiaries selected in accordance with eligibility criteria was not available
      (target: 85%). Instead, the ICR reported that 80% of participants in an independent qualitative
      beneficiary satisfaction survey (conducted in November 2018) were "satisfied with the categories of
      households selected as these were deemed to be the most vulnerable." The ICR also noted that
      poverty was an eligibility criterion (eight of the nine targeting criterion contained poverty) and poverty
      was near universal (approximately 80 percent between 2016 and 2018).
     63.6% of workers (participants, also referred to in the ICR as beneficiaries) were paid on time (defined
      as cash paid fifteen days after the end of a work cycle), falling short of the target of 80.0%. According
      to the ICR (page 14), the shortfall in achievement was in part due to MIS glitches, internet connectivity
      issues, limited access due to weak infrastructure, insecurity and/or the rainy season, and low staffing.
      The Beneficiary Assessment revealed that the majority of respondents (78 percent) were "unsatisfied"
      with the payment process, namely the long time it took to receive money, noting that delays in
      payment disrupted their cash flows, caused challenges with their creditors, and forced them to
      constantly borrow. However, challenges such as the rainy season, absent participants, difficult
      terrain, connectivity, and verification issues often required additional time to deliver cash into the

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Safety Net and Skills Development (P143915)



          hands of the workers (participants). Further, the implementing partners did not always the payment
          schedule properly and participants incorrectly expected to receive payment immediately upon
          completion of work
         52.7% of beneficiaries (participants) ranked the program as "fair," "good," or "very good" in the areas
          of targeting mechanism and selection, payment mechanism, timeliness, and functioning of the
          oversight and coordination structures. This fell short of the target of 80.0%.
         100% of selected Bomas posted the list of approved beneficiaries in public places (or announced the
          list at a public meeting), achieving the original target of 90.0%.

Also,

         The independent project evaluation carried out in Juba indicated positive impact of the cash
          transfers. 36.0% of respondents bought food for their households with the cash, while 26% and 22%
          paid school fees and medical bills, respectively. 89% indicated that their household income increased,
          and of these, 82% reported that the increased income led to greater frequency and better quality of
          meals. A number of beneficiaries also reported to the ICR mission that they used the cash transfer to
          save and start small scale income generating activities.

However,

         The key output to design, test, and finalize a targeting mechanism to select poor youth for skills
          development training was not completed. Consequently, the actual skills training programs and
          assessments were also not completed.



Achievement is rated Modest due to significant shortcomings in the activity to develop a skills development
training program for youth, including failing to achieve the key project indicator to establish a targeting
mechanism for youth.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Provide access to income opportunities and temporary employment to the poor and vulnerable (REVISED
indicators/targets)

Revised Rationale
Outputs

See outputs reported above, for Objective 1.




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Safety Net and Skills Development (P143915)



Outcomes

      53,163 participants were employed in public works projects and received income, far surpassing
       the revised target of 34,000.
      100% of selected Bomas posted the list of approved beneficiaries in public places (or announced the
       list at a public meeting), achieving the revised target of 100.0%.
      See other outcomes listed above in Original Objective 1 on compliance with eligibility criteria,
       timeliness of payments, and beneficiary satisfaction.



Achievement is rated Substantial due to surpassing of the target for providing income opportunities and
employment to the poor and vulnerable, although there were moderate shortcomings in the quality of the
process such as timeliness of payments and compliance with eligibility criteria.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Put in place building blocks for a social protection system.

Rationale
According to the theory of change, the project's outputs included institutional support to the Ministry of
Gender, Children, and Social Welfare (MGCSW) to develop a social protection policy and the operational
tools to implement the policy. These outputs were envisioned to help the Government of South Sudan put in
place building blocks for a social protection system in the country. According to the Project Appraisal
Document (page 5), these "building blocks" were understood to be a social protection policy, and operational
tools to improve beneficiary identification and registration, monitor the program, and ensure that cash benefits
were transferred to eligible beneficiaries in a secure, transparent and timely manner.

Outputs

      Technical assistance in developing a social protection policy.
      Technical assistance in developing operational tools including a Management Information System
       (MIS), payment system, and targeting tool.
      Development/testing of a targeting mechanism to select poor youth for skills development training.
      Establishment of an appeals committee for grievances, a community-based structure that aimed to
       address grievances related to the project, as well as to mitigate against social risks, tensions,
       disputes, and in extreme cases, violence. This community-based grievance redress mechanism was
       functional and deemed largely capable of addressing complaints raised by beneficiaries, including
       incidents of violence in one project area. Nonetheless, shortcomings in the mechanism existed, such
       as limited capacity to identify, report on, and mitigate emerging social risks.


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Safety Net and Skills Development (P143915)



Outcomes

      A national social protection policy framework was approved by the Council of Ministers and launched
       in May 2016. A Social Protection Unit was established, staffed, and equipped within the MGCSW. A
       National Social Protection Technical Working Group, with support from the World Bank and the United
       Nations International Children’s Fund (UNICEF), was also established to bring together the
       Government, humanitarian and development actors for strategic coordination and alignment.
       Discussions with the World Food Programme (WFP) and UNICEF representatives during the ICR
       mission affirmed their appreciation of MGCSW’s leadership and commitment to sustain the Technical
       Working Group.
      Basic operational tools in support of the implementation of the policy framework, such as the MIS,
       grievance redress mechanism, targeting mechanism, and payment mechanism were launched. Data
       collection, storage and processing by the MIS was developed by project closing; however, the ICR
       (page 34) reported that the MIS still required "significant improvements in order to be considered as
       fully functional." The MIS independent assessment report (January 2019) noted issues on data privacy
       and security, internal data quality checks, synchronization with the biometric system, restricted access
       and audit trails, and lack of hardware, software, and trained staff to operate the system. The project
       introduced a three-step targeting process to select project beneficiaries (geographical targeting,
       followed by community-based targeting to select households). The payment mechanism was
       established, in partnership with a commercial bank, based on two-factor authentication. The payment
       procedure, involving three parties and the World Bank, allowed for rigorous checks and balances. The
       biometric component strengthened the registration and payment verification system, which aimed to
       reduce potential risks of fraud, thereby greatly enhancing transparency and accountability in the
       utilization of resources. However, as noted previously, there were some shortcomings in the process
       regarding timeliness of beneficiary payments and level of satisfaction of beneficiaries.
      Local level oversight and coordination structures, including State Technical Committees,
       County/Municipality Core Teams, Payam/Block and Boma/Quarter Council Development Committees,
       Appeals Committees, and Community Supervision Teams were established. The various structures
       played a role in mitigating risks, ensuring smooth implementation, serving as a liaison between the
       project and the communities, and promoting a culture of accountability and transparency. More
       specific information on the effectiveness of these local entities was reported by the project team as
       follows: on average, 67% of participants were "satisfied" with selection of beneficiaries, coordination
       between the structures and the beneficiaries, supervision of work and encouraging beneficiaries to
       work, and leaders offering a sense of direction and order; anecdotally: local structures served as
       effective entry points on the ground and helped generate strong commitment and ownership of project
       activities by local communities, thereby supporting smooth implementation and management of
       grievances, strengthening legitimacy of the project, and improving trust by communities of local
       institutions (in contrast, in locations were community mobilization and capacity building were not
       carried out effectively, there were higher levels of implementation challenges).

Achievement is rated Substantial due to establishment of the social protection framework and several
operational tools, although there were some shortcomings in the actual functionality of the tools.



Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Safety Net and Skills Development (P143915)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Modest due to the first objective only partly achieved, while the second objective was
                            fully achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    External shock
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy under revised indicators/targets is rated Substantial due to both objectives fully achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The PAD (page 17 and Annex 7) estimated the cost-effectiveness of the proposed wage transfer in the public
   works component. The public works activities were expected to reach 26,300 households and 173,580
   individuals with income transfers equivalent to US$3 per household for 30 days per year in rural areas and 40
   days per year in urban areas. The cost-effectiveness ratio was estimated at 0.48, meaning it was expected that
   it would cost US$2.07 project cost to transfer US$1.00 in wage benefits to the intended recipients. The
   PAD also provided an indicative illustration of potential economic returns for the skills development component
   based on a similar initiative (Adolescent Girls Initiative) being implemented in another part of the country.

   The ICR (Annex 4) revisited the estimate of the cost-effectiveness of the wage transfer and came up with a cost-
   effectiveness ratio of 0.42. The ICR suggested that due to the program's high labor intensity and the precision
   of the targeting (community-based targeting through house to house visits), the cost-effectiveness is favorable
   and comparable to earlier and similar programs in the Africa region and the world (for example, 0.40 cost-
   effectiveness ratio in Liberia and 0.47 in Ethiopia). Also, the opportunity cost for participating in the program
   (foregone income) was assumed to be very low due to very low formal labor force participation rates. Indirect
   benefits, which were not included in the appraisal calculation, were also likely to be significant due to the
   creation of public works assets intended to benefit the community.

   No internal rate of return was estimated at either appraisal or completion.

   Efficiency in implementation had some shortcomings, due to significant external shocks which led to early
   implementation delays. It took 17 months for the project to become effective after approval by the Bank Board,


                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Safety Net and Skills Development (P143915)



due to lengthy government approval processes and government reshuffling, departure of a major implementing
partner in the middle of the project period, and initial inefficiencies in the beneficiary payment mechanism due to
manual verification. Modifications in project design and implementation arrangements helped to ensure
eventual completion of project activities within 15 months of original project closing date. Project management
was shared among three Bank projects.

Efficiency is rated Modest based on significant shortcomings in efficiency of implementation (including dropping
of an entire project component) due to external shocks.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the project objectives is rated High due to strong alignment with government strategy and Bank
strategy. Efficacy is rated Modest under the original objectives due to significant shortcomings in achieving
outcomes for the first objective. Efficacy is rated Substantial under the revised objectives due to both
objectives fully achieved. Efficiency is rated Modest based on significant shortcomings in efficiency of
implementation (including dropping of an entire project component) due to external shocks.

Project under original objectives/indicators

Overall outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory due to High Relevance of Objectives, Modest Efficacy,
and Modest Efficiency.

Project under revised objectives/indicators

Overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory due High Relevance of Objectives, Substantial Efficacy,
and Modest Efficiency.




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Safety Net and Skills Development (P143915)



According to harmonized OPCS/IEG guidelines on restructured projects, the overall outcome is weighted
according to the amount of the Loan that disbursed before and after the restructuring. At the time of
restructuring in 2017, US$2.75 million, or 14.2%, of the Credit had disbursed. The original project numerical
rating is 0.426 (0.142 x 3 (Moderately Unsatisfactory)) and the revised project numerical rating is 3.43 (0.858 x 4
(Moderately Satisfactory)); therefore the combined rating is 3.856, which rounds up to 4, or Moderately
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The national social protection policy was approved and launched, although effective implementation is at risk
due to several factors, including continued volatility in security and economic conditions. The operational
tools to ensure implementation are also not yet fully functional and effective. A follow up operation, in the
form of a $40 million IDA Credit for a South Sudan Safety Net Project, is currently under preparation and will
ensure continued financing for the project interventions. Community-level capacity, through the community
structures established by the project, has been improved and ownership of community-level infrastructure is
high, but the sustainability of such assets is tenuous as operations and maintenance plans (and
funding) were not clearly defined.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The results framework was logical and straightforward, with the project design kept relatively simple to
  take into account very weak capacity and the challenging macro environment. Drawing from prior
  experience, the technical assistance for implementing agencies was clearly defined and relied
  on twinning arrangements with government staff and international consultants (in the project
  implementation unit) to strengthen capacity. Another lesson incorporated into the project design was
  the use of inclusive and transparent community-based targeting, given that poverty data was not
  available. The risk assessment appropriately rated the overall project risk as High given the fragile
  environment and low institutional capacity. The M&E design included clear data collection
  arrangements. Implementation arrangements were flexible in order to adapt to challenges as they arose
  (for example, difficulty in accessing some project areas, departure of some implementing partners due to
  security risks); however, the institutional arrangements were complex given the low capacity
  environment, with a multitude of local entities being responsible for targeting, implementation, verification,
  and grievance redress.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Safety Net and Skills Development (P143915)



  Moderately Satisfactory



b. Quality of supervision
 The project implementation period was marked by volatile conditions on the ground and hence the need to
 make multiple adjustments to the project design and implementation arrangements. Security issues
 prevented field supervision in several project areas outside of Juba. Field supervision was also affected by
 temporary relocation of Bank staff from the Country Office from December 2013 to May 2014 and from July
 2016 to April 2017. However, overall, there were a higher than usual number of Bank supervision missions
 and bi-weekly video conferences with implementing agencies to support implementation, anchored by task
 team leaders and core members who remained the same until project closing. There was appropriate
 candor in ISR ratings, as Development Objective and Implementation Progress ratings were both in the
 Unsatisfactory range during the months of stalled activity. Project restructuring was effectively used to
 respond to the changes in circumstances on the ground, including a change in scope of the public works
 activities to reach a higher number of beneficiaries in a shortened period of time; dropping of the skills
 training component (and key indicator); and the use of UNOPS to implement public works activities outside
 of the capital city of Juba. Challenges to fiduciary management were also effectively addressed by
 strengthening risk mitigation measures, such as requiring prior review for all procurement. Project
 monitoring was effectively carried out, although there were some shortcomings in the conducting of
 evaluative studies.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change was clear and the results framework accordingly robust. Each of the indicator
 definitions also identified a data source, targets, and baseline values. Project monitoring arrangements
 were also clear, encompassing a management information system, beneficiary satisfaction surveys (with a
 particular focus on targeting and transfer mechanisms), community score cards, and independent
 evaluations of the implementing partners. The evaluative aspects of the M&E design were largely focused
 on measuring the quality of the process (compliance with eligibility criteria, timeliness of payments,
 beneficiary satisfaction) and only anecdotally capturing the actual impact on beneficiaries livelihoods.



b. M&E Implementation
  Regular data collection and reporting were mainly coordinated and conducted by the project
  implementation unit, which included an M&E Specialist and a private sector firm to design the MIS.

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Safety Net and Skills Development (P143915)



  However, there were some data quality issues in the beneficiary payment process, as there were data
  mismatches between the biometric system and the MIS due to lack of full integration of the two
  systems. An independent evaluation for public works activities in Juba was commissioned by Action
  Africa Help International, although the same assessment could not be carried out in the other project
  areas. An independent beneficiary satisfaction verification exercise, with particular focus on targeting
  and transfer mechanisms, was conducted using a community-scorecard method; however, it was
  conducted only once towards the end of the project period project implementation instead of being an
  annual exercise, as per the M&E design; thus an assessment over time could not be made.



c. M&E Utilization
  Project progress as measured through the monitoring system was regularly discussed with the project
  implementation unit, identifying areas requiring attention. The MIS was functional and provided critical
  data but due to some remaining quality shortcomings in the system, there was a need to triangulate MIS
  data with data from other sources, such as the progress report from the implementing partners.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project due to small-scale civil works. The
   safeguard policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) was triggered. The project initially relied on a
   portfolio-wide Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework containing broad
   parameters, rather than a project-specific instrument. Safeguard policies on Pest Management (OP/BP
   4.09), Indigenous People (OP/BP 4.09) and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) were also
   triggered (for the latter safeguard International Waterways, the project was subsequently granted an
   exception to riparian notification because the proposed activities would be limited to the improvement or
   rehabilitation of existing water delivery schemes).

   A project-specific Environmental and Social Management Framework was eventually prepared which
   included an Integrated Pest Management Plan, and Environmental and Social Management Plans for
   specific public works activities. An international safeguards consultancy firm was hired by the project
   implementation unit to implement and monitor safeguards measures for three World Bank projects in the
   country. The firm seconded two international safeguards consultants to the project implementation unit, who
   supervised safeguards implementation, provided training, and supported safeguards officers at the various
   implementing agencies.

   The project team provided regular supervision of safeguards policies and the Government produced a
   safeguards closure report. According to the ICR, the report outlined challenges faced during
   implementation, particularly on social safeguards issues, including: (i) lack of a community mobilization
   strategy and tailored communication materials; (ii) no specific training and sensitization on gender-based
   violence prior to implementation; (iii) limited resources to ensure regular M&E of safeguards across project

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Safety Net and Skills Development (P143915)



   locations; and (iv) unsystematic management of voluntary land donation. The project team confirmed that
   the project was in compliance with all safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project implementation unit included a Finance Specialist and a Procurement Officer to support the
   three ongoing Bank operations in the country. Following the outbreak of violence in 2016, additional
   fiduciary risk mitigation measures were adopted to mitigate against heightened fiduciary risks, ensure
   accountable and effective delivery mechanisms, and enhance monitoring and evaluation of implementation
   progress. These measures included: (a) direct payments to service providers; (b) switching from report-
   based disbursement system to the transaction-based Statement of Expenditure disbursement system; and
   (c) prior review for all project procurement requests regardless of the amount involved. Also, given the
   need to verify tens of thousands of payments transactions in a high-risk environment, the project team was
   proactive in rolling-out biometric registration; however, the process continued to experience challenges of
   data mismatch between the biometric system and the MIS due to lack of full integration of the two systems.

   No ineligible expenditures were presented during the project period, and interim unaudited financial reports
   were presented in a timely fashion, with the final annual audit report providing an unqualified/clean
   opinion. There were some minor issues noted in management letters, including weaknesses in the
   process of handing over assets, delayed implementation of previous audit recommendations, failure to
   maintain a comprehensive risk management strategy, and continued reliance on manual accounting
   systems for project financial reporting purposes.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Community-level trainings on water, sanitation and hygiene and also financial literacy were not part of the
   original project design but were undertaken in Juba City at the initiative of the implementing partner. As
   reported in the ICR, training participants reported improved awareness of hygiene practices (i.e. ensuring
   cleanliness when breastfeeding), as well as of the importance of saving. Some participants reported
   engaging in small-scale income generating activities.

   Also, engagement in public works was reported to provide beneficiaries with a platform for greater
   interaction and dialogue among the diverse ethnic groups, contributing to strengthened community
   cohesion and social unity. Nine out of ten of the respondents of the independent evaluation in Juba felt that
   the Project united people of different ethnic groups.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Safety Net and Skills Development (P143915)



                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons from the ICR (page 29-30), adapted by IEG:

      The use of third parties as implementing partners can be very effective in fragile and conflict-
       affected settings, especially in situations where government capacity and systems are
       nascent and access to project locations is limited. In the case of this project, the engagement
       of UNOPS as implementing partner -- supported by a commercial bank as the payment
       service provider -- helped mitigate the capacity gap, enabled access to remote and insecure
       areas, and mitigated high fiduciary risks.

      A project design that addresses the specific daily needs and challenges of women is an
       effective way to promote gender equity and inclusion. Discussions with implementing
       partners and beneficiaries revealed that the targeting process usually took place in the
       morning, which was the time of day that women were usually available at home or in the
       neighborhood. Meaningful participation of women in public works activities was then
       achieved through: (a) participation of women in the selection of public works activities and in
       the community structures; (b) work activities and payment sites were in close proximity to
       beneficiaries’ houses; (c) assignment of work tasks based on physical ability (the ICR
       expressed this as "light and appropriate work for women"), including consideration for
       pregnant and lactating mothers included in the work norms; (d) selection of work hours taking
       into account women’s household obligations; (e) provision of work site shelter for children
       during work hours; and (f) zero tolerance towards violence.

An additional lesson drawn by IEG:

      Capacity building measures to expose national institutions to international expertise can be
       effective in developing nascent capacity. In the case of this project, the twinning
       arrangements with the Technical Support Team with international experts, knowledge
       exchange, and study tours, contributed to the project implementation unit's transition from
       one staffed fully by international consultants to one with a majority of national staff. In
       addition, working closely with international NGOs, a United Nations agency and a
       commercial bank also opened opportunities to learn new skills and build capacity.




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Safety Net and Skills Development (P143915)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear, well organized, and results-oriented. It provided a candid narrative on the context (outbreak
of violence) and its impact on the project design and experience. The theory of change was overall sound,
albeit focused on the short-term with output-oriented indicators given the emergency context. The results chain
was well-documented - with satisfactory quality of evidence - and supported the main conclusions. Lessons
were clearly derived from project experience, as outlined in the ICR. The ICR was overall consistent with
guidelines, although it did not explicitly state whether all safeguards were in compliance with policies (the TTL
subsequently provided confirmation on 12/18/19).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 16
