     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021990

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P151157                                     BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Bosnia and Herzegovina                      Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55290                                  31-Dec-2018                                           87,286,398.63

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2014                                30-Jun-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                          87,527,163.93                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero        John R. Eriksson             Christopher David Nelson         IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p.5), the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 12) and
   the Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR, paragraph), the Project Development Objective
   (PDO) was to meet critical needs and restore functionality of infrastructure essential for public services and
   economic recovery in floods affected area.

   This review will assess the following objectives:


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)



         to meet critical needs for public services and economic recovery in floods affected areas
         to restore functionality of infrastructure essential for public services and economic recovery in floods
          affected areas



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1: Emergency Disaster Recovery Goods (US$40.0 million at appraisal, reduced to US$32.6 million at
   restructuring, US$32.6 million actual) retroactively financed through the use of a positive list, the purchase
   of goods urgently needed during the recovery phase. The positive list included logistical goods,
   reconstruction goods, emergency goods, energy and power sector goods as well as agricultural recovery
   goods, with an initial priority set of fuel and food, agricultural and emergency goods. This component
   reimbursed the purchase of goods during the emergency phase, emergency goods that the governments
   intended to purchase to continue responding to the emergency, or replenish stocks depleted during the
   emergency. This component was reduced by US$7.4 million during the 2016 restructuring and reallocated
   to the second component to meet the rising needs of this second component based on the Recovery Needs
   Assessment (RNA) and progress in implementing activities reported by local institutions (see below).

   2: Rehabilitation of Key Public Infrastructure (US$57.0 million at appraisal, increased to US$64.4 million
   at restructuring, US$64.4 million actual) financed the rehabilitation of both local and regional public
   infrastructure based on the RNA. This component used a framework approach where activities were
   prioritized in a demand drive manner, based on the RNA. The following were financed: the rehabilitation or
   reconstruction of high priority, public service delivery infrastructure in the worst-affected areas. This
   component consisted of two subcomponents that followed different project cycles:

         Regional Infrastructure Rehabilitation Subcomponent that financed the rehabilitation of strategic,
          regional-level public infrastructure such as transport links, distribution and transmission
          infrastructure, dikes and other strategic public infrastructure. The Steering Committees set the
          overall sector financial envelopes for each entity. The ministries in charge of particular sectors under
          each entity identified a list of concrete activities. Two Project Implementation Units (PIUs)
          implemented the activities (one PIU for the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina FBiH, and one
          PIU for Republika Srpska - RS).
         Local Infrastructure Rehabilitation Subcomponent that financed local-level infrastructure, such as
          water supply schemes, local roads and bridges. Resources were allocated across the most affected
          municipalities. The municipalities prioritized the activities that were then bundled into larger
          packages procured by the PIUs. During the 2016 restructuring, an additional US$7.4 million was
          reallocated from component 1 above to this subcomponent.

   3: Project Implementation Support and Capacity Building (US$3.0 million at appraisal and actual)
   financed the management of the project and supported the identification and implementation of the sub-
   activities. The component also provided technical assistance and capacity building to help ensure future


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)



   improved disaster resilience. During the 2016 restructuring, this component was allowed to finance the
   purchase of disaster preparedness goods and equipment.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The total project cost reached US$100.0 million. Total disbursements reached US$87.5
   million. The balance was cancelled.

   Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) singulalry financed this project.

   Borrower Contribution: There was no Borrower contribution.

   Dates: The project was approved on June 30, 2014 and became effective less than three months later, on
   September 15, 2014. The Mid Term Review was conducted on June 3, 2016. The project was set to close
   originally on December 31, 2018 but was given a six month extension to close by June 30, 2019. There
   were two restructurings:

         On January 9, 2016 to introduce changes to the Results Framework, change component costs,
          reallocate resources between components and disbursement categories. The end target values of
          the three PDO outcome indicators were amended after the completion of the Recovery Needs
          Assessment (RNA) and the actual investments during the first year of implementation. In addition,
          one indicator (Distribution Lines constructed or rehabilitated) was dropped because the Government
          decided not to support investments in electricity under the project (ICR, p. 11 of 55). Three
          intermediate outcome indicators were introduced: (i) number of bridges rehabilitated; (ii) length of
          flood protection infrastructure rehabilitated or reconstructed; and (iii) number of landslides
          rehabilitation activities. Finally, as part of the change in components, the capacity building for
          disaster resilience under the third component was allowed to finance the purchase of disaster
          preparedness goods and equipment.
         On December 12, 2018 to provide a six month extension and amend the closing date to June 30,
          3019. This extension accommodated the completion of remaining activities, i.e., the rehabilitation of
          railway infrastructure in the Federation of BiH, the rehabilitation of local infrastructure and landslides
          on regional roads in Republika Srpska due to unforeseen weather conditions, and procuring new
          flood protection related equipment in Brcko District.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDOs were highly relevant to the World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for BiH (2016-
2020). One of three focus areas of the CPF was building resilience against natural shocks such as those
brought by natural hazards. CPF objective 3b - build resilience to floods – referred to the World Bank’s
support to existing multi-sector engagements in Disaster Risk Management (DRM). The objective also
noted strengthening World Bank support in water resources management for better protection and



                                                                                                       Page 3 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)



               preparedness against floods. The CPF mentioned continuing World Bank support in DRM through this
               project and future DRM policy dialogue.

               The PDOs were highly relevant to the governments’ strategic objectives. The 2015 Strategic Framework for
               BiH provided the BiH Council of Ministers a guide toward medium-term work programs. One of the strategic
               objectives related to the resilience and sustainability of infrastructure - improving environmental
               management and development of environmental infrastructure while increasing resilience to climate
               change. The PDOs were also relevant to the Sava and Drina Rivers Corridors Integrated Development
               Program (P168862) in the pipeline. Its objective was to improve flood protection and enable transboundary
               water cooperation in the Sava and Drina Rivers Corridors.

               In summary, the PDO, with its focus on helping to recover from the impact of the floods to improve the
               connectivity of BiH to the global economy through improved roads, bridges, and rails, was realistic, and
               achievable. Road transport in BiH accounted for 95% of all goods and passenger movement. Adding the
               improvement in flood protection activities as well as assisting in ensuring the recovery of agriculture
               production provided sufficient ambition to achieving rapid economic recovery of the region. The agricultural
               sector represented nearly 10 percent of GDP. The floods severely affected areas across central and
               Northeastern BiH, which had been historically oriented towards agriculture and agribusiness. The realistic
               PDO and its level of ambition contributed to a high rating of relevance.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             • to meet critical needs for public services and economic recovery in floods affected areas


                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The project supported local governments in BiH to respond to the crisis brought by the
                             floods and contribute to the economic recovery of the flood affected areas. This objective would be achieved
                             by financing the purchase of goods urgently needed for disaster recovery, based on a positive list that was in
                             line with the government’s priorities. The project’s positive list included: (i) logistical goods, (ii) reconstruction
                             goods, (iii) emergency goods, (iv) energy and power sector goods, (v) agricultural recovery goods, and (vi)
                             any other goods or commodities essential to recover from the flooding. The emergency goods purchased
                             would reach beneficiaries such as registered farmers and agricultural producers, emergency staff in flooded
                             cities who distributed goods to the residents or were engaged in search and rescue operations, and other
                             displaced people. According to the clarification provided by the World Bank project team to IEG on February
                             13, 2020, "majority of beneficiaries who received support in terms of agricultural goods were formally
                             registered farmers (i.e., registered in a formal registry of agricultural households). This registry included

                                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)



households for whom agriculture and farming were the main source of income, and registration was a pre-
condition to receive agriculture subsidies." Only two underlying assumptions were included in this theory of
change, both centering on capacity. First, that the government had adequate capacity to assess critical needs
and distribute emergency goods to disaster affected people. Second, that municipalities had sufficient
capacity to prioritize and implement rehabilitation works to restore the functionality of the destroyed
infrastructure to restore public service and spur economic recovery. The project had no other sources of
financing. These assumptions outside of the project were sufficient and valid to establish attribution.

OUTPUTS:

      100 percent of emergency disaster goods were purchased in line with established schedule, as
       targeted
      26 percent of affected farms benefited from government support (original target 20 percent, target
       exceeded)

OUTCOMES:

      US$27 million in emergency goods were distributed by entity-level strategic reserves (original target
       value of US$30 million, mostly achieved)
      There were 104,537 project beneficiaries (pb) (original target 75,000, target exceeded).
      There were 868,895 direct project beneficiaries (dpb) (original target 300,000 target exceeded), of
       which 51 percent were female beneficiaries (original target 51 percent, target achieved)

In summary, outcomes targets were achieved, mostly achieved or exceeded and efficacy of achieving this
objective was rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
• to restore functionality of infrastructure essential for public services and economic recovery in floods
affected areas

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project financed rehabilitation of both local and regional disaster-affected public
infrastructure essential for public services and economic recovery such as roads and railways. By financing
these public service infrastructure facilities to pre-flooding condition, the project would restore the functionality
of these public service infrastructure for the economic recovery of the flood affected areas. The eligibility
criteria used to prioritize the infrastructure projects were critical to support the economic recovery of the flood
affected area. For example, those infrastructure that were not affected by the 2014 floods were excluded.
Projects requiring long preparation, unresolved ownership, or complex, were excluded. All projects were
designed using the "build back better" principle. Funds were allocated to municipalities based on the RNA's
estimate for economic loss per capita, assigned in proportion to overall needs, corrected for a municipality's

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)



poverty level and capacity to generate own revenues. Most of the infrastructure to be rehabilitated would
focus on the transport, flood control, and agricultural sectors to support economic recovery. Only two
underlying assumptions were included in this theory of change, both centering on capacity. First, that the
government had adequate capacity to assess critical needs and distribute emergency goods to disaster
affected people. Second, that municipalities had sufficient capacity to prioritize and implement rehabilitation
works to restore the functionality of the destroyed infrastructure to restore public service and spur
economic recovery. The project had no other sources of financing. The assumptions outside of the project
were sufficient and valid to establish attribution of project outcomes. to the project's interventions.

OUTPUTS:

      446 public service infrastructure facilities were recovered to pre-floods condition (original target 200
         facilities, target exceeded)
      100 percent of targeted municipalities identified, consulted, and finalized lists of priority local service
         activities for funding under the project according to project criteria, achieving target.
        93 percent of regional activities were budgeted and presented to ministries as part of the list of priority
         activities for funding under the project (target 100 percent, mostly achieved)
        58,109 piped household water connections were rehabilitated (original target 15,000 households,
         target exceeded)
        263.58 km of rural roads were rehabilitated (original target 80 km, target exceeded)
        63.45 km of non rural roads were rehabilitated (original target 25 km, target exceeded)
        35 bridges were rehabilitated (original target 15, target exceeded)
        53,460 m of flood protection infrastructure were rehabilitated or reconstructed (original target 50,000
         m, target exceeded)
        56 landslides were rehabilitated (original target 15, target exceeded)
        19 public facilities were rehabilitated (schools, health facilities, priority public buildings, drainage
         ditches) (original target 10, target exceeded)
        Trained 137 public officials in disaster risk management (original target 30, target exceeded)

OUTCOMES:

      173,765 persons benefited from the rehabilitation of local infrastructure facilities (original target
       120,000, target exceeded)
      840,995 persons were identified as direct beneficiaries of rehabilitated local infrastructure (original
       target 300,000, target exceeded), of which 51 percent were female beneficiaries as targeted.
      According to the World Bank Task Team in an email to IEG on February 13, 2020, if 2014 prices were
       used on Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries (AFF)data, the real growth of AFF was 9.2 i percent in
       2015, and 9.1 percent in 2018. Overall GDP grew at the same rate at this time, except in 2018 when
       GDP rose from 3.2 percent in 2017 to 3.6 percent in 2018. Real figures suggested that the
       sustainability of the sector was maintained in terms of real prices. Livelihoods likely improved in 2018.
       The neutral effect was a positive outcome given the severity of damages. It was difficult to quantify the
       benefit per activity but the above effects could be partly attributed to the project as the largest single
       recovery operation in flood affected areas and led to restoring the functionality of economic
       infrastructure essential for public services and economic recovery.



                                                                                                      Page 6 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)



                            In summary, outcome targets were achieved, or exceeded while most output target indicators were mostly
                            achieved or exceeded leading one to ask if the target indicators were not ambitious enough or set too low. As
                            a result, efficacy of achieving this objective was rated substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Most of the target outcome indicators were almost achieved, achieved, or exceeded. The emergency goods
                            procured reached the intended beneficiaries, according to external audits conducted in 2017. The RNA did
                            note that in the immediate aftermath of the flooding, the agriculture sector experienced supply chain
                            disruptions. These were readily addressed by delayed payment terms of agricultural inputs and related
                            services that helped the farmers to recover. The project applied appropriate criteria and prioritized facilities in
                            flooded areas to restore them to pre flood conditions, if not more resilient. The project helped to rehabilitate
                            more infrastructure than initially planned. These achievements led to addressing the critical needs of
                            the flood affected areas and restored the functionality of the public services essential for the area's economic
                            recovery. Economic recovery was evident from the investments made in the transport sector, investment in
                            flood management, and in the agriculture sector. These included, for example the rehabilitation of more than
                            260 km of rural roads, 63 km of non-rural roads, 35 bridges, the reconstruction of 53,460 m of flood protection
                            infrastructure, and aid to 26 percent of affected farmers with seeds, seedlings, agriculture equipment, and
                            other goods to resume production. These activities contributed to an 8 percent increase in the country's long
                            term growth following the recovery (ICR, p 20 of 55). Overall efficacy is rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency: At appraisal, there was no Economic Rate of Return (ERR) established
   for the whole project because specific investments were only identified after the completion of the Recovery
   Needs Assessment (RNA). The project supported the rehabilitation of damaged infrastructure and interrupted
   public services related to transport, water supply and sanitation, and rural development but specific subproject
   investments were identified during implementation. Economic analysis at appraisal relied on limited data to
   arrive at costs and benefits (PAD, paragraph 38). A cost benefit ratio of 1.01 to 2.01 applied to the emergency
   assistance to restore public services and reduce welfare losses. Benefits included: the prevention of production
   loss because services were restored in 10-20 days in key sectors. These benefits were valued at US$5.7 million
   (for 10 day loss) and US$11.4 million (for a 20 day loss). Benefits from shortening the restoration of agricultural
   production by 10 days prevented productivity losses of US$18.8 million and US$37.5 million for 20 days.

                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)



Benefits from three interventions ranged from US$40.3 million to US$80.4 million. Reduced production losses
for a 10-20 day power outage were estimated to be between US$15.8 million (10 days) to US$31.5 million (20
days). For the rehabilitation and reconstruction of secondary roads, the estimated ex ante ERR reached 22
percent. Detailed costs and benefits were presented in Annex 7 of the PAD.

At completion, efficiency was calculated for subproject investments under each component. Annex 4 of the ICR
provided details in the calculations and assumptions used to reach the reported ERRs. There were over 400
subprojects. To replicate the economic analysis used during appraisal, a similar economic analysis was applied
to the transport sector only. The ERR for roads at closing was 15 percent over a 5 year period or 29 percent
over a 15 year period. The principles of building back better contributed to improved resilience in the affected
areas by reducing the future expected average annual losses due to floods. The flood protection works were
designed for a 100-year return period flood while pre-disaster floods were typically designed for shorter return
periods. The Net Present Value (NPV) was estimated at US$50 million over 20 years discounted at 5 percent
(no justification provided in the ICR).

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: Operational efficiency was achieved by fostering ownership and
co-financing at the local level for rehabilitating local public infrastructure. Project funds were not used for
feasibility studies or detailed designs, but for project execution of feasible projects with completed designs
resulting in a larger number of works. However, there was a lack of capacity to manage hundreds of
simultaneous flood management and infrastructure rehabilitation sub projects. The risk associated with this lack
of capacity was identified during appraisal, became evident during early implementation, and was addressed
after the MTR, resulting in the six month extension of project closing to complete remaining works that were
affected by procurement delays. In the case of Brčko District (BD), this was the first time a Bank financed project
was implemented in that District but they completed all their works in time.

In summary, the sub-project activity that received the majority of financial support reached high rates of
economic and financial efficiency. Secondary roads had an estimated 22 percent economic rate of return (ERR)
at appraisal. At closing, the same road sector was estimated with a 15 percent ERR. Administrative and
operational efficiency had some negative impacts from unforeseen weather conditions and changes in credit
conditions for municipalities in RS, which affected the pace of delivering local infrastructure rehabilitation; a new
bidding process for the rehabilitation of railway infrastructure in FBiH; and governance arrangements where
entity level ministries were assigned to coordinate directly with project beneficiaries for regional infrastructure
rehabilitation. The "building back better" principle assisted in improving operational efficiency for local service
delivery by enhancing the disaster risk management capacity of local entities. This efficiency compensated for
the relatively minor 6 month extension of project implementation period.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)



                                                                                                        Page 8 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)



                                                                                       57.00
Appraisal                                                   22.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       65.40
ICR Estimate                                                15.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objective was rated high. Efficacy of both Objectives 1 and 2 was rated substantial. Efficiency was
also rated substantial. Following the guidelines, the outcome is thus rated Satisfactory with minor shortcomings.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to development outcome:

      Risk from Natural Hazards. BiH continues to be prone to flooding. There is significant likelihood that
       floods of similar intensity to the 2014 event will hit the country again. There is potential negative
       impact from future floods on communities and infrastructure that have been reconstructed or
       rehabilitated under the project. To mitigate this risk, building resilience to natural shocks is one of the
       focus areas of the CPF for FY16-20 and the Bank continues an active policy dialogue in the country
       on Disaster Risk Management (DRM).
      Sustainability of Implementation Capacity. The project took important steps to strengthen the
       institutional capacity of local institutions in disaster risk management. The ICR reported that the
       country has not incorporated planning instruments. In the RS, land use plans were not updated along
       with the updates made in flood maps after the 2014 floods. A strong effort is needed in the years to
       come to build this capacity in BiH.
      Sustainability of Raising DRM Awareness. By raising awareness in DRM, key stakeholders and
       civil society fostered resilience in flood-prone areas by moving from a reactive response to a
       preventive risk management approach. During a March 2019 consultation, project stakeholders
       expressed an overall sense that rehabilitated or reconstructed public infrastructure was more resilient
       than the pre flood conditions. Rehabilitated and reconstructed dikes, for example were designed for
       floods with higher return periods. Construction of culverts, cleaning and widening of riverbeds were
       also expected to contribute to improved resilience in the flood affected areas. However, no specific
       studies mapped areas that were prone to hazards to better inform resilient investments and identify
       supporting policy reforms. Project stakeholders pointed to illegal construction in flood prone areas as
       an evidence of this risk that public policy reforms could address. There is a risk that efforts to raise
       DRM awareness would not continue after the project closing.




                                                                                                       Page 9 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)



     Financial and Technical Risks. Current budget allocations for disaster risk management at local
      level were typically used for maintenance of infrastructure. Future efforts on mechanisms that trigger
      comprehensive reforms are needed to ensure long-term sustainability of investments.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Following the 2014 floods, the project was prepared using streamlined procedures for operations in
  urgent need of assistance. This prompt response met the project’s critical needs to restore the
  functionality of disaster affected infrastructure. Under these emergency response operations, specific
  activities and components were identified, with target indicators, technical aspects, and monitoring and
  evaluation (M&E) arrangements to be verified during implementation. Environmental and social aspects
  were addressed at entry. The Bank assessed the main risks, and identified the need to strengthen the
  fiduciary and monitoring capacities of the Project Implementation Units (PIUs).

  The Bank had a robust experience in emergency response projects around the world and in the
  region. Lessons learned from prior similar operations that were considered in project design included (i)
  simplifying objectives and limiting scope to improve efficiency;(ii) using emergency operations to
  complement other World Bank and donor post-crisis assistance; (iii) having a PIU per governance entity
  when decision making is challenged by a decentralized organization; (iv) partnering with local
  governments to identify priority investments to improve accountability and ownership; and (v) allowing the
  addition of project activities that may be identified during implementation rather than at appraisal (PAD,
  paragraph 25).

  The principles of “build back better” was included in the project approach to build resilience and
  strengthen disaster risk management capacity. However, resilience aspects were not included in
  the M&E design such as adding indicators not only to track physical facilities recovered to pre-flood
  conditions but also those recovered because of improved resilience. For example, in RS, land use plans
  informed by flood maps generated by the project could prevent illegal construction in high risk, flood
  prone areas. Indicators showing how resilience improved could generate measurable factors to show the
  public the basis for public policy reforms and leverage recovery investments for adopting disaster risk
  management. Implementation design used existing structures, mechanisms, and capacities built by
  projects that were ongoing during appraisal. At appraisal, a substantial overall implementation risk was
  raised from design, stakeholders, and the implementing agency. General elections were due after project
  approval. Risk from stakeholders with competing priorities was mitigated by keeping local governments,
  who would not be part of the 2014 election, to be the primary stakeholder in identifying priority
  investments. Implementing agency risk was mitigated by recently adopted new legislation that allowed for
  urgent, streamlined procedures. Risk form design and scope across several sectors and government
  entities was mitigated planned capacity strengthening as part of the project. Most of the risks were
  adequately addressed during implementation (see Quality of Supervision below).

  In summary, the components were reasonable to achieve the PDO and the capacity of the implementing
  agencies to be supported by the project. Design was informed by lessons from prior similar
  operations. Adopting the "build back better" principle in recovery infrastructure sub-projects aided in


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)



  raising awareness in disaster risk management. While there was no co-financing, project financing for
  local sub-project investments were made only for sub project investments with completed feasibility
  studies and design financed by local entities, freeing projects funds to execute more sub-project
  investments, benefiting more people and accelerating implementation. All these supported a satisfactory
  rating of the quality at entry.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank ensured continuity of a strong task team with the co-team leader providing consistent oversight
 from project start to closing. Regular, semi-annual support missions were undertaken with multi-disciplinary
 teams of technical, environmental and social safeguards, and procurement specialists. According to the
 ICR, issues identified during these missions were promptly addressed and reported in aide memoires,
 ISRs, and management letters and proactively followed up to ensure achieving project outcomes. Some of
 these issues were related to fiduciary, procurement, and safeguard aspects, funds reallocation to achieve
 the intended project’s outcomes and facilitate implementation. For example, during the Mid Term Review,
 the Bank team recommended reallocating resources to better performing components such as the
 rehabilitation of local infrastructure if the procurement for the rehabilitation of railway infrastructure in FBiH
 or that of the rehabilitation of road infrastructure and flood protection infrastructure in RS were delayed any
 further. The Bank responded by assisting the PIU in the RS and BD in using the Bank’s local procurement
 consultant and staff. To address the issue surrounding the lack of specific capacity building activities by
 FBiH and RS, the Bank team confirmed in its February 13, 2020 email to IEG that they mobilized additional
 grant funds from the Enhancing Capacity to Understand Disaster Response Needs and Road Network
 Vulnerability in Bosnia and Herzegovina Trust Fund created by the World Bank to support the institutional
 capacity of the Civil Protection Agencies in better understanding disaster risk management needs. In the
 project's 2016 restructuring, the Bank team complemented capacity efforts by allowing the financing of
 equipment for post disaster response.

 In summary, the Quality of Supervision by the Bank team remained satisfactory because the team kept
 their focus on achieving the PDO, restructured the project to consider actual needs, and mobilized
 additional funds for capacity building. There were only minor shortcomings in the proactive identification of
 opportunities and resolution of threats that resulted in extending project closing. These included the
 governance aspects related to implementing the key regional infrastructure and the shift in the funds from
 grants to credit to assist RS local governments in implementing their local infrastructure sub-investments.



 Overall Bank Performance was “Satisfactory.” At entry, the Bank could have strengthened indicators in its
 results framework to incorporate lessons learned from international experience in building resilience in
 post-disaster contexts. During early implementation, considering that risk assessment pointed to the need
 to strengthen the fiduciary and monitoring capacities of the Project Implementation Units (PIUs), the Bank
 could have undertaken a more proactive role in strengthening the PIUs in both entities (FBiH, RS) and the
 District early in project implementation. The shortcomings were fully addressed during the remaining


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)



 implementation period. No other donors were involved, hence, no lack in coordination among donors were
 noted.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design followed the 2013 Guidance Note for Projects in Situation of Urgent Need. M&E design
 selected indicators that tracked progress and outputs with some targets to be identified after the project
 started and once prioritization of activities was completed. M&E design focused on the pace of
 implementation, efficiency of expenditures based on outputs, and due process (PAD, paragraph 30). M&E
 design was aligned with the PDOs and reflected the results framework that was firmed up with target
 indicators after the RNA, as designed. The project would be monitored by the Agriculture Project
 Coordination Units in the RS and BD and the agriculture Project Implementation Unit in FBiH.
 Arrangements were in place to monitor progress towards the PDOs through adequate indicators. The PDO
 was clear. The results framework was adequately used to monitor progress towards the project’s
 outcomes. The M&E design, however, did not specify indicators that would track the project’s contribution
 to the overall economic recovery. Considering that the project followed the principles of “building back
 better,” the indicator on public service infrastructure facilities that were reconstructed with improved
 resilience were not quantified. M&E design did not systematically measure women’s participation in the
 project. For example, the intermediate outcome indicator for the number of public officials trained in
 disaster risk management could have been gender-disaggregated. Annex 1 did not provide baseline
 information.



b. M&E Implementation
  End target values of the PDO indicators were determined during the first year of the project’s
  implementation and the results framework finalized through the first project restructuring in January 2016,
  M&E data was adequately collected and systematically analyzed starting from the second year (2015)
  until project completion. The methodology used to calculate the indicators addressed the issue of double
  counting. For instance, in cases where a settlement benefitted from both a bridge repair and flood
  protection works, the number of direct beneficiaries was not counted more than once. Both the PIU at
  FBiH and the Agriculture Project Coordination Unit (APCU) at RS had dedicated M&E staff. However,
  activity forms have not always been systematically provided by line ministries and municipalities. The
  PIUs have reported on the progress achieved in each of the sub-projects in their semi-annual
  implementation status reports, some though, were submitted late but with no significant impact on results.




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)




c. M&E Utilization
  M&E tracked project implementation progress. M&E data informed the reallocation of funds from
  Component 1 to Component 2 during the 2016 restructuring to ensure a more efficient use of Project
  resources. M&E findings were communicated to various stakeholders as evident in the 100 percent
  achievement of the indicator that target municipalities identified, consulted and prepared final lists of
  priority local service activities for funding under the project according to project criteria. The M&E data
  was also used to inform recommendations and lessons learned, for example in providing resources to
  local government as a grant or as a credit line.



  In summary, the overall rating of M&E quality is “Substantial”. The M&E system sufficiently assessed the
  achievement of the objectives and ensured a more efficient use of Project’s resource. Moderate
  weaknesses were in designing the intermediate outcome indicators to quantity of infrastructure that was
  now more resilient, not just reconstructed and rehabilitated to pre-flood conditions, specifying indicators
  that would quantify the contribution of the project activities to the economic recovery of the flood affected
  areas, and gender disaggregation whenever feasible. Nevertheless, the M&E quality was substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a category B and triggered OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment and
   OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. The project also triggered OP/BP 7.50 International Waterways but
   was given an Exception to Riparian Notification requirement under paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50. Despite this
   exception, the FBiH notified riparian countries through the International Sava River Commission on the
   proposed works along the Sava River aimed at raising the river’s embankments, and another notification
   was issued for works along the Bosna river. Responses were received from Slovenia, Croatia and Serbia
   with no objections or issues noted. The project had an Environmental and Social Management Framework
   (ESMF), which applied to all sub-projects. Each of the sub-projects financed under the project underwent an
   environmental screening as per the ESMF checklist and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), where
   applicable. According to the ICR, environmental and social safeguards compliance remained satisfactory
   throughout implementation.

   Solid waste management issues at the subproject sites were reported. There were also cases reported
   where the ESMF requirements, related to work place safety, were not fully addressed. These issues were
   addressed by strengthening the mechanisms in place to ensure that ESMF requirements were included in
   bidding documents for civil works and supervision. Municipalities were also supported to check compliance
   with all provisions including disclosure of ESMFs and screening checklists.


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)



  There were no cases of permanent acquisition of private land. The ICR reported that site-specific checklists
  were followed. Implementing authorities submitted proof that land acquisitions were adequately addressed,
  supported by signed agreements for those with temporary expropriation of private land plots for the
  duration of the corresponding civil works contract. Contracts for civil works could only be executed after the
  PIUs received evidence that land acquisition issues were satisfied.

  Project-affected people were aware of the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) and expressed
  satisfaction with the rehabilitation works carried out. Prioritizing regional and local infrastructure sub-projects
  used a participatory approach. Consultations with affected municipalities were held at the beginning of a
  sub-project. Joint meetings with relevant authorities were held to inform them on the World Bank’s
  environmental and social safeguards provisions as well as to plan mitigation measures. One complaint was
  received concerning the increased likelihood of floods if the proposed draining system design was used in
  constructing a bridge in the RS. The PIU, together with Banja Luka city representatives, the designer, the
  contractor, and supervisor teams met with the community. A solution was reached to construct manually
  operated gates to regulate rainwaters flow. The European Investment Bank (EIB) - financed Vrbanja River
  embankment works intended to implement a solution to this problem.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. Overall, both PIUs had adequate financial management systems, including
  accounting, budgeting, staffing, internal controls, counterpart funding, audit and financial reporting. Audit
  reports, which according to the World Bank Task Team in their February 13, 2020 email to IEG, were all
  unqualified, and the interim un-audited financial reports (IFRs) were timely submitted.

  Procurement. The project used a positive list to reimburse goods purchased during the emergency,
  purchase goods in response to the flooding disaster, and replenish stocks that were depleted during the
  emergency. A positive list is a list of eligible essential goods that can be retroactively financed. These
  goods could have been procured through national emergency procedures as set forth in the relevant laws
  of the Borrower or commercial practices of the private sector as set forth in the respective Project
  Operation Manuals. Technical and financial reviews of the goods procured were conducted for each
  expenditure, which determined their acceptability to the World Bank.

  The PIUs in FBiH and RS responsible for procurement were under the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and
  Water Management. Their staff was familiar with World Bank financed projects. However, both PIUs were
  ill prepared to undertake simultaneous design preparation and tendering processes for over 400 sub-
  project investments. The PIU in the RS was responsible for procurement in the BD at the beginning of the
  project implementation since this was the first Bank-financed project implemented at the district level. Later
  on, BD managed its own procurement by hiring 2 procurement staff to manage both RS and BD. This
  action accelerated project implementation. The World Bank Team also responded with intensified technical
  assistance and procurement support. Procurement issues were reported for both the FBiH and RS. In the
  FBiH, procurement was cancelled for a railway sub-project. Funds were reallocated over one-and-half
  years. In the RS, a prospective bidder complained about conflict of interest, which was promptly solved.




                                                                                                      Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                     IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 There were minor shortcomings
Outcome                        Highly Satisfactory     Satisfactory
                                                                                 in Efficacy and Efficiency.
Bank Performance               Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presented 12 lessons and recommendations from the project operations. IEG has selected
the following lessons that may benefit other task teams designing similar projects:

      A task team with strong in-country experience and seasoned in rapid response project
       preparation should benefit from using streamlined procedures. In this project, a strong
       task team was well versed in the country's policy environment and governance and
       administrative structures. The team included technical experts on flood management,
       landslides and rehabilitation of infrastructure to help identify quality issues in specific sub-
       projects and support the implementation units in addressing issues as these arise. The
       lesson from this project was that a project may benefit having a strong task team familiar with
       the country policy environment and knowledgeable in rapid response project preparation.
      Using a positive list and allowing for retroactive financing may be an effective way to
       implement emergency response projects. In this project, a positive list identified items
       eligible for retroactive financing. Reimbursement was applied to goods purchased during the
       emergency phase, goods that the government intended to purchase as part of its continuing
       response to the emergency, and goods to replenish stocks depleted during the emergency.
       Agreement was reached that the RNA would serve as the basis for identifying items that
       would be retroactively financed. Simplified procurement procedures during the early phase of
       implementation, carried out by PIUs familiar with World Bank procedures, also contributed to
       quick delivery of emergency response goods to the large number of beneficiaries. A
       framework approach and robust eligibility criteria with evidence-based prioritization,
       facilitated the rehabilitation of infrastructure essential for public services and economic
       recovery.
      Decentralized implementation of an emergency response project empowers
       participating municipal authorities to build on their proximity with recipient

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)



         beneficiaries to build local DRM capacity. In this project, local authorities supported by
         dedicated personal implemented and communicated with beneficiaries. Communication with
         local beneficiaries was effective because of the proximity between the places where
         decisions on sub-projects were made (municipal assemblies) and project beneficiaries. In
         addition, local experienced staff directly reached out to the project beneficiaries explaining
         the project objectives and decisions. These factors fostered beneficiary engagement and
         positively contributed to a demand-based prioritization of investments.
        Procurement procedures in emergency response and recovery projects may include
         cut-off dates to trigger re-allocation of funds when there are significant delays. In this
         project, restructuring followed the Mid Term Review and determined that the allocated funds
         for the first component exceeded need. The amount reduced was reallocated to the
         component that dealt with local and regional infrastructure reconstruction and rehabilitation.
         This action served to keep focused on achieving the desired project outcomes.
        Adopting a “build back better” strategy for emergency response operations may
         improve the resilience of rehabilitated infrastructure. In this project, improving resilience
         in the affected areas was not a primary project outcome. Nevertheless, the flood protection
         works financed by the project improved resilience of infrastructure in those areas (flood
         protection works were designed for a 100-year return period flood while pre-disaster flood
         protection works were typically designed for shorter return periods). In a March 2019
         consultation, project beneficiaries agreed that public infrastructure financed under the project
         was more resilient than its condition prior to the May 2014 floods.
        Accountability and municipal co-financing are effective mechanisms to reach a larger
         number of beneficiaries and contribute to efficient project implementation. In this
         project, accountability by local governments was evident in their promotion of stakeholder
         participation, fostered buy-in, and ownership in project decision. Local governments also co-
         financed rehabilitation works, selected sub-projects, communicated with beneficiaries, and
         implemented works. In this project, municipalities financed the preparation of feasibility
         studies and detailed designs for priority infrastructure. This strategy led to executing a larger
         number of infrastructure investments, expanded project coverage, and reached more
         beneficiaries. Since only viable works were financed, project implementation was
         accelerated. Promoting accountability at the local level was critical in this post-disaster
         situation when decisions had to be made rapidly and enforced just as quickly.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

This ICR was concise and followed the guidelines. The report was focused on results and highlighted the
activities that supported the outcomes achieved. The evidence provided was supported by references and
further explained in the annexes. The annex on efficiency, for example, drew on other countries experience with
ERRs for similar components that were funded under the project. The analysis summarized the points and
clearly linked the evidence to the findings. For example, there was some considerable effort made to explain

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)



why the two sectors, transport and agriculture, were significant factors to support the impact of the subproject
infrastructure investments in the economic recovery of the flood affected areas. Lessons and recommendations
were based on project operations. For example, how the project implementation benefited from having a task
team well grounded in the country's policy environment, its governance and administrative structures. The
report was results oriented and emphasized how the project activities informed the outcomes. For example,
rural connectivity was enhanced with the completion of rural roads. The report was internally consistent,
pointing to minor inefficiencies and providing evidence to support that these did not take away from the targets
that were exceeded. These inefficiencies referred to the resulting extension of the project closing because of
the governance challenges in implementing key regional infrastructure and the change from grants to credits to
fund RS local governments local infrastructure sub-investments. The results were mutually reinforcing,
providing the evidence, for example on how the outcome for the first objective was mostly achieved but still
supported substantial efficacy.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 17
