     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BT: Urban Development-II (P090157)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022024

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P090157                                  BT: Urban Development-II

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Bhutan                                   Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-47440,IDA-54310                      31-Dec-2015                                         24,847,447.58

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Apr-2010                              30-Jun-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          12,007,500.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           29,407,500.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       24,769,094.80                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                J. W. van Holst             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani                Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 3):




                                                                                                Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BT: Urban Development-II (P090157)



   a) To support Bhutan's municipal reform program by strengthening municipal finance and
   management systems in Thimphu and Phuentsholing: and (b) to improve infrastructure services in
   Northern Thimphu where no formal services are currently available.

   An additional objective was added with the Additional Financing (AF) for the project on August 13, 2014. The
   revised PDOs as stated in the AF Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) were:

   (a) To strengthen the municipal finance and management systems in selected Thromdes (local
   government equivalent to a municipality or city corporation): (b) To improve infrastructure services in
   Thimphu: and (c) To support implementation of the urbanization policies under the government's
   Eleventh Five Year Plan (FYP).

   This review is based on the PDOs as stated in the AF Agreement.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  13-Aug-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   There were three components (PAD, pages 4 -5) and Schedule 1, page 5 in the AF Agreement).

   1. Municipal Finance & Management. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.5 million. With the
   AF, the revised estimated cost was US$2.2 million. The actual cost was US$1.8 million. This component
   aimed at strengthening the institutional systems of the Thimphu and Phuentsholing municipalities. There
   were two sub-components: (i) strengthening their local revenue administration systems: and (ii)
   strengthening their expenditure and financial management systems. The scope of this activity was scaled
   up with the AF to include strengthening the local revenue administration, expenditure and financial
   management systems of Gelephu and Samdrup Jongkhar, which were designated as municipalities in
   2010.

   2. Thimphu Northern Area Development. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$9.3 million. With the
   AF, the estimated cost was US$25.2 million. The actual cost was US$20.1 million. This component aimed
   at developing urban infrastructure (internal roads, water and sewerage systems and street lighting in
   two areas on the northern edges of the Thimphu city, under the land-pooling approach (This approach
   refers to a planning technique aimed at minimizing displacement and land acquisition costs, through
   voluntary agreements with land owners to redraw their plots in exchange for improvements in basic

                                                                                                 Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BT: Urban Development-II (P090157)



  infrastructure. According to the ICR (page 54) variants of this approach have been used by urban
  governments in Japan, Korea, Germany and India). The scope of this activity was expanded with the AF to
  include infrastructure investments in the Lower Taba Local Area Plan (LAP, refers to a local level master
  plan that defined land uses, laid out plots and included location of infrastructure facilities to serve a
  projected future population).

  3. Capacity Building. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.2 million. With the AF, the estimated cost
  was US$2.0 million. The actual cost was US$2.2 million. This component aimed at financing training and
  technical assistance for the municipalities and capacity building of the Ministry of Works and Human
  Settlement (MoWHS).

  With the AF, the third component was renamed as Support for Policy Implementation. The scope of
  this component was revised to include additional assistance to the MoWHS and the municipalities for :
  (i) implementing a national human settlements strategy: (ii) drafting national planning legislation
  and standards: and (iii) implementing architectural guidelines for land use.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$12.7 million. The revised estimate with the
  AF was US$29.4 million. The actual cost was US$24.7 million.

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA credit of US$12.0 million. AF of US$17.4 million
  was approved on August 24, 2010. With this the IDA credit for the project was US$29.4 million. The amount
  disbursed US$24.7 million. There was parallel financing for similar activities in the southern part of Thimphu
  city from the Asian Development Bank (ADB).

  Borrower contribution. Borrower contribution was estimated at US$0.7 million at appraisal. The Bank
  project team clarified that there was an actual borrower contribution of US$0.7 million for the original project
  and US$0.1 million for contribution to the AF project.

  Dates. The original project approved on April 29,2010 was scheduled to close on December 31, 2015. The
  AF was approved on August 24, 2010. The project eventually closed on June 30, 2019.

  Other changes. These changes were made through a Level 1 restructuring on August 13, 2014. In 2013,
  the government requested support for implementing the Municipal Finance Policy and the 11th FYP's
  objective of strengthening the financial management systems of the municipalities. Following the Mid-Term
  Review in May 2013, the Bank agreed to the government's request for additional support through an AF
  credit.

        The project was scaled up to expand its geographical scope.
        While the two original PDOs essentially remained the same, an additional PDO was added.
         The results framework was modified in lieu of the activities added through AF.
        The closing date was extended to June 30, 2019 for completing the scaled up activities.



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         BT: Urban Development-II (P090157)



                       Split rating. An additional PDO was added and PDO targets were revised following the AF. However, given
                       that the revised PDOs were overall completely consistent with the original PDOs for the project, there is no
                       split rating of objectives in this ICRR.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Economic growth before appraisal, had led to rapid urbanization, with urban population
estimated to have grown by about 4.7% annually since 2000. Urban population accounted for a third of the
total population, and was expected to reach 50% of the total population by 2020. Meeting the challenges of
urbanization was therefore important in the country context. The urbanization issues (such
as, providing water and sewerage facilities and housing), were particularly important in Thimphu, the
country's capital and biggest municipality (accounting for around 40% of Bhutan's total urban population)
and Phuentsholing, the next most populous municipality.

Government Strategy. The PDOs were consistent with Bhutan's 10th Five Year Plan (FYP) for 2008-2013
and the National Urbanization Strategy (BNUS) of 2008. The plan outlined the goals of sustainable urban
development, increasing housing supply and supporting decentralized governance. The BNUS articulated
the urbanization issues: municipal reform towards decentralization: balanced regional
development: prioritization of investments in two major cities and regional centers: environmental protection
and cultural conservation: and capacity building of urban institutions. In 2007, Bhutan enacted the Local
Government Act and the Public Finance Act in 2007. These acts delegated Thromdes with service delivery
responsibilities and gave them power for collecting and managing own-source revenues. The PDOs were
very consistent with Bhutan's 11th FYP for 2013-2018 and with the current 12th FYP for 2018-2023. While
the 11th FYP highlighted the need for deepening the institutional and policy framework for urbanization, the
12th FYP underscored the need for creating a "just, harmonious and sustainable society through enhanced
decentralization".

Bank strategy. The PDOs continue to be relevant to the Bank strategy. At appraisal, the first pillar of the
Bank's Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for 2006-2009, highlighted the need for "promoting quality of
urban life and balanced regional development' through "satisfactory urban service delivery" in Thimphu and
selected towns (CAS, page 20). The Second Area of Engagement of the Bank's Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) for 2011-2014, highlighted the need for "spatial planning and public services"
and "Integrated sustainable urban-rural development" (CPS, page 21). The PDOs are highly relevant to the
current CPS for 2015-2019. The Results Area three of the CPF aimed at "supporting green development"
and highlighted the need for "improving infrastructure management". (CPS, page 13).

This project succeeded a prior project (Bhutan Urban Development Project), which financed basic
infrastructure in ten smaller settlements in Bhutan. Unlike the prior project, this project focused on
investments in basic infrastructure in Thimphu municipality, where population growth concerns were most
urgent. With the AF, the project activities were appropriately expanded to include the two areas that had
been designated as municipalities in 2010. The relevance of objective is rated as High.


Rating Relevance TBL




                                                                                                                      Page 4 of 15
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      BT: Urban Development-II (P090157)



               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective

                Strengthen the municipal finance and management systems in selected Thromdes

                Rationale


                Theory of change. Capacity building of the municipalities and staff training, were aimed at improving
                the revenue collection and expenditure management of the two municipalities. Scaling up activities (such as
                strengthening the expenditure and financial management systems of two more municipalities) were core
                activities aimed at improving their revenue collection and expenditure management capacity. The causal
                links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and the intended outcomes were
                monitorable.

                Outputs (ICR, pages 12- 14 and page 34).

                        Revenue Management Systems (RMS) and Digital Asset Registers (DARs) were installed in four
                         targeted cities (Thimphu, Phuentsholing, Samdrup Jongkhar and Gelephu), to improve collection of
                         property taxes. Budget and Accounting Manuals were drafted in these municipalities as targeted. The
                         budgets and manuals enabled Thimphu municipality to meet recurrent expenditures through
                         the revenue from property taxes. Thimphu also linked the Digital Asset Registers and Revenue
                         Management System to the water service billings and introduced an e-payment system for collecting
                         water tariffs.
                        8,738 Property Tax Records were computerized, exceeding the target of 7,000 in Thimphu
                         municipality. The corresponding figures for Phuentsholing and Gelephu municipalities were 2,803
                         (target 2,000) and 1,199 (target 1,100) respectively. The target for the Samdrup Jongkhar
                         municipality (1,500), was expected to be reached in 2020, as implementation of the system was
                         started just before project closure in that municipality.

                Outcomes. (ICR, paragraph 25).

                        Property taxes collected in Thimphu municipality increased to over 250 million Bhutanese Ngultrum
                         (BTM), as compared to the target of 200 million BTM between 2011 and 2017. Property taxes
                         collected in Phuentsholing municipality increased from BTN 11 million in 2016 to BTN 106 million in
                         2017, representing an increase of 963% during the period (there were no targets). Due to delays in
                         the roll-out of the property and tax record digitization, Gelephu and Samdrup Jongkhar



                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BT: Urban Development-II (P090157)



         municipalities did not report figures of property taxes when the project closed. The ICR (paragraph 25)
         notes that these figures are expected at the end of 2020.

Increases in revenue collections do not necessarily result only from digitization of property records. It is
therefore impossible to ascertain the extent to which the digitization of property records contributed to
improving the finance and management systems, since there are no data in the ICR to confirm the direct
impact of activities associated with digitization of property records. Hence, given the lack of evidence
regarding the extent to which the municipal finance and management were strengthened and the lack of
indicators that could serve to measure their impact and attribution to the project, the achievement of this
objective is rated as Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

Improve infrastructure services in Thimphu

Rationale


Theory of change. Developing urban infrastructure (roads, water and sewerage systems and street lighting)
under the land-pooling approach for Thimphu municipality and the central water supply scheme for Thimphu
municipality, were expected to improve service delivery in Thimphu. Likewise, infrastructure investments in
the Lower Taba Local Area Plan for Thimphu, were likely to aid in accommodating the population growth in
the municipality. These activities were expected to contribute to improving the infrastructure services in
Thimphu. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical, and the intended
outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, pages 14-16 and pages 30-34).

      624 serviced plots were developed for construction under the Dechencholing, Lanjopakha and Taba
         Local Area Plans (LAPs) at closure. This exceeded the target of 300.
        14.58 kilometer (km) of roadside footpaths were constructed in the three LAPs, exceeding the target
         of 10.98 km. 1.12 km off-road footpaths were constructed, exceeding the target of 0.62 km.
        20.40 km of non-rural internal roads were constructed as targeted.
        10.39 km of roadside drains were constructed as targeted.
        20.30 km of water pipelines were provided at closure. This was slightly short of the revised target
         of 20.70 km.
        13.75 km sewerage pipelines were provided, exceeding the target of 13.05 km.
        404 staff of the Thimphu and Phuentsholing municipalities were trained, exceeding the target of 80.



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BT: Urban Development-II (P090157)



Outcomes. (ICR, page 14-16).

The targets for the following outcomes were either realized or exceeded.

      33,309 persons in urban areas had access to all season roads within a 500 meter range under the
       project in December 2018. This exceeded the target of 1,200.
      732 households were provided with new piped water connections, exceeding the target of 600.

On the other hand, the targets of the following outcomes were partly realized.

      364 demand-determined new building permits were issued in the Local Area Plans. This represented
       85% of the target of 430 permits.
      510 households were provided with new sewerage connections. This represented 85% of the target
       of 600.

According to a beneficiary survey conducted in November 2019 in the three interviewed project areas, an
average of 87% of respondents reported high levels of satisfaction with the connections to piped water
systems, and 92% of respondents reported satisfaction with the flush toilets.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Support implementation of the urbanization policies under the government's Eleventh FYP.

Rationale


Theory of change. Technical assistance to the Ministry of Works and Human Settlements and the
municipalities (such as for developing a national human settlement strategy, developing urban development
guidelines and planning regulations), were likely to support the implementation of urban policies under the
government's 11th FYP. The causal links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical

Outputs (ICR, page 16).

      Technical documents and policy guidelines and standards for urbanization policies (such as the
       Bhutanese Architectural Guidelines, the National Human Settlements Strategy (NHSS), the Spatial
       Planning Act and Planning Regulations and Standards), were completed as targeted.
      404 people were trained to use the architectural guidelines and standards at closure, exceeding the
       target of 80.

Outcomes.



                                                                                                Page 7 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               BT: Urban Development-II (P090157)




                                  The National Settlement Strategy was used for identifying the investment priorities of the MoWHS and
                                   other ministries for the 12th Five Year Plan and for preparing the Comprehensive National
                                   Development Plan.
                                  Nine plans were prepared incorporating the findings and recommendations of the outputs described
                                   above, exceeding the target of five. The plans included the Paro Valley Development Plan for 2015 -
                                   2035, the Punakha Urban Development Plan for 2016, two LAPs in Samdrup Jongkhar, two in
                                   Dagana and three in Bumthang.

                            While it is difficult to ascertain the extent to which the outputs produced under the auspices of this project
                            contributed to realizing the PDO, based on the information in the ICR (paragraph 38), this review concludes
                            that the activities significantly contributed to realizing the PDO.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                            While there was no direct evidence that Objective 1 was achieved, the efficacy of the achievement of
                            Objectives 2 and 3 was substantial. Hence, although Objective 1 was important for the support of municipal
                            reform and the improvement of urban infrastructure, the overall efficacy of the project’s achievements was
                            rated substantial, but marginally so.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency


   Economic analysis. An economic analysis was conducted at appraisal and at closure for activities under the
   LAPs. These components accounted for 86% of the estimated cost at appraisal and 81% of the actual cost. The
   project activities aimed at improving the service delivery of water and sewerage facilities in the project-
   intervened areas. The project benefits were to be reflected through land value increase in the project areas. The
   ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) for Dechencholing and Lanjopakha LAPs were estimated
   at 28% and 39% as compared to the ex ante EIRR of 33% and 28% respectively.



                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BT: Urban Development-II (P090157)



An economic analysis was also conducted for activities added through the AF for the project (LAP for Taba and
the Central water supply scheme). The estimated ex post EIRR for Taba LAP, was 25% as compared to the ex
ante EIRR of 12%, The ex post EIRR for Taba was considerably lower than the ex ante EIRR, due to the slower
than forecast uptake of water and sewer connections. The ex post EIRR for the Central water supply
scheme was 29% as compared to the ex ante EIRR of 24%.

Administrative and Operational issues. Project savings were realized due to a combination of factors,
including exchange rate fluctuations and competitive procurement. These savings were used to implement
water, sewerage, road and streetlight improvements in two other adjacent LAPs. On the other hand, due to
weak implementation capacities, the implementation of finance and management systems was slower in all
municipalities other than Thimphu. Consequently, as noted already in Section 4 of this review, Gelephu and
Samdrup Jongkhar municipalities were unable to report figures of property taxes collected when the project
closed.

Despite some administrative and operational weaknesses, the efficiency with which the project was
implemented is rated as substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   86.00
 Appraisal                                                30.50
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   81.00
 ICR Estimate                                             30.50
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



Relevance of the original PDOs and revised objectives included in the AF to the government and Bank strategy
is High. The efficacy of the achievement of one of the three objectives (to strengthen the municipal finance and
management systems in selected Thromdes), was rated modest due to inadequate evidence. On the other
hand, the efficacy of the other two objectives (to improve infrastructure services in Thimphu and to support
implementation of the urbanization policies under the government's Eleventh FYP) were rated substantial and
overall efficacy was rated substantial, although marginally so because of the considerable importance
of strengthening the municipal finance and management systems. Efficiency was rated substantial, in view of
the sound economic rates of return for local area plans which accounted for close to 80% of all


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BT: Urban Development-II (P090157)



investments. Given the weakness of the overall efficacy rating, the project's overall outcome
is rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



Government commitment. The ICR (paragraph 77) notes that the long-term development outcome of
stronger urban management and decentralized governance, is contingent upon improved institutional
capacity. For municipalities this would include appropriate staffing and training to ensure that the municipal
finance and management systems are consistently utilized. It would also require a deeper commitment by
the government to ensure that new technical staff are trained in the principles of municipal finance and
management.

Technical risk. The ICR (paragraph 78) notes that the water and wastewater systems in this project were
financed under a design-build-operate transfer fixed term contract. This meant that Operation and
Maintenance (O&M) costs needed to be covered once the contract concludes in 2022. It is not clear if
revenues from the current tariff system will be adequate to cover the future O&M costs.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  According to the ICR, this project was prepared based on the experience of a prior Bank project - the
  Bhutan Urban Development Project (BUDP 1). Lessons from this previous
  operation were incorporated into the design, including focusing only on investments in Thimphu, a new
  approach to land assessment through the Land Pool approach, and focus on building local government
  capacity. A Project Management Unit was established in the Ministry of Works and Human Settlements
  which oversaw the project and was responsible for implementation of Components 1 and 3. For
  Component 1, project focal points were designated in each Thromde. A Project Implementation Unit was
  established for Thimphu for the works implementation for Local Area Plans. These arrangements were
  appropriate for strengthening their institutional capacities. Several risks were identified at appraisal,
  including risks associated with weak implementation capacity of the Thimphu City Corporation and weak
  capacity for financial and procurement management. Mitigation measures incorporated at design to
  address these issues, included training relevant staff on procurement and financial management during
  implementation. With mitigation measures, the overall project risk was rated as moderate at appraisal.



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BT: Urban Development-II (P090157)



  Appropriate arrangements were made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in
  Section 10 of this review).



  There were shortcomings in M&E (discussed in Section 9a of this review).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


 Nineteen Implementation Results Reports were filed and twenty seven supervision missions were
 held over the project lifetime of ten years. The ICR (paragraph 74) notes that supervision team was
 appropriately staffed, and continuity of leadership was maintained with two Task Team Leaders during
 project implementation. The supervision team responded to government priorities such as
 through identifying separate trust fund resources (from the Institutional Fund) to support fiscal
 decentralization studies and training. This freed credit resources for other activities under the original
 credit. The ICR (paragraph 74) notes that the Mid Term Review provided a comprehensive assessment of
 project performance and this provided the basis to scale up the project with AF. The team also worked
 closely with the Project Management Unit to identify and utilize the cost savings (due to exchange rate
 changes and competitive bidding), for financing additional activities in the two LAPs. The support provided
 by the supervision team aided in safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in Section 10).

 The Bank failed to make the necessary changes to remedy the weaknesses of M&E (discussed in Section
 9b of this review).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 Of the three key outcome indicators - the number of building permits issued by Thimphu municipality and
 number of households with permits in Dechencholing and Lanjopakha - were appropriate for monitoring

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BT: Urban Development-II (P090157)



 project performance. The third indicator - percent change in local revenues collected by the two
 municipalities - was inadequate, as outputs other than digitization of property records, would be required for
 strengthening the municipal finance and management systems of municipalities for improving collection of
 local revenue. Likewise, although the Thromode M&E cell tracked the number of beneficiaries within and
 adjacent to the Local Area Plans that benefitted from access to these services, there was no specific
 indicator to capture this outcome.



b. M&E Implementation


  A household survey was conducted at appraisal to establish baseline data on parameters against which
  the project’s performance was to be measured (PAD, paragraph 37). However, given that the data held
  by municipalities on the number of properties was incomplete, targets were set based on best estimates.
  The project staff were trained on M&E at appraisal by the MoWHS.



c. M&E Utilization


  The ICR (paragraph 63) notes that regular reporting of results allowed the team to refine the PDO
  indicators during the Mid Term Review. For example, the change from "local revenue" collected to
  "property tax collected" was a better measure of the project's contribution. Likewise, splitting water and
  sewerage conditions enabled the team to identify and track progress on both types of connections. This
  enabled the municipalities outreach efforts to improve connection rates, when the water and wastewater
  treatment plants became operational.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


   The project was classified as a category B project under World Bank Safeguard policies. Two safeguard
   policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) (PAD, page 16). Three additional safeguards were triggered with the project
   with AF: Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): and Projects on
   International Waterways (OP 7.50).

   Environmental Assessment. The PAD (paragraph 75) notes that an environmental assessment was
   conducted at appraisal. The expected environmental impacts, (such as, due to the clearing of

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BT: Urban Development-II (P090157)



  trees, construction-related impacts, temporary disturbance to local traffic and operation stage impacts due
  to sewerage disposal), were expected to be limited. The ICR (paragraph 66) notes that there were no major
  or irreversible impacts and compliance with environmental impacts was deemed to be satisfactory.

  Involuntary Resettlement. All project affected families title owners, who had agreed to the Land Pooling
  Approach and contribute 25% of their land, were to receive compensation for structures, other assets and
  livelihood plus resettlement assistance (PAD, page 66). Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) were
  prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal (PAD, page 64). The ICR (paragraphs 68 and 69) notes that
  resettlement and rehabilitation of the affected households and persons were managed as per the RAPs and
  compensation payments were made to the affected people (ICR, paragraph 69).

  Natural Habitats. The ICR (paragraph 66) notes that there were no major or irreversible impacts and no
  damage or loss to important flora and fauna as a result of project activities in the development of
  LAPs, rehabilitation of roads and construction of the water supply scheme.

  Physical Cultural Resources (PCR). According to the clarification provided by the team, the project
  assessed the risk to PCR prior to implementation and there was no destruction or damage to PCR during
  implementation.

  Projects on International Waterways. The ICR (paragraph 65) notes that in accordance with the
  guidelines for this safeguards, India and Bangladesh were notified, with India responding with no objection
  and Bangladesh submitting no response.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


  Financial management. There was no separate Financial Management Assessment of the MoWHS, as
  the ministry had earlier implemented Bank-finance projects and was familiar with Bank's financial
  management policies (PAD, page 39). The financial management risk was rated as "modest' during
  preparation. The ICR (paragraph 70) notes that financial management performance of the project
  was satisfactory. Good quality Interim Unaudited Financial Reports and external audit reports
  were submitted in a timely fashion. The team clarified that the audits were unqualified.

  Procurement management. An assessment of the procurement arrangements of the Thimbu City
  Corporation (TCC) and the Phuentsholing City Corporation (PCC) - was made at appraisal (PAD,
  paragraph 61). Overall procurement risk was rated as Moderate. The ICR (paragraph 71) states that
  overall procurement performance was rated as moderately satisfactory. Although there were significant
  delays in the initial years due to a combination of factors, including understaffing of the implementing
  agencies, lack of understanding of appropriate contract provisions and a scarcity of qualified bidders on
  initial contracts, these issues were rectified during implementation (ICR, paragraph 72).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BT: Urban Development-II (P090157)



   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR drew six lessons and recommendations from the project's experience. Half of them were
very much focused on the specifics of issues faced by this project such as procurement and
safeguards. The following are three lessons, mentioned in the ICR that have potential implications
for other Bank-financed projects, with some adaptation of language.

1. Land pooling arrangements can be an effective planning instrument to land acquisition
required as part of urban development. The experience of this project demonstrated that land
pooling (a technique aimed at minimizing displacement and land acquisition costs through voluntary
agreements arranged by municipalities between land owners to redraw their plots in exchange for
improvements in basic infrastructure), could minimize resettlement costs during urban development.
The lesson is that there are many potential options for collaborative strategies to reduce or even
eliminate the disruptive impact of urban development, such as land pooling..

2. The project underscored the benefits of capacity building through training activities. There
were delays in the activities pertaining to municipal financial management, due in part to the lack of
familiarity with fiscal decentralization and municipal financing principles. These delays were rectified
with training aimed specifically at capacity building of financial management staff in municipalities.
The lesson is that training on a specific subject provided to staff who have an urgent need to gain
knowledge of a subject and remain in their jobs is likely to be successful.

3. Project design should include outreach activities for avoiding implementation delays.
Delays in completion of water and wastewater connections in this project were mainly due to the
response to the problems related to connection fees expressed by households. The nature and
extent of the problems were eventually understood and resolved during implementation, following a
series of outreach activities by the municipalities to encourage households to connect to the system.
The lesson is that improved public services are not necessarily welcomed, if the additional cost is
not known and effectively communicated in the context of the benefits.



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BT: Urban Development-II (P090157)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and reasonably concise and its structure is consistent with OPCS guidelines. Annex 7
in the ICR provides useful information on the use of land pooling which was an important institutional aspect of
the project. The ICR candidly discusses issues pertaining to shortcomings in M&E. The ICR also draws some
useful lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

It is necessary to provide information on all safeguards that were triggered. The ICR provides no information on
whether there was compliance with safeguards on physical cultural resources, although the Bank project
team provided information on compliance with this safeguard to IEG in the course of this review.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 15
