     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021813

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P113273                                    LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Liberia                                    Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51010                                  31-Dec-2016                                         13,732,883.39

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Jun-2012                                30-Nov-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              15,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                               15,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                           13,732,883.39                                            0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Maria Vanessa              Fernando Manibog              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Corlazzoli




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the legal agreement, the objectives of the Smallholder Tree Crop Revitalization Support Project
   implemented in Liberia were “(i) to increase access to finance, inputs, technologies, and markets for
   smallholder tree crops in Liberia, and (ii) to develop a long term development program for the tree crops
   sector” (Legal Agreement IDA 51010, pg. 5). The objectives as stated in the legal agreement are the same as
   the ones presented in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, para 16).

   No substantive changes to the objectives or project’s theory of change were made throughout the project.

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



   While the project cost and IDA financing were revised downwards and the targets of the indicators were
   reduced, the outcomes were generally consistent, hence a split evaluation is not warranted.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  11-May-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Smallholder Tree Crops Revitalization (Appraisal cost was estimated at US$16.9 million,
   including an IDA contribution of US$9.5 million. At closing the cost was US$8.613 million in IDA
   contribution). This project was designed as a pilot with the aim of learning about larger-scale tree crop
   development program targeting smallholder farmers. The first component aimed at revitalizing the
   production and marketing of major tree crops (cocoa, coffee, oil palm, and rubber). The strategy included
   assisting smallholders to rapidly resume production through the rehabilitation of existing farms,
   replanting/planting, and capacity building. The component's activities also aimed at producing access to
   long-term credit to meet farm development costs (PAD, para. 21). The component included strengthening
   value chains. The component was made up of three sub-components each focused on a major tree crop.

   Sub-component 1 - Cocoa/Coffee Rehabilitation. This sub-component sought to adopt a value-chain
   approach with investments in production, storage, bulking, processing, and financial products development
   to facilitate cocoa and coffee certification to access preferential markets (PAD, para. 22). The sub-
   component aimed to rehabilitate cocoa based on two different models, namely, medium and high input.
   Activities included the selection of beneficiaries, co-financing agricultural inputs for farm development
   through start-up grants, the establishment and strengthening of farmers’ organization to enhance their
   abilities to provide services to members, capitalization of cocoa/coffee, facilitation of the access to financial
   services by cocoa/coffee smallholders and farmers' cooperatives, and rehabilitation of feeder roads.

   Sub-component 1.2 - Smallholders Oil Palm Rehabilitation. This component aimed at rehabilitating and
   replanting oil palm by (a) re-launching production and modern processing in one existing small holder
   plantation in Grand Gedeh and (b) establishing an outgrowers model around a concessionaire in Grand
   Bassa. The project would finance a small tool package, fast-yielding seedlings, long-term credit, technical
   assistance, and farm access road development (PAD, para. 23)

   Sub-component 1.3 - Smallholder Rubber Revitalization. This sub-component aimed at replanting and
   planting in smallholder rubber farms, improving the rubber farmer organization (FO), providing training and
   technical advice, and increasing access through limited feeder road and farm track rehabilitation.

   Component 2: Institution Building and Preparation of Future Large-Scale Tree Crop Development

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



  Program. (Appraisal cost was estimated at US$3.3 million, including an IDA contribution of US$3.1 million.
  At closing the cost was US$2.078 million in IDA contribution). This component aimed at (a) strengthening
  institutional capacity of public and private institutions involved with the project, (b) supporting capacity
  building of the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) and Cooperative Development Authority (CDA) and (c)
  supporting the MOA country agricultural offices (CAOs) to strengthen their operational capacity and project
  involvement. It also sought to (d) secure three crop smallholder’s land use rights and supporting related
  institutions, (e) commission applied tree crop research, (f) strengthen the MOA’s project management unit
  and (g) support the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). This component also sought to prepare for a
  future large-scale smallholder tree crop development program and included a project preparation advance.

  Component 3: Project Coordination and Management (Appraisal cost was estimated at US$3.0 million,
  including an IDA contribution of US$2.5 million. At closing the cost was US$3.0 million in IDA contribution).
  This component aimed to ensure effective coordination, management, and monitoring and evaluation of the
  project through the support of steering bodies, the project coordination unit, and the implementation of the
  M&E system.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. At appraisal, the total cost of the project was estimated at US$23.1 million, of which US$15.0
  million would be financed by the World Bank’s International Development Association (IDA) (PAD, pg.
  viii). During the project implementation, the total cost of the project was revised to US$19.5 million, and the
  IDA allocation decreased from US$15 million to US$13.7 million (ICR, para. 15). At closing, the total project
  cost was US$13.692 million (ICR, pg. 49).

  Financing. A total of US$15.0 million was financed through an IDA credit (IDA-51010). During the life of
  the project, the Liberian currency depreciated causing a loss of US$1,194,106 expected for implementation
  (World Bank staff interview, 2020). The IDA allocation available to achieve the PDO therefore shrunk from
  US$15M to US$13.7M.

  The actual disbursement at the end of the project was US$13,732,883 (ICR, pg. 2).

  Borrower Contribution. The PAD stated that Borrower would contribute US$1.1 million, while the
  beneficiaries would contribute US$6.2 million (PAD, pg. viii and para. 28). The legal agreement did not
  stipulate a contribution from the Borrower. At the end of the project, there was no evidence in the ICR to
  suggest that the Borrower or the beneficiaries made a financial contribution.

  Dates. The project was approved on June 5, 2012 and became effective on May 13, 2013. It underwent a
  midterm review on November 3, 2015.

  The project underwent three Level-2 financing restructuring.

  On July 28, 2014, changes to the legal covenants were made.

  On May 11, 2016, the project revised the results framework, components, costs, the credit closing date, and
  the allocations among disbursement categories. During this restructuring, there were also changes to the
  indicators including the lowering of targets. Some of these changes stemmed from the mid-term review
  (World Bank staff interview, 2020). At the time of the restructuring, the project was experiencing delays due

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



   to the Ebola outbreak and changes to the design of the long-term credit scheme, which were addressed
   during the first restructuring.

   On October 10, 2018, the project again reallocated funds among disbursement categories due to the rising
   costs of consultant services (ICR, para. 20).

   The project’s original closing date was December 31, 2016. The project was extended at the May 11, 2016
   restructuring and the project closed 23 months after the original closing date on November 30, 2018 (ICR,
   pg. 2).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: At the time of appraisal, Liberia had emerged from two civil wars and was undergoing its
second democratic election. The country was experiencing steady real growth rates and real GDP growth
was forecasted at about 7 percent in 2012 (PAD, para. 2). In 2010, the country had reached the Highly
Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) status, which provided for basic substantial debt relief and new public and
private investments in all sectors.

The agriculture sector had been the backbone of the economy throughout the conflict and in the post-war
period, accounting for 61 percent of GDP in 2008 and providing employment for 4 million people (PAD,
para. 4). Rice and cassava were the main food crops, while rubber, oil palm and cocoa comprised the
majority share of the country’s agricultural exports. Despite favorable agro-climatic conditions and available
labor force, the tree crop sub-sector was performing sub-optimally. There were little replanting or
maintenance activities (PAD, para 5-6). Tree plantations were very old and productivity was low.
Processing factories were operating below capacity, despite high international demand for tree
crop products. The tree crop sub-sector also was experiencing supply-side challenges including relatively
small–scale farms, remote location of farms, poor conditions of rural roads, limited market linkages, few
market-oriented farmer organizations, and limited capacities of the Ministry of Agriculture (PAD, para. 10-12
and ICR, para. 3).

Previous Sector Experience: At appraisal, the project design took into consideration support that was
being provided by the International Finance Corporation (IFC) to the Ministry of Agriculture. The IFC was
supporting the certification of the oil palm sector, the establishment of a credit line for small and medium
enterprises, and the designing of an agri-finance program (PAD, 15). The project was developed following
the recommendations of the Diagnostic Trade Integration Study (DTIS) and designed by taking into account
lessons learned from previous tree crops projects financed in the World Bank in the 1970s and the 1980s in
Liberia and other West African countries (PAD, para 16).


Alignment with Government Priorities: The project’s development goal aimed to improve economic
revitalization through the promotion of export-oriented economic growth, while simultaneously facilitating
rural development (PAD, para. 23). The proposed project is aligned with the 2010-2020 Liberia Agriculture
Sector Investment Program (LASIP) developed by the Government of Liberia. The project was meant to
support three out of the four programs of the LASIP including supporting activities related to smallholder

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



               tree crop development, rehabilitating and expanding rural roads, rebuilding the Ministry of Agriculture and
               improving coordination, developing the capacity of farm-based organizations, and revitalizing agriculture
               research (PAD, para. 15). The project’s PDOs supported the LASIP, which was implemented from 2011-
               2015. In 2013, the Government of Liberia drafted the country’s vision and strategy for socio-economic
               transformation and developed the Agenda for Transformation – a five-year development strategy.
               Throughout the Agenda of Transformation, the government made commitments to improve the results of
               smallholders farmers and to support them in increasing agriculture productivity through access to markets,
               improvements in infrastructure, finance, skills, regulations and property rights (Agenda for Transformation,
               pg. 37 and 58).

               Alignment with World Bank Assistance Strategy: The PDOs of the project was aligned with the World
               Bank’s Country Assistance Strategies at inception and contributed towards the Country Partnership
               Strategy at completion. At appraisal, the PDOs aligned with the Joint Country Assistance Strategy for
               FY09-FY12. It contributed towards the expansion of agricultural development programs and aimed to
               address some of the structural and sectoral development challenges associated with agriculture. The
               project aimed to support CAS Outcome 4: Improve agriculture and natural resource management in ways to
               generate pro-poor growth (CAS FY09-12, para. 77-19). Similarly, the PDOs contribute towards attaining the
               Country Partnership Strategy FY 13-17, Outcome 4: Improved management and productivity in agriculture,
               forestry, and fishery (CPS FY13-17, pg. 21). While the overall focus of the Country Partnership Strategy for
               FY19-24 shifted towards the attainment of human development, the PDOs contributes towards Pillar I:
               Strengthening Institutions and Creating an Enabling Environment for Inclusive and Sustainable Growth
               (CPS FY19-24, pg. 35).

               Overall, the project’s PDOs aimed to close critical gaps that were affecting smallholder tree crop owners.
               The project’s PDOs were relevant to the context of the country and aligned with the government’s priority.
               While the PDOs were more closely aligned to the Country Assistance Strategy at the beginning of the
               project than towards the end of it, the relevance of the PDOs is rated as substantial overall.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase access to finance, inputs, technologies, and markets for smallholder tree crops in Liberia.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The aim of the project was to revitalize and grow Liberia’s tree crop sector by addressing
                             smallholders tree farmers’ lack of access to finance, inputs, technology, and markets, while simultaneously
                             improving infrastructure and strengthening government agency capacities. The retrospective Theory of
                             Change suggested that if farmers applied the skills they learned, had the necessary tools, and cooperatives

                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



purchased crops from the members, then there would be an increase in rehabilitation and replanting, that
would lead to increase yields. The theory also stated that if there was improved infrastructure then farmers
would be better able to transport their crops to markets. Finally, if government agencies increased their
capacities in the areas of human resources, research, development of master plans, formulation of national
policies, then a long-term and large-scale tree crop development program would be developed. An implicit
assumption is that if there is increased small tree yields, and farmers have long-term financing as well as
access to markets, the farmers would increase their income which will contribute to a decrease in poverty.

The theory of change had significant shortcomings. Even though the PAD outlined the different ways in which
the project incorporated lessons learned, the design of the project made several assumptions that did not
materialize. These had major implications on the project implementation and the achievements of the PDOs.
Assumptions related to access to long-term finance, which was part of the PDOs, did not come to fruition. For
example, the theory of change assumed availability of counterpart cofinancing. The project expected US$8.1
million from the Government of Liberia, concessionaires, and farmers. These contributions were expected to
be in-kind but they did not materialize (ICR, para 61i). Similarly the project assumed that farmer’s priorities
included seeds, fertilizers, and agro-chemicals, whereas in reality, the farmers indicated hiring labor was their
first-order priority, followed by mechanical services, and transportation (ICR, para. 61ii). The project also
assumed long-term credit schemes would be available for farmers until new tree crops materialized.
However, a large-scale program that would provide the credit did not materialize (ICR, para 61iv). The
Ministry of Finance and Development Planning also did not provide financing after the project was completed
(ICR, para 61iv). The project also assumed that there would be access to quality inputs, however seeds,
fertilizers, and agro-chemicals were not readily available in Liberia and had to be imported (ICR, para 61v).
The theory of change assumed that revitalizing the tree crop sector could be achieved by shifting outcomes at
the individual level of analysis. Aside for some capacity strengthening at the government agency level, the
project did not seek to change any power, political, or structural causes for the lack of growth in the small tree
crop sector.


The project indicators remained relatively the same throughout the life of the project. That said, the outcome
targets were reduced during the second restructuring. One out of the six PDOs indicators was dropped and
replaced with a new indicator, and two PDOs indicators were moved to the intermediate level. While the
indicators in the project focused on the outcome (tree crops rehabilitated and yield increase), they did not
measure the totality of the project's contribution to the different parts of the PDOs, such as access to market,
technology, and inputs. The indicators did not measure knowledge gain or change in behavior of the targeted
farmers. The ICR is very reflective and explicit about identifying gaps in information and lack of evidence.
The monitoring and evaluation system did not close these gaps with additional qualitative or quantitative data.

Increase access to Finance

Outputs
A total of US$62,390 in matching grants were provided to 12 cooperatives with 119 farmer organizations
(Target of US$128,000 not met, Target of 40 farmer organizations met, ICR, para. 30 and pg. 43). The
funding allocated was less than 50% of the minimum intended funding (ICR, para 31). However, the grants
were able to reach more people than expected with a total of 2,974 farmers receiving matching grants (ICR,
para. 31). Fewer funds were distributed to more farmer organizations, and as a result, more farmers were
reached.



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



A total of U$115,526 was provided in in-kind credit to one rubber cooperative in Montserrado county,
comprising of 150 farmers (ICR, para. 32 and pg. 43). The funds were used to purchase fertilizer and
pesticides.

Outcomes:


At the beginning of the project, according to baseline data, none of the farmers had access to long-term credit
or finance (ICR, para. 32). As a result of the project, a total of 3,518 project-supported farmers had access to
credit or benefited from access to some form of matching grant (Target of 3,025 met, ICR, para. 33).
However, the evidence on attribution is weak since the data on who received the long-term credit is
inconclusive. While the project database states that 1,625 cocoa farmers from Nimba county received credit,
project documents and the financial institution confirmed only one organization benefited from long-term
credit scheme (ICR, para. 33). According to the ICR, long term credit was provided to 3 out-grower schemes
(ICR, pg. 43). However, at least two of the three out-grower schemes were waiting for the project to fulfill its
promise on access to long-term credit at the end of the project. At project closure, there were no long-term
partnerships or financial arrangements in place to ensure continued farmer’s access to credit for maintaining
their farms with tree crops (ICR, para. 33). The project “acknowledged that farmers would need financing from
commercial banks at the end of the project to maintain the tree crop established” (ICR, para. 32).

The project provided financing to rubber producers and farmers. According to World Bank staff the financing
was used to establish a new rubber plantation (World Bank staff interview, 2020). While a larger number of
farmers had access to finance during the project, the funds allocated were less than what was originally
projected. The access to funding was not long-term or sustainable ,which was not conducive to long-term
investment or growth of the sector. As a result this outcome is rated as modest.

Increase access to inputs

Outputs:

        67 farmer field school facilitators were trained on agrochemicals (ICR, para. 35).
        52 and 26 nurseries were set up in 2016 and 2017 respectively (ICR, para. 35).
        5 people were trained (Target of 70 not met, ICR, pg. 39).
        US$ 2,196,155 was provided in grants to purchase inputs (ICR, pg. 44).
        A total of 3,518 farmers received at least one of the following: small tools, fertilizers, or chemicals.

Outcomes:
The project was able to provide farmers with inputs and training. Unfortunately, the monitoring and evaluation
system did not capture how the farmers used the inputs and to what extent they helped with the tree crops.
The project did not collect sufficient data on how the inputs were used, who used them, and whether
productivity increased as a direct result of the project. No results were reported on the establishment of seed
grants and relevant out-grower concessionaire linkage (ICR, para. 35). There were also no informal linkages
arrangement with WIENCO – a Dutch cocoa company which provided technical training and input on credit to
cocoa farmers under the rehabilitation scheme. Project data on WIENCO’s input and related farmers’ benefit
was also absent (ICR, para. 35). In conclusion, while farmers received inputs and training, it is difficult to




                                                                                                       Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



assess the contribution or quality of the inputs due to the poor monitoring and evaluation system. As a result
this outcome is rated as modest.

Increase Access to technology

Outputs


      Construction of palm oil processing stations at the farmer-managed plantation in Grand Gedeh (ICR,
       para. 37).
      Installation of two motorized mills with the processing capacity of at least 40 drums of fresh fruit
       bunches within 45 minutes of four mills (ICR, para. 37).
      Sixteen cocoa cooperatives were reported to have received moisture testing meters (ICR, para. 37).


Outcomes:

The project reported an increased oil production at the factory which enhanced the plantation’s income
generation capacity, although quantitative data on the pre- and post-processing activities incomes was
difficult to obtain (ICR, para 37). No results were reported on the applied tree crop agricultural research
activities. Data on the total number of farmers that benefited from training and use of the improved techniques
provided was not available (ICR, para. 37). Thus, the results data in terms of increased access to technology
are mixed or negligible.

Increase markets for smallholder tree crops

Outputs

      5km of road were rehabilitated (Target of 17km not achieved, ICR, para. 39).


Outcomes

Anecdotal evidence gathered for the ICR, suggested that 48 beneficiary farmers in 9 communities living
nearby the stretch of road rehabilitated were able to take their products to market, including in rainy
season. Although limited in scale, the matching financial grants allowed some farmers to sell their crops
directly to the cooperatives (ICR, para. 39). That said, the ICR is candid about the lack of data on formal
market arrangements to guarantee the beneficiary farmers of a market once their tree crops were ready for
harvest (ICR, para. 39). Out-grower schemes were also not established and cooperatives supported by the
project also expressed concern about market prospects once trees were ready for harvesting (ICR, para.
39). Thus, as a result, the ICR did not provide conclusive evidence that the project achieved the outcome of
increasing access to markets in a satisfactory manner – whether it was physical access or formal market
arrangements. As a result, this outcome is rated as modest.

Overall Outcome of the Objective:

A total of 3,850 beneficiaries, of which 23% were female, were reached as a result of the project (Revised


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



target of 3,100 met, Original Target was 5,000, ICR, pg. 14). Of the beneficiaries, 3,518 were farmers of
which 20% were women (ICR, para. 44). A total of 3,750 small tree crop farmers had access to finance, input,
market, and technology as a result of the project (Target of 3,025 met, ICR, pg. 14).

The project’s support rehabilitated, replanted or planted 5,828 hectares (Target of 6,056 not met, Original
target 11,300, ICR, pg. 14). Of the 5,828 hectares, 4,194 hectares were rehabilitated, 1,004 hectares were
replanted, and 630 hectares were of new-planted trees (Target of 300 for new planting met, Targets for the
rehabilitation of 4,506 and replanting of 1,250 were not met, ICR, pg. 14). Moreover, the targeted yields per
metric tons per hectare (mt/ha) were all not achieved, as follows: high input cocoa 1.00 (target of 1.30 not
met), medium input cocoa 0.46 (target of 0.50 not met), coffee 0.30 (target of 0.50 not met), and for oil palm
1.50 (target of 5 not met) (ICR, pg. 14). The weighted averages are 0.63 mt/ha for the target yield and 0.48
mt/ha for the yield achieved, meeting 77% of the expected target (ICR, para. 41). The ICR speculates that the
lower achievement in comparison to the yield indicator was due to lack of credit to hire labor and lack of
access to market (failure to rehabilitate full road) (ICR, para. 41). That said, lack of access to markets is not
necessarily the driving factor that contributes to the productivity that a hectare can yield in a farm, which is
dependent on factors such as quality of the soil, application of fertilizers or pesticides, quality of the seeds,
irrigation, and labor. While the ICR may have speculated that low achievement was due to lack of access to
market (failure to rehabilitate road), this factor must have not been a direct determinant of tonnage per area
planted. On balance, the project did not meet key inputs and outcomes. The targeted increases in productivity
were not met. Moreover, the project failed to secure long-term credit for farmers, which puts the sustainability
of outcomes at significant risk.

Overall, key performance indicators were for the most part partially achieved. While the project reached the
expected number of small tree crop farmers to engage with, there was only a modest increase of access to
finance, inputs, technology, and markets. While taking into account the project's implementation in a fragile
environment and the delays experienced related to the Ebola outbreak, the project did not lead to the
expected number of hectares rehabilitated or replanted. The rehabilitation and replanting of small trees also
did not lead to the expected increase in yields. The project also did not include any indication that the farmer's
income had increased or that there was a reduction of poverty as a result of the project's increase yield. As a
result, the project only modestly achieved this first objective.




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To develop a long term development program for the tree crops sector.


Rationale
Outputs

      5 Country Agricultural offices were equipped (Target of 5 met, ICR, pg. 39).
      5 CDA field offices equipped (Target of 5 met, ICR, pg. 40).
                                                                                                    Page 9 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)




                                   5 people were provided financial assistance to complete their final year of a Ph.D. program in human
                                      nutrition, entomology, agricultural economy and crop science (ICR, pg. 46).
                                     Methodology for community land use rights validation agreed with stakeholders (Target met, ICR, pg.
                                      41).
                                     Tree crop master plans were formulated in a participatory process under Ministry of Agriculture
                                      leadership for cocoa, rubber and oil palm. (Target met, pg. 41). The master plans were accompanied
                                      by an action plan for promoting each tree crop (ICR, pg. 46). The master plans for coffee were not
                                      completed (Target not met, ICR, pg. 42).
                                     The national policy and strategy for Farmer Organizations (FO) and cooperative development was not
                                      formulated and validated by all national stakeholders (Target not Met, ICR, pg. 40). That said, the
                                      project was requested to help update the Cooperative Development Act instead of the FO policy and
                                      strategy (ICR, pg. 40).
                                     Support was provided to create the Liberia Agriculture Commodities Regulatory Agency (an agency
                                      within the Ministry of Agriculture) by assisting with feasibility studies, and the elaboration of the Liberia
                                      Agricultural Commodities Regulatory Authority (LACRA) Bill. (ICR, pg. 46.)

                            Outcome

                            The long-term, large-scale tree crop development program (STCRSP II) was only partially formulated and
                            was not approved by the Ministry of Agriculture (Target not met, ICR, pg. 14). The project did help advance
                            the master plans for three out of the four tree crops. These master plans were approved by the Ministry of
                            Agriculture (ICR, para. 42). These master plans were comprehensive, according to the ICR, identifying long-
                            term strategic tree crop sector goals, including a strategic road map. They also outline a set of
                            recommendations and policies. The Government of Liberia has used the master plan to request for additional
                            funding for a second phase of this project (ICR, para. 43). The ICR does not provide any evidence on the
                            change of government capacity as it relates to human resources or research.

                            In conclusion, while progress was made to create a master-plan that included long-term strategic tree crops
                            sector goals, it fell short of developing a long-term development program for the tree crops sector, which is
                            the project’s development objective.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            In conclusion, the objectives were only modestly achieved. The project’s inability to secure long-term finance
                            for the smallholder tree crop farmers will put a lot of the partially achieved outcomes at significant risks. While
                            the project was able to provide access to finance to more farmers than originally expected, each farmer also
                            received fewer funds. The results in terms of increased access to technology were inconclusive due to lack of
                            data related to oil production. Similarly, while farmers received inputs and training, it is difficult to assess the
                            contribution or quality of the inputs due to the poor monitoring and evaluation system. The project built only

                                                                                                                                    Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



  5km of road (target 17Km), and the ICR also did not provide conclusive evidence that the project achieved
  the outcome of increasing access to markets in a satisfactory manner – whether it was physical access or
  formal market arrangements.


  While the project reached the expected number of small tree crop farmers, the limited achievement of
  increased access to finance, inputs, and technology did not lead to the expected number of hectares
  rehabilitated or replanted. Moreover, targets on tree yield were also only partially met. The project also did not
  include any indication that the farmer's income had increased or that there was a reduction of poverty as a
  result of the project's increase yield. While the Ministry of Agriculture was able to create master plans for
  three out of the four tree crops, it did not meet the objective of developing a long-term development program
  for the tree crop sector. Moreover, in conclusion, even the partially achieved results cannot be attributed
  conclusively to the project’s interventions because of the weak M&E (discussed in Section 9) and insufficient
  causal evidence.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
  Modest                                                    Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
Scope of Analysis: A financial and economic analysis was carried out with and without simulations prior to the
project’s implementation in 2012. The same methodology used in the appraisal was replicated during the end of
the project analysis.



Financial Analysis: The financial analysis was carried out to assess whether (a) the targeted smallholders
would get sufficient cash income to justify their adherence to and participation in the project, (b) the proposed
financial arrangements for farm development costs would be worth the risk to the different beneficiaries, and (c)
the proposed models and investments would be attractive to other potential private partners. During the
appraisal, financial internal rates of return and incremental incomes appeared to be attractive for all eleven
crops tested (PAD, para 42). For crops with long gestation period, such as oil palm and rubber, the repayment
could be achieved in 11 years.



Economic Analysis: At appraisal, the economic analysis expected that the project would generate direct and
indirect economic benefits related to (a) increased incomes of tree crop smallholders, (b) reduced transaction
costs and post-harvest losses, (c) increased value of added tree crop production, (d) enhanced market/business
opportunities and economies of scale benefiting all actors of the supply chain, (e) enhanced bargaining power,
(f) incremental on and off-farm employment, (g) foreign exchange savings, and (h) improved social stability in
project areas (PAD, para 43).




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



A cost-benefit analysis was conducted over a 25 year period. At appraisal, without considering the project and
long-term tree crop program preparation costs, the project was expected to yield an Economic Internal Rate of
Return (EIRR) of 33 percent and a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$28 million, at a 10 percent discount rate
(PAD, para. 43). The EIRR would be 29% if all the project costs were considered.



At project closing, the EIRR was 29.2%, with a NPV of US$26.7 million. The benefit-cost ratio (BCR) was 2.99 at
a 10% discount rate (ICR, para. 47 and pg. 56). This implies that for every US$1 invested by the project and the
beneficiaries, the tree cropping interventions would result in approximately US$3 in benefits for the smallholder
farmers (ICR, pg. 56).



One significant shortcoming of the ICR's efficiency section is that it did not disclose or explain why there was a
significant difference in the reported EIRR and NPV vis-a-vis the calculated numbers in the project's Impact
Evaluation report conducted by LTS Consulting. According to the ICR and an interview with Bank staff, the
ICR's analysis was based on the Project Impact Evaluation results (ICR, Annex 4, pg.50). However, the two
documents report different results. The ICR reported that the EIRR was 29.2%, with a NPV of US$26.7 million.
and the benefit-cost ratio (BCR) was of 2.99 at a 10% discount rate (ICR, para. 47 and pg. 56). This implies that
for every US$1 invested by the project and the beneficiaries, the tree cropping interventions would result in
approximately US$3 in benefits for the smallholder farmers (ICR, pg. 56). Meanwhile, the project’s impact
evaluation report estimated a NPV of US$17.7 million, with an internal rate of return of 17.5% (LTS Impact
Evaluation Report, pg vi). The Impact Evaluation Report also reported a BCR of 2.12 indicates that for every $1
invested, smallholder farmers are likely to receive $2 in benefits (LTS Impact Evaluation Report, pg vi). This
cost benefit analysis of the Impact Evaluation Report was estimated to run over a 25-year period with a 10%
discount rate (LTS Impact Evaluation report, pg. vi). In sum, the EIRR and NPV reported in the ICR are higher
than those in the Project Impact Evaluation Report. The Impact Evaluation Report numbers, while positive, are
also significantly less than the projected numbers at appraisal. While both numbers showcase positive results,
the gap in reported numbers further highlights inconsistencies in how data was reported in this project.


The ICR also reports that the EFA results varied by tree crop models. The new-planting cocoa, high-input cocoa
revitalization, and oil palm and rubber models were the most successful, while coffee results presented negative
returns (ICR, pg. 58). As a result, the investments in coffee returns were a negative net present value of
US$208,147 and a BCR of only 0.33. The economic analysis recommended that any future phases of the
project should not continue to support the coffee model (ICR, pg. 58).



Sensitivity Analysis: At project closing, the sensitivity analysis indicated that under the scenario of 20 percent
or more cost increase, the corresponding EIRR remained high with a positive NPVs (ICR, para. 49). It would
take a rise in costs of over 50 percent and a simultaneous reduction in benefits of over 55% for the entire project
to not be economically viable (ICR, para. 49).



Operational Efficiency: The project experienced almost a year delay (11.4 months) to become effective due to
slow parliamentary ratifications (ICR, para. 50). Moreover, there were institutional weaknesses and capacity

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



challenges that led to slow project start-up, and weak implementation performance (ICR, pg. 58). These initial
delays were also exacerbated by the Ebola virus outbreak, which were external and beyond the control of the
project.



The project's ex-post economic and financial analysis indicated positive returns of investments for the project
and for the individual farmer. However, the project experienced operational efficiency delays, in particular in
slow parliamentary ratifications of the project. Also, one significant shortcoming is the lack of clarity in the ICR's
efficiency section with regards to why the reported EIRR, NPV, and BCR differ from the analysis conducted in
the Impact Evaluation Report. Overall, the efficiency of this project is rated as Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        100.00
 Appraisal                                                   33.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        100.00
 ICR Estimate                                                29.20
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s PDOs aimed to close critical gaps that were affecting smallholder tree crop owners. The project’s
PDOs were relevant to the context of the country and aligned with the government’s priority. The PDOs were
more closely aligned to the Country Assistance Strategy at the beginning of the project than towards the end of
it. Overall the relevance of objectives is rated as substantial.

In the project's design and theory of change, assumptions were made related to smallholder farms gaining
access to finance, and other critical assumptions that did not come to fruition. The project only partially
achieved key indicators. While the project reached the expected number of small tree crop farmers, the
increased access to finance, inputs, technology and markets did not lead to the expected number of hectares
rehabilitated or replanted. Moreover, targets on tree yield were also only partially met. While the project was
implemented in a fragile environment and experienced delays related to the Ebola outbreak, it did not fully
achieve its objectives. A weak monitoring and evaluation system also contributed to the inability to measure
conclusively the achievements of this pilot project. Overall, the efficacy of this project is rated as modest.

The project experienced operational efficiency delays, in particular in slow parliamentary ratifications of the
project. The project’s ex-post economic and financial analysis indicated positive returns of investments for the

                                                                                                        Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



project and for the individual farmer, although the Efficiency section primarily focused on NPV and EIRR and not
on individual financial returns for the farmers. One significant shortcoming is the lack of clarity in the ICR's
efficiency section with regards to why the reported EIRR, NPV, and BCR differs from the analysis conducted in
the Impact Evaluation Report. Overall, the efficiency of this project is rated as substantial.


On the basis of substantial relevance of objectives, modest efficacy, and substantial efficiency, the overall
outcome of the project is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory. (The overall outcome rating based on this
combination of three sub-ratings is in line with the guidance from Appendix H, page 38 of the Bank's ICR
preparation guidelines dated September 27, 2018).



a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the development outcome are significant due to the following factors:

Financial – The farmers that benefited from this project do not have access to long-term credit or financing
to continue to invest in tree crops, inputs, and technology (ICR, para. 80). As a result, it is possible that the
gains created as a result of this project will not persist beyond the life of the project. Moreover the farmers
may go into debt if they decide to pursue commercial financing on their own.

Government Ownership and Commitment – The Government of Liberia demonstrated a commitment to
continuing to support tree crop rehabilitation through the creation of the Tree Crop Master Plans. It is also
supporting the Smallholder Agricultural Transformation and Agribusiness Revitalization Project (STAR-P,
P160945) that aims to increase access to markets, finance, technology and inputs for smallholder farmers.
The project focuses on oil palms, so some of the beneficiaries supported by the STCRSP project could
potentially continue to receive support (ICR, para. 80). That said the project experienced delays, poor M&E
systems, and unmet assumptions that had a negative effect on the outcome of the project. The ICR was
unable to demonstrate an increase in government capacity and it is uncertain what is the government's long-
term commitment to providing financing to small tree farmers. Without a shift in government priorities, future
projects are also likely to experience similar challenges.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  On paper, the theory of change of the project was logical and the project’s objectives reasonable.
  Unfortunately, the design did not take into account the operational conditions of working in a country that
  had a fragile, conflict, and violence status. According to the ICR, the scope of the project was ambitious
  with multiple activities, models, and targeted counties (ICR, para. 77ii). There were also flaws in the

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



  results framework with performance indicators not fully aligning or measuring the objectives (ICR, para
  77i).

  Moreover, the project was designed based on critical assumptions that did not materialize. For example,
  the project was expected to receive US$8.1 million in co-financing from the Government of Liberia,
  concessionaires, and farmers, but it did not materialize (ICR, para 61i). Priority investments needs of
  smallholder tree crop farmers to hire labor were not followed through by the project (ICR, para 61ii).
  Assumptions related to concessionaires and large-scale farm owners providing technical-support to
  smallholder tree crop farmers and participation in long-term credit schemes also never materialized (ICR,
  para. 61iii). The project also did not achieve the objective of creating a large-scale program. The Ministry
  of Finance and Development Planning did not provide subsidiary financial agreement (ICR, para 61iv). As
  a result, the long-term credit scheme needed to ensure that tree crop farms reach maturity was not
  accomplished (ICR, para 61iv). Sourcing and gaining access to quality seeds, fertilizers, and
  agrochemicals were challenging and lengthy. Expectations that input suppliers would extend farmers
  and their organizations with in-kind credit were not met (ICR, para 61v).

  As the ICR adequately reflects, there was insufficient attention to outlining risk mitigation in the
  operational risk assessment framework. For example, the risk assessment noted reluctant financial
  institutions as a risk but provided few specific details on how to mitigate this risk (ICR, para 77iii).



  As a result of the project’s design flaws, ambitious scope, faulty or unrealistic assumptions, and
  insufficient attention to outlining detailed risk mitigations, the quality of entry is rated as unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Ebola crisis had a significant impact on the project implementation and delayed the timeframe for
 achieving results. Most of the project results were generated after the mid-term restructuring, which
 mitigated some challenges. The restructuring focused on revising indicators and reducing targets but did
 not reduce the scope or timing of the activities to address the design flaws (ICR, para. 78).

 The project also did not make alternative arrangements to ensure that farmers had access to credit to
 maintain their farms at the end of the project, particularly when it was evident that expected arrangements
 would not materialize (ICR, para. 78).

 The project experienced significant challenges in implementing the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
 system. As the ICR states, “the shortcomings in the M&E were particularly consequential given the pilot
 nature of the project” (ICR, para. 78).

 While the Bank made important project changes in the restructuring, it was unable to sufficiently address
 project implementation weaknesses, under-development of the M&E system, and insufficient support to the


                                                                                                         Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



 implementing partner to adequately mitigate project implementation weaknesses. As a result, the quality of
 supervision is rated as moderately unsatisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change aimed to support Liberia’s tree crop sector by addressing a lack of access to
 inputs, technology, markets, and finance, while simultaneously improving infrastructure and strengthening
 government agency capacities. The theory of Change suggested that if farmers applied the skills they
 learned, had the necessary tools, and cooperatives purchased crops from the members then there would
 be an increase in rehabilitation, replanting, and increase yields. The theory also stated that if there was
 improved infrastructure then farmers would be better able to transport their crops to markets. Finally, if
 government agencies increased their capacities in the areas of human resources, research, development
 of master plans, formulation of national policies, then a long-term and large-scale tree crop development
 program would be developed.



 The project had a handful of indicators that were modified through the restructuring, including the decrease
 in targets. The indicators did not accurately or adequately the outcomes or the achievement of the PDOs.
 For instance, there were no indicators to measure improved access to inputs, technology, or finances, or
 increased government capacity. Similarly, as the ICR pointed out, some of the indicators were not
 measurable or hard to attribute to the project, for example, “incremental yearly net cash-flow” (ICR, para.
 65).



 The project’s M&E system was supposed to be established and implemented through annual participatory
 planning and evaluation workshops, as well as thematic evaluations (PAD, para 64 ). A baseline, a mid-
 term review, and a final evaluation were expected to be undertaken to identify lessons learned and
 integrate them into future programs (PAD, para 63 ). Moreover, impact evaluations that measured the
 increase yields and income derived were expected to take place during the life of the project (PAD, para.
 34). The M&E system was supposed to embed a strong learning objective, given that this project was
 considered a pilot (PAD, para 63). The M&E system was also supposed to include a communication and
 knowledge sharing strategy to disseminate key information through various channels and target different
 audiences (PAD, para. 64).




                                                                                                  Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)




 According to Bank staff interview, all the M&E systems outlined in the PAD, including projected data
 collection activities (baseline, midterm and final evaluation), personnel, and data reporting process were in
 place during the life of the project. The responsibility of the M&E system was of the participating partners
 or service providers. The project had a full time Planning and M&E officer (PAD, para. 33). The Project
 Coordination Unit (PCU) also prepared quarterly reports on M&E findings (PAD, pg. 41).



b. M&E Implementation
  During the course of the project implementation, a web-based M&E system was developed to document
  and capture outcomes, impacts, and facilitate the sharing of lessons learned (ICR, pg. 26). The
  management information system was completed by the mid-term and linked to the Geographic
  Information system (GIS), but unfortunately only one individual used the system, the M&E officer (ICR,
  para. 65). A consulting firm was also hired to carry out the baseline and support in the monitoring of key
  indicators (World Bank staff, interview).

  The mid-term review restructuring attempted to correct some of the M&E design flaws but challenges
  remained in terms of “interpretation and appropriate level of indicators” (ICR, para. 65).

  The ICR was very frank and upfront about the M&E challenges and its significant shortcomings. For
  example, the ICR noted there were gaps in data and analysis of key project activities that affected
  development outcomes. For example, there was a gap in information with regards to the use of the
  matching grants, the price paid to the farmers by the cooperatives, and price obtained by the
  cooperatives in the resale of crops (ICR, para. 66). There were also data gaps related to the unit cost of
  some of the investments, including feeder roads and/or delivering services compared to unit costs
  incurred by similar projects or standard costs commonly used in Liberia (ICR, para. 66).


  The ICR also pointed out that there were few project activities at the time that the mid-term assessment
  was conducted. After the mid-term assessment, data collection on the volumes sold and prices obtained
  for rehabilitated tree crops was not maintained(ICR, para. 66). Similarly, while the M&E system reported
  the aggregated number of farmers trained, feedback from farmers and implementing partners signaled
  that there were differences in the type and level of trainings (ICR, para 66). The M&E system did not
  maintain basic data such as information on the type of training provided and the beneficiaries (ICR, para
  67). The MIS failed to deliver detailed information, including on the specific model smallholder farmer
  adopted, time of adoption, attrition of smallholder farmers (ICR, para. 68).



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR stated that the MIS generated materials that were used to inform project beneficiaries and other
  stakeholders on the status of the project activities. The information was used to create quarterly and
  semi-annual reports, as well as communication materials (ICR, para. 70). The MIS also generated
  socio-economic descriptions of beneficiaries and size of beneficiaries’ farms, which were used to write
  the ICR (ICR, para. 70). Despite these uses of the MIS, the M&E data collected were primarily inputs as
  opposed to the evidence of the achievements of the outcomes (ICR, para. 70).

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)




  The results framework, theory of change, and indicators had some design flaws, that were unfortunately
  not all fully addressed during the restructuring. The ICR is very honest and upfront about the serious
  limitations of the implementation of the M&E system, including data gaps, missing information, poor
  quality of data, and overall lack of rigor. While an MIS system was created and used, the M&E system
  was unable to collect or capture evidence that could demonstrate the achievements of outcomes, let
  alone lessons learned in a project that was meant to be a ‘pilot.’ As a result, of the significant M&E
  weaknesses, the overall quality of M&E is rated at negligible.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental Category “B” Partial Assessment. At appraisal, it triggered the
   following safeguards: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OB/BP 4.04), Forests
   (OP/BP 4.36), Pest Management (OP 4.09) and Involuntary Resettlement (OB/BP 4.12) (PAD, pg. ix).

   An Environmental and Social Management Team was set up under the project to monitor safeguard issues.
   This group had a strong collaboration with the Environmental Protection Agency of Liberia and the Ministry
   of Agriculture. The PIU unit was staffed with an Environmental Specialist.

   The project remained in compliance with the Bank’s environmental and social policies (ICR, para. 73). An
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Resettlement Policy Framework and site-
   specific ESMPs were prepared (ICR, para. 72). No specific environmental or social issues arose during the
   implementations (ICR, para. 73). There were also no issues with land acquisition, restriction on land use or
   benefit sharing. Subproject screenings also ensured that farms with contested ownership were not included
   in the project (ICR, para. 73).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The financial management system, including accounting, auditing and reporting was adequate and
   consistent, according to the ICR (ICR, para. 74). There were three areas where the project’s financial
   management system could have been improved. First, manual accounting was being used despite
   numerous attempts to have the project team use accounting software (ICR, para. 74). Second, audited
   reports were submitted late in two financial years. Finally, a qualified accountant was only hired in the last
   year of the project implementation (ICR, para. 74). At the end of the project, financial management was
   rated by the Bank as moderately satisfactory due to funds being used for intended purposes, timely and
   reliable financial reports, and measurements in place to protect the assets of the project (ICR, para. 74).


   At project closing, the procurement rating was moderately satisfactory by the Bank. The procurement of

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



   the project slowed down during the Ebola outbreak. The Ministry of Agriculture also did not renew the
   procurement specialist’s contract during the final year of implementation and hired a specialist with less
   experience (ICR, para. 76). The Bank provided hands-on support and training clinics for the new
   procurement specialist (ICR, para. 76).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None



d. Other
   None



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  The outcome is rated as
                                                                                  Moderately Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  mainly due to the lack of
                                                                                  achievement on the objectives
                                                                                  as demonstrated in the Efficacy
                                Moderately            Moderately
Outcome                                                                           section. Based on the Bank and
                                Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  IEG Guidelines, the substantial
                                                                                  relevance, modest efficacy, and
                                                                                  substantial efficiency correspond
                                                                                  to the outcome rating of
                                                                                  moderately unsatisfactory.
                                                                                  There were appraisal design
                                                                                  flaws and assumptions were
                                                                                  made that did not materialize.
                                Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                  The Bank was unable to provide
                                Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  sufficient support to address
                                                                                  monitoring and evaluation
                                                                                  weaknesses.
                                                                                  The M&E system was weak and
                                                                                  unable to capture or measure
                                                                                  basic output data. There were
                                                                                  also important inconsistencies in
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Negligible
                                                                                  the data and poor data quality.
                                                                                  Moreover, the poor M&E
                                                                                  system impacted the efficacy of
                                                                                  the project.


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



Quality of ICR                    ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were provided by the ICR and presented here with some adaptation:

1. Project activities need to be adequately timed and sequenced in order to yield the greatest
possible outcomes. For example, in the case of building processing factories and warehouses, it is
important to complete these activities early in the project. If they had been available at the
beginning of the project, the benefits from access to the facilities could have contributed to
generating increased income (ICR, para. 81iv).


2. Treecrop projects may need longer than four years to test results. For example, it takes
several years for tree crops to mature, particularly if they were newly planted or replanting is
involved. As a result, some of the positive or negative outcomes of the project will not be know for
several more years (ICR, para. 81iv)



The following lesson is provided by IEG:


3. At the design stage, it is important to test assumptions thoroughly and corrective actions
mapped out accordingly. The project made several assumptions that did not materialize during
the implementation of the project. For example, the project assumed that it could secure long-term
credit schemes for the farmers until the new tree crops would mature, which did not
materialize. Similarly, the project made unrealistic assumptions about in-kind contributions of seeds,
fertilizers, and agrochemicals. The inability to meet these assumptions reduced the quality of
outcomes and made the achievement of the objectives more difficult. To fully test assumptions, the
project team needs to have extensive upfront consultations and negotiations with potential partners
and private sector, particularly in FCV contexts (ICR, para 81iii).



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear, well written and supported by a logical outline. The ICR was evidence-based and
refreshingly candid about the limitations of the project’s design and implementation. This is particularly evident
when the ICR discusses unmet assumptions, issues with the indicators, gaps in data related to efficacy, and the
M&E section. The ICR could have included more information on how the project attained specific safeguards
and the results of the audit findings. The results framework (Annex 1) could have provided more explanatory

                                                                                                    Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-Smallholder Tree Crop Project (P113273)



detail, particularly on the indicators that were not met. While the ICR narrative was very honest and upfront
about the limitations of the project, the ICR’s ratings did not accurately reflect the narrative. One significant
shortcoming is the lack of clarity in the ICR's efficiency section with regards to why the reported EIRR, NPV,
and BCR differs from the analysis conducted in the Impact Evaluation Report. Overall, this ICR is rated as
Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 21 of 21
