          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          YF First SOE Reform DPL(P127408)



                                                                                    Report Number : ICRR0021645

   1. Project Data



    Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
    Serbia                                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


    Programmatic DPL
    Planned Operations:         2              Approved Operations:          2

    Operation ID                               Operation Name
    P127408                                    YF First SOE Reform DPL


     L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
     IBRD-84910                                31-Mar-2016                                        101,460,585.20

     Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
     24-Mar-2015                               31-Mar-2016

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                         100,000,000.00                                              0.00

     Revised Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                              0.00

     Actual                                      101,460,585.20                                              0.00




     Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
     Felix Oppong               Clay Wescott                 Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)


PHPROJECTDATATBL



     Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
     Serbia                                    Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation

     Operation ID                              Operation Name
     P149750                                   YF Second Programmatic SOE Reform DPL ( P149750 )



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     YF First SOE Reform DPL(P127408)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                     Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-84910,IBRD-86540                    31-Dec-2017                                            96,944,712.50

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Oct-2016                              31-Dec-2017

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                        96,944,712.50                                                0.00




2. Program Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   According to the program documents (PD) of the operations, the program development objectives (PDOs) are
   to (i)reduce state participation and level of direct and indirect support to the real sector, (ii) enhance state
   owned enterprise (SOE) performance, governance and accountability, and (iii) mitigate the short term social
   and labor impacts of the SOEs’ restructuring and disposition plans (DPL1 program document, 2015:4; DPL2
   program document, 2016: 4).”

   Given that the PDOs did not change during the implementation of the programmatic series, this ICR Review
   will use this formulation of the objectives for the validation.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   The program had three pillars:
   1. To accelerate the restructuring and divestiture program for companies in the Privatization Agency portfolio
   and selected state-owned enterprises operating in the commercial sector.

   The pillar aimed to reduce state participation in non- performing State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) that had
   been included in the portfolio of a Privatization Agency. It was expected that the achievement of this
   objective would directly impact the fiscal accounts through a reduction in annual subsidies and soft loans
   given to SOEs, non-accumulation of tax and social contribution arrears and a reduction in the arrears of
   companies in Privatization Agency Portfolio to public utilities. Actions envisaged to achieve this objective
   were: (i) enact and implement a new Privatization Law and amend the Bankruptcy Law to facilitate the
   disposal and restructuring of companies; (ii) assist government to design and implement methods for
   privatizing the companies; and (iii) assist companies in the Privatization Agency portfolio to manage potential
   environmental risks that were slowing the privatization process.

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     YF First SOE Reform DPL(P127408)




   2. . To Strengthen governance regulatory, institutional framework, monitoring and transparency
   arrangements for improved performance and accountability of state-owned enterprises.

   The pillar aimed to improve the performance, governance and accountability of public utilities by amending
   the legal and regulatory framework in line with international standards and practices. Improved corporate
   governance of the affected SOEs was expected to reduce their reliance on the state for funding, attract
   private investment, and support broader public expenditure management reforms. The actions undertaken to
   achieve the objectives focused on adopting a Law on Public Enterprises to address fragmentation of the
   monitoring of public enterprises, clarification of corporate governance and performance monitoring
   provisions, and removal of ambiguities in the selection process of General Managers and Board Members of
   public enterprises.

   3. To mitigate the social and labor market impact of the reform program.

   The pillar aimed to: (i) to ensure adequate financial protection of redundant workers of companies from the
   Privatization Agency portfolio; and (ii) to facilitate the transition into employment and provide a temporary
   safety net for vulnerable redundant workers. Through this the pillar, the Bank aimed to support the
   enactment of a decree to detail the options and amounts available for social programs and to facilitate the
   utilization of resources under the special budget-financed, and transition funds. It also aimed to support
   efforts to link redundant workers with services offered under the National Employment Service.




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   The first operation (DPL1) was approved on 3/24/2015 and closed on 3/31/2016; the second operation
   (DPL2) was approved on 10/25/2016 and closed on 12/31/2017. All dates were as planned. Both loans were
   single tranche disbursement, denominated in dollars and on IBRD terms. The total amount of US$198.4
   million was disbursed, of which US$101.5 million was for DPL1 and US$96.9 million for DPL2. There was no
   co-financing or borrower contribution.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  At appraisal, the objectives of the series were relevant and were directly derived from the government
  strategy. The Fiscal Strategy for 2015-17 indicated the need to reduce government allocations in the national
  budget to public and state enterprises by: (i) reducing subsidies to SOEs, (ii) strictly limiting guarantees for
  new loans, and (iii) strengthening of accountability and transparency in the operation of the enterprises (Fiscal
  Strategy, 2015:102-103). The strategy emphasized the importance of disposing of all enterprises within the

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     YF First SOE Reform DPL(P127408)



  portfolio of the Privatization Agency through privatization or by bankruptcy. Also, the government planned to
  assist other enterprises outside the Privatization Agency portfolio to find strategic partners and to restructure
  those in the utility and infrastructure sectors (such as energy, railway, transport and roads). These objectives
  were described in the February 2015 Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies with the IMF as a
  clear priority of the government to improve SOEs operational viability and limit fiscal risks to the budget.

  The DPL program was aligned to the FY2012-15 and FY2016-20 Country Partnership Frameworks of the
  World Bank Group (WBG) in Serbia. The privatization objective of government was articulated in focus area 1
  of the Country Partnership Framework (FY2012-15) which was related to economic governance and role of
  the state. One of the objectives of this focus area (titled “productive SOE assets transferred to private
  ownership”) discussed the need for the state to reduce its involvement in commercial SOEs that posed a
  significant drain to scarce fiscal resources in Serbia. It noted the importance of accounting for the impact of
  privatization on affected SOE workers and the need to mitigate these effects through development policy
  lending. SOE reform was also identified as one of the top priorities which could impact on the WBG twin goals
  by the 2015 Systematic Country Diagnostic of the Bank (SCD, 2015:104).

  At completion, SOE reforms continued to be relevant to the government. It is explicitly indicated in the
  government’s Fiscal Strategy for 2018 and 2019 that “the operation of SOEs is a source of significant fiscal
  risk to both revenue and expenditure sides of the budget.” Some SOEs are still facing numerous problems in
  revenue collection, settlement of liabilities, and profitability. It notes that the major fiscal risks relate to
  government guarantees of SOE Loans. The sector remains relevant because it employs a significant segment
  of the Serbian economy (nearly 79,000 people). The 2018/19 Fiscal Strategy of government notes efforts by
  the World Bank, International Monetary Fund and European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and
  European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to reduce the fiscal risks from large SOEs (Fiscal
  Strategy, 2017:60).




  Rating
  Substantial

b. Relevance of Design
  The policy actions pursued by the DPL series were consistent with the objectives and could be expected to
  contribute to reducing state participation in SOEs, strengthen the regulatory institutional framework and
  mitigate the adverse impact of privatization on workers and the environment. In DPL2 (PD, pp. 12-13, 34),

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            YF First SOE Reform DPL(P127408)



       four triggers became prior actions with no substantial change. Two triggers were combined to become one.
       One trigger on establishing audit committees was revised because the restructuring of 4 companies in the
       railroad, electricity and energy sectors delayed establishing audit committees in those cases. The trigger on
       enhancing labor market incentives didn't become a prior action because it couldn't be completed within the
       time frame. Three targets concerning reducing subsidies to SOEs were strengthened. The program document
       of DPL1 (program document 2015: 11-12) indicated that guarantees to Srbijagas and the utility companies
       were sources of significant domestic risks.

       The institutional depth of the reforms supporting the objectives was mixed across the three pillars. While
       some prior actions in the DPL1 had follow up actions, there were others in DPL2 that required additional
       actions to ensure the achievement of results. For instance, the second DPL had prior actions that required the
       borrower to issue public announcement of bids for companies, select companies for bankruptcy and initiate
       process of bankruptcy. The institutional depth of these prior actions was not adequate by themselves to
       change incentives and behavior. Nonetheless, the World Bank supported other reforms that added value to
       the achievement of the objectives such as the enactment of a new Privatization Law, amendment to the
       bankruptcy law, and the adoption of a Law on Public Enterprises.

       The choice of a programmatic series to implement structural SOE reforms was appropriate, given the large
       number of SOEs involved in the reforms and complexities associated with dealing with a sector that
       employed about 15 percent of the formal Serbian workforce. The design was aided by effective dialogue and
       engagement with the government and other stakeholders. The use of analytical products, including rapid
       technical notes for policy dialogue strengthened the design of the series.




       Rating
       Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To reduce state participation and level of direct and indirect support to the real sector.

    Rationale
    To achieve the above objective, the series focused on reducing the direct and indirect support to companies
    in the Privatization Agency Portfolio, minimizing the disposal and treatment of waste generated by
    companies through the enactment of the Privatization Law, amending the Bankruptcy Law, assessing the

                                                                                                         Page 5 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    YF First SOE Reform DPL(P127408)



volume of environmental risks posed by selected companies, and initiating a process to implement the laws.
The intention was to restructure problematic SOEs, and thereby reducing the annual direct subsidies and
soft loans channeled to SOEs, while minimizing the accumulation of arrears from new taxes, public utilities
and social contributions.

Outputs and Outcomes
Evidence provided by the ICR indicates the enactment of a new Privatization Law and an amendment of the
Bankruptcy Law eliminated the moratorium prohibiting debt enforcement actions against entities being
restructured, and those affected by the bankruptcy provisions. It notes (ICR 2019:12) that as of 2011
Serbia’s universe of SOEs comprised the following three groups: (i) enterprises in the Privatization Agency’s
portfolio (approximately 640 companies); (ii) large SOEs (approximately 50 companies); and (iii) municipal
enterprises (approximately 645 companies). Evidence provided by IMF 2019:13 (Article IV consultation
report and Second Review under the Policy Coordination Instrument) states that by March 2019, more than
310 companies had entered bankruptcy, and 54 had been privatized since 2014. Of these, the World Bank
ISR of March 2016 confirmed that (at appraisal of the second operation in the series) 89 companies had
been resolved, mostly through bankruptcies by 2016. IMF 2019 also noted that about 34,800 employees
from 336 companies have received severance payments between 2014 and 2019.

Nonetheless, Serbia does not keep a single comprehensive list of all SOEs for all purposes. While the ICR
reports the existence of about 1,200 SOEs in Serbia as of 2014, the IMF reports about half of the number
over the same period. Serbia keeps multiple SOE lists for various reasons (e.g., statistical, employment,
former Privatization Agency portfolio, etc.). There are also two categories of SOEs: (i) regular SOEs, which
are governed in line with the general Company Law; and (ii) public enterprises (PEs), which operate in
industries that have been defined as general interest in the Law on Public Enterprises (IMF, 2019:25). The
World Bank Group cannot be sure of results when the baseline (number of SOEs) is not consistently
reportedly from one year to the another. The challenges addressed are likely to re-occur after the operations
close because of inaccurate data reporting.

The series nearly achieved its target (strengthened between DPL1 and DPL2) to reduce the state’s annual
direct subsidies and soft loans to companies in the Privatization Agency portfolio to less than €5 million by
2017 from a baseline of €85 million in 2010-2012. The ICR (2019:17) reports that the State’s annual direct
subsidies and soft loans were reduced to €20 million in 2017 and €8 million in 2018. It also noted that three
petrochemical SOEs (Azotara (fertilizers), MSK (industrial acids), and Petrohemija (basic plastics))
relaunched their production in 2017 and requested government assistance to buy the gas. Contrary to the
objectives of the series, the government supported the purchase of gas for these SOEs resulting
their inability to meet the target. It is noted that the decision to support the three petrochemical SOEs was
politically sensitive.

Also, the DPL2 (program document, 2016: 34) noted that the series targeted to reduce new tax obligations
and social contributions arrears to €5 million in 2017, from a baseline of €190 million (2010-2012). The ICR
reports that the target was nearly met. The government was able to reduce the arrears significantly from an
average (2010-2012) of €70 million to €10 million by 2017, noting that 43 out of 121 SOEs from the


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            YF First SOE Reform DPL(P127408)



    Privatization Agency portfolio increased their arrears (by €10 million), 35 companies reduced by €15 million,
    and 43 companies kept the same level (ICR, 2019: 28-29). In addition, the largest SOEs accumulated about
    0.3 percent of GDP in tax and social contribution arrears during 2016-2018, and arrears of the 10 largest
    SOEs to the state electricity company amount to 0.4 percent of GDP (IMF, 2019:58).

    The series (DPL2) used an indicator measuring potential environmental damages, that could be an issue in
    privatization. The indicator was defined as: “disposal and treatment of legacy hazardous waste generated
    by companies in the Privatization Agency portfolio”, to reach a cumulative target of 1,500 tons between
    2015-2017 for 180 companies in the portfolio, up from a baseline of zero. The ICR reports evidence that
    1,071 tons were disposed and treated (permanently or contracted for) for one company (ICR,2019: 8-9).
    While the government verbally informed the Bank that 2,300 tons was disposed and treated for all 12
    companies, no documentation on this for 11 of the 12 companies could be found. It is noted the fiscal costs
    of the disposal and treatment of legacy hazardous waste continued to weigh on different levels of
    government rather than the SOEs themselves.

    Municipalities continued to provide large subsidies to SOEs, mostly related to local public enterprises as of
    2019, including some that were turned over to municipalities after attempting to privatize them (IMF,
    2019:57; ICR, 2019:16). It can be concluded that the target may have been achieved, but that the evidence
    on this was not conclusive.




    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     To enhance performance, governance and accountability of State-owned enterprises

    Rationale
    To improve the performance, governance and accountability of state-owned enterprises, the series took a
    particular focus on public utilities, through amendments of the legal and regulatory framework in line with
    international standards and practices. It also aimed at correcting the poor operational and financial
    performance in the SOE sector driven by weak monitoring and corporate governance arrangements,
    resulting from political influence in the decision-making and operations of SOEs. It was expected that the
    strengthening of the Law on Public Enterprises will catalyze improvements in the governance of SOEs.

    Outputs


                                                                                                       Page 7 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     YF First SOE Reform DPL(P127408)



 The series supported the adoption of a new Law on Public Enterprises and the appointment of 15
 supervisory boards to strengthen the regulatory framework for monitoring and ensuring the accountability
 and transparency of SOEs in Serbia. In addition, the series supported the operationalization of the Public
 Oversight Board for auditing and helped establish the publication of quarterly business monitoring for public
 enterprises.

 Outcomes
 The results were measured by two indicators. The first required all public enterprises to prepare and publish
 their audited financial statements as required by the Law on Public Enterprises and Law on Accounting and
 Auditing for all public enterprises (for which the founder is the Republic of Serbia). The ICR reported that this
 legal provision was followed by all public enterprises that were required to. Random checks using a link
 provided by the ICR to the online repository of the financial statement validates the claim that some financial
 statements are posted online. IMF (2019:53) notes that “Financial statements are prepared according to
 international accounting standards, are audited, and published, but are not reviewed thereafter. It can be
 verified that some information is publicly available, and the annual financial statements can be accessed
 through the Serbian Business Registry Agency. However, Serbia does not produce an aggregate SOE report
 on the entire sector.” Thus, it can be concluded that the series contributed to promoting accountable
 governance of SOEs.

 The second indicator for this objective proposed to reduce direct subsidies to large SOEs for recurrent
 expenditures to less than € 200 million for 2015 and € 150 million for 2017. The ICR reports that this target
 was partially achieved, given that direct subsidies reached € 170 million at the end of 2017 from a baseline
 of € 250 million, encompassing SOEs in the portfolio of the Privatization Agency and other large SOEs. It
 further notes that the SOEs in the portfolio of the Privatization Agency were resolved and did not require any
 direct or indirect support (ICR 2019:30). The budgetary support to large SOEs accounted for the inability of
 the government to meet the target. IMF (2019:51) recognizes that steps had been taken by the government
 to reduce losses and lower fiscal risks of SOEs but the contingent liabilities stemming from unfinished
 reforms are likely to arise.

 The ICR reported that annual guarantees for liquidity purposes to SOEs were completely eliminated by 2017
 from a baseline of € 265 million in 2014. However, IMF (2019:31) reports gross new issuance of guarantees
 to SOEs of RSD 84 billion (2016), RSD 54 billion (2017) and RSD 8 billion (2018). The evidence shows that
 guarantees to SOEs were reduced but not completely eliminated as reported by the ICR.

 The evidence provided indicates that the series made substantial progress in achieving this objective.




 Rating
 Substantial
PHREVDELTBL


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            YF First SOE Reform DPL(P127408)


PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective
     To mitigate the short term social and labor impacts of the SOEs restructuring and disposition plans.

    Rationale
    To mitigate the short-term labor and social impacts of resolution of the companies from the Privatization
    Agency portfolio by ensuring that there is adequate financial protection of redundant workers of companies
    from the PA portfolio, the series facilitated the transition into employment of redundant workers and provided
    a temporary safety net.

    Output
    The series supported the creation of a special budget financed fund through the 2015 budget law to provide
    financial assistance to redundant workers in lieu of severance pay. It also supported through the Ministry of
    Labor, Employment, Veteran, and Social Affairs and its National Employment Service, an improved design
    and targeting of public works that prioritized applications from persons who are deemed redundant,
    unskilled, or hard-to-employ. In addition, it supported government to limit the payment of remuneration of
    RSD 15,000 per person per month under a casual employment contract.

    Outcome
    Three results indicators were used to monitor the achievement of the above objective. First, the series aimed
    at increasing the number of redundant workers receiving compensation from the Transition Fund from about
    5,700 (in 2014) to at least 25,000 by 2016. The ICR notes that about 27,981 people benefited from the
    Transition Fund, of which 8,951 ( about 32 percent) were women. IMF Article IV published in December
    2015 (IMF 2015: 62) acknowledged the allocation of budgetary funds into the Transition Fund to pay
    severance redundant workers. It is noted however, that the payments from the Transition Fund is not a long-
    term solution to the redundancy challenges of workers but a solution that could complement other measures
    in the labor market. To that extent, the objective of the series to mitigate short term social impact was
    achieved.

    The second indicator aimed to register at least 30 percent of workers made redundant from public
    enterprises during 2016 with National Employment Service. The DPL2 (program document 2016: 26) notes
    that the National Employment Service designed measures to support affected workers, such as, through
    individual action plans, and outreach to potential new employers and registering job vacancies. The ICR
    reports that 85 percent (4,758 out of 5,587) were registered, of which 1,787 were women. It notes that the
    target was exceeded because the National Employment Service visited every company that laid off more
    than 10 workers and consulted local employment councils for support.

    The third indicator aimed to increase number of participants in public work from 2,882 in 2013 (1,187 female
    and 1,695 male) to at least 6,000 in 2015 and to at least 7,000 in 2016. The ICR (2019:32) reports that the
    targets were exceeded for both 2015 (10,853, out of which 4,767 were women) and 2016 (7,357 of which
    3,319 were women).




                                                                                                       Page 9 of 16
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               YF First SOE Reform DPL(P127408)



    The evidence indicates that substantial progress was made in the achievement of this objective, and the
    series contributed to this achievement.




    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  The objectives of the series were substantially relevant to the World Bank’s Strategy for Serbia and the
  government priorities during the operations that aimed to reduce subsidies to SOEs, limit guarantees for new
  loans, and strengthen of accountability and transparency in the operation of SOEs. Relevance of design is rated
  substantial, since the operations were based on analytical products and provided technical notes for the
  implementation of the reforms. Two of the objectives are rated Substantial for making significant progress
  toward strengthening SOE governance and mitigating the social and labor impact of the SOE reform program.
  One objective is rated modest because the targets to reduce state participation and level of direct and indirect
  support to the real sector were not fully met, although they were nearly met.




  a.      Outcome Rating
          Satisfactory


  6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

  Some of the reforms support by the series may be undermined if the government does not take stock and
  publish the comprehensive list of SOEs in the country and consistently publish the list of SOEs that benefit from
  the government budget either directly or indirectly. There are risks associated with putting in place supervisory
  boards and audit committees without ensuring the preparation of proper reporting guidelines, comprehensive
  assessment of SOEs financial data and implementation of uniform KPIs. There is also the risk that vested
  interests will secure new SOE subsidies despite the laws and policy opposing them. It is also noted that the
  alleviating impact of the measures on workers is only short term, indicating the possibility of longer-term risks if
  other structural measures are not taken.




                                                                                                        Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     YF First SOE Reform DPL(P127408)




a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
    Modest

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The series benefited from a consultative process that influenced the production of a 2015 Systematic
  Country Diagnostics and the Country Partnership Framework (FY2016 -20). The ICR also reports that the
  frameworks of the DPLs were developed jointly with the authorities and in consultation with other
  stakeholders and the results indicators were directly linked to the reform pillars and data was to be
  collected by the Ministry of Economy, line ministries and other relevant agencies (ICR, 2019:24). In
  addition, the prior actions were supported by analytical products such as (i) the Poverty and Social Impact
  Assessment; and (ii) the regulatory and implementation framework for addressing environmental liabilities
  in privatization in Republic of Serbia (World Bank, June 2013; and OECD Guidelines on the Corporate
  Governance of State-Owned Enterprises).

  The series was supported by a limited number of World Bank prepared knowledge products. The program
  documents and ICR referenced a policy note prepared on the topic “ OECD guidelines on the corporate
  Governance of State- owned Enterprises”, and a Poverty and Social Impact Assessment that underscored
  the relevance of supporting redundant workers. The World Bank based many of the prior actions on
  external papers such as Goldberg and Nellis (2007), Methods and Institutions – How do They Matter?
  Lessons from Privatization and Restructuring in the Post-Socialist Transition, and a 2013 analysis of the
  legal and regulatory framework produced by Milieu, Law and Policy Consulting.

  The macroeconomic framework during design and implementation was adequate to support the series (as
  discussed in the DPL1 program document, 2015: 7-8; DPL2 program document, 2016:7-12). The Executive
  Board of the IMF approved a three-year Stand-by Arrangement for Serbia on February 2015 which focused
  on restoring the health of public finances, financial sector stability and resilience, and job creation. The
  DPL1 program document (2015:12); and the ICR (2019:21) noted that Bank staff collaborated with the IMF
  and reinforced each other’s efforts on the restructuring and privatization of public enterprises. This is
  confirmed by IMF (2015:2) that stresses the importance of government keeping the momentum of
  implementing the SOE structural reforms due to the expected impact on reducing fiscal risks. In addition,
  the IMF cites World Bank consultations in relation with financial restructuring plan of Srbijagas noted by
  DPL 2 program document (IMF, 2015:12; DPL 2 program document, 2016:17-19). In August 2016, the
  IMF’s combined fourth and fifth reviews of Serbia’s economic performance under the Stand-by
  Arrangement indicated that the fiscal had over- performed due to stronger revenues and tighter controls on
  current expenditures. Finally, the choice of a programmatic series for SOE reforms was appropriate in
  sustaining the impact of the policy actions pursued under that series.




                                                                                                  Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     YF First SOE Reform DPL(P127408)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  According to the ICR, the Bank team had strong and near continuous dialogue with the authorities, in
  addition to three to five missions per year to assess the progress of implementation of the reforms (ICR
  2019:37). It also notes provision of technical notes to the government during the implementation of the
  series. A March 2016 ISR filed by the Bank team detailed progress the authorities had made in
  implementing the prior actions for the second operation, progress in achieving the results indicators of the
  first operation and challenges associated with the SOE prior actions for the second operations. This
  evidence and other ISRs validate the Bank’s active supervision of the reforms.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  The ICR (2019:38) notes that the government developed a strategy to address the key priorities in the
  program because the reforms were highly political and required broad consensus within government. At
  the same time, the government worked with multiple development partners (World Bank and IMF) on
  different aspects of SOE reforms. The UNDP and Austrian Development Cooperation provided support
  to redundant workers of SOEs (2007), ahead of the series and reported the need for longer term reforms
  (UNDP 2007- Severance to job project- Support to re-employment). The reforms supported by the Bank
  were second generation reforms and yet the government was committed to finding lasting solutions to
  challenges arising from the fiscal costs of supporting SOEs, SOE governance and redeployment of
  redundant workers.



  Government Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  Not Applicable


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     YF First SOE Reform DPL(P127408)




  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  Of the seven indicators in the results framework, only one (disposal and treatment of legacy hazardous waste
  generated by companies in the Privatization Agency portfolio) was not directly linked to the objectives of the
  series. However, it is noted that disposal of legacy hazardous waste could facilitate privatization of the SOEs.
  The results framework had appropriate baselines and targets required to monitor the achievement of results but
  the ICR reports of difficulties in collecting data to ascertain some of the results. One aspect that could be
  improved is that the monitoring framework measures uses different samples of SOEs for different indicators It
  could have been clearer why a particular sample was used for a particular indicator.



b. M&E Implementation
  The second operation of the series amended the results indicators without taking into account the impact of
  the decision of the government to call early elections. The targets for the indicator A1 changed from cutting
  annual direct subsidies and loans from €10 million to €5 million. Also, the target for new tax and social
  contribution arrears was reduced from €20 million to €5 million; and the target for new arrears to public
  utilities was reduced from €20 million to €5 million. Finally, the target for the result indicator on annual
  guarantees for liquidity purposes was brought to zero from €100 million.

  As acknowledged by the ICR (2019:16), the changes were ambitious but were informed by the progress the
  government had made in the implementation of the reforms supported by the first operation.

  In addition, tracking of some of the results indicators proved difficult after the series closed, though the
  results framework was designed to align with regular data collected by the government on SOEs. As noted
  earlier the multiple reporting of SOE data, changes in definition of indicators, and some indicators not being
  tracked anymore was a concern.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E framework was used to make changes to the reforms supported by the series, especially during
  the design of the second operation.




  M&E Quality Rating

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       YF First SOE Reform DPL(P127408)



  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  The DPL2 program document (2016:27) notes that the reforms supported by the series has no significant
  adverse effects on the environment, forests and natural resources. The ICR confirms that the
  series strengthened the capacities of the government to effectively address the social, labor, and
  environmental impact of the reforms in the program (ICR 2019:13). For instance, the series supported the
  improvement of environmental management to properly dispose hazardous waste generated by companies
  in the PA portfolio. It also supported the management of redundant workers.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  There were no fiduciary issues reported in the ICR report.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  No unintended impacts reported.



d. Other
    ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                       Satisfactory            Satisfactory                ---
Risk to Development
                              Modest                  Modest                      ---
Outcome
Bank Performance              Satisfactory            Satisfactory                ---
Borrower Performance          Satisfactory            Satisfactory                ---
Quality of ICR                                        Modest                      ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      YF First SOE Reform DPL(P127408)



The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.


12. Lessons

 The ICR draws a number of lessons, of which two are of particular interest and restated as follows:

 Structural SOE reforms require a long period of engagement and implementation before achieving expected
 outcomes. In the case of Serbia, the ICR reports that it took five years from the first identification to
 completion in 2016 and yet some of the impact of the new laws passed are yet to be realized. Maintaining the
 policy dialogue and the provision of critical support over the medium term is essential for realizing the full
 impact of the series.

 Secondly, when a DPL series has not completely addressed challenges related to structural SOEs reforms,
 continuing the series with other programmatic operations with follow-up actions or technical assistance may
 be appropriate. Serbia has a relatively large SOE sector with large fiscal costs that could potentially affect real
 sector growth. In this case, the series tackled short term reforms without sufficient time and attention to
 achieving longer term results. The management of the fiscal costs of SOEs still requires support. After
 implementation of the series, Serbia’s SOE governance still shows significant gaps against OECD best
 practices, with room to improve SOE governance frameworks across all dimensions (IMF, 2019:58). There is
 room for more transparency, assessment, and reporting to improve the governance and performance of
 SOEs, and the Bank is continuing to support SOE reforms with a follow-on DPL series.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well written overall but failed to provide sources of the information used to populate some of the
indicators in the results framework. In addition, there were many hypothetical statements that were not
accompanied by evidence. The relevance of objectives was discussed using a recent government strategy
prepared after the project had closed without reference to relevance at the appraisal stage. The Task Team
Leader did not respond to IEG's request for a meeting to discuss the ICR.




a. Quality of ICR Rating


                                                                                                      Page 15 of 16
 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
 YF First SOE Reform DPL(P127408)



Modest




                                                                   Page 16 of 16
