     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization (P130164)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021929

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P130164                                    IN: Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                      Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53100                                 31-Dec-2018                                       121,630,912.86

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Oct-2013                               31-Dec-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          160,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                           131,877,656.13                                             0.00

 Actual                                       121,630,912.86                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Kavita Mathur              Peter Nigel Freeman          Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) were to “improve rural connectivity, enhance road safety and
   strengthen road sector management capacity of Rajasthan” (Financing Agreement page 5 and the Project
   Appraisal Document para 16).

   The PDOs remained unchanged.



                                                                                                Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization (P130164)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  27-Jul-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components:

   Component A: Rural Connectivity Improvement (appraisal estimate US$197.0 million, of which
   US$138.0 million was Bank financing; total actual cost US$163 million, actual Bank financing US$111.7
   million). The project planned to finance the construction of about 2,500 kms of rural roads to provide
   connectivity to about 1,300 revenue villages with population between 250 and 499 people in the areas of
   the state not covered by the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) or (National) Prime Minister's
   Rural Roads Program. This component would also introduce cost-effective low volume technologies. The
   roads would be built to a bitumen surface standard and would include all necessary bridges and cross
   drainage works to maintain year round connectivity.

   Component B: Road Sector Modernization and Performance Enhancement (appraisal estimate
   US$11.0 million, of which US$7.7 million was Bank financing; total actual cost US$4.0 million, actual Bank
   financing US$2.8 million). This component would support the Roads Sector Modernization Plan (RSMP) in
   the following key areas:

         improvement of the policy framework;

         modernization of engineering practices and business procedures;

         sustainable asset management;

         institutional and human resource development of the Public Works Department (PWD);

         enhancing governance & accountability in PWD; and

         preparation of a pipeline of feasible projects for implementation.

   Component C: Road Safety Management (appraisal estimate US$15.0 million, of which US$10.5 million
   was Bank financing; total actual cost US$9.2 million, actual Bank financing US$6.3 million). This component
   would support the strengthening of road safety management systems in Rajasthan with the objective of




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization (P130164)



  reducing the number of fatalities and serious injuries from traffic accidents in the state. This was to be
  accomplished through:

        Safe Corridor Demonstration Program (SCDP);

        the establishment of a Road Safety Strategy;

        road safety education and awareness programs;

        road safety audits; and

        procurement of road safety equipment and related training materials for some ongoing initiatives.

  The project also included incremental operating cost of US$1.5 million.

  Note: The total actual cost by component is not available in the ICR. The project team provided this
  information to IEG.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The actual project cost was US$177.6 million, significantly lower than the appraisal estimate
  of US$227 million. The ICR does not explain the reason why the actual project cost was 22% lower than the
  appraisal amount. The project team clarified that this was due to: (a) the strong devaluation during project
  implementation which resulted in lowering the project cost by 8%; and (b) the cancellation of some activities
  some activities that further reduced the project cost by 14%.

  Financing: The actual credit amount was US$121.6 million, lower than the appraisal commitment of
  US$160.0 million.

  At the time of project preparation, the project received US$3 million as a Project Preparation Advance
  (PPA). Since the PPA was scarcely used (disbursement of only US$2,277) at the time of restructuring, the
  undisbursed amount was reallocated to Category 1 activities (works and goods) (ICR para 18 and
  Restructuring Paper para 8c).

  Borrower Contribution: The actual borrower contribution was US$56.0 million, substantially lower than the
  appraisal commitment of US$67.0 million. The state govt did not utilize full IDA credit for this project. The
  total unutilized funds at the time of project closing was XDR.20.26 million (approximately US$29 million
  considering the devaluation).

  Dates: The project was approved on October 29, 2013 and became effective on March 10, 2014. The
  project closed on December 31, 2018 as planned.

  Split rating: The PDOs remained unchanged, but changes were made to the results framework. The
  indicator “increased percentage of core network in good/fair condition” was dropped because of lack of data
  on the condition of road network. This is not a good indicator as it measures the condition of the core
  network and not the rural roads improved under the project. To measure the road sector management


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization (P130164)



   capacity a new indicator “Road Asset Management System was Operational” was added. However, this is
   still an output indicator and not an outcome indicator. In the circumstances a split rating is not appropriate.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context: Rajasthan is one of the largest states of India, covering nearly 10% of the total area of the country
and about 5% of total population. However, it is one of the the low-income states of India. At appraisal in
2013, its per capita income (US$943) was about 20% lower than the national average
(US$1,185). Rajasthan had a state road network of 193,017 km, including 7,260 km of national highways,
10,953 km of state highways, 9,900 km of major district roads, 25,033 km of other district roads, and
139,871 km of village roads. Road density, was only about 60 km per 100 square km, lower than the
national average of 110 km. About 75% of the State’s population was rural and mainly dependent on
agriculture for livelihood.

The capacity of the Public Works Department (PWD) to manage the road sector was weak. The gaps in
road investment planning, engineering practices, and business processes were found to be hindering the
overall capacity of the PWD to handle the state’s road network. There was a need to revamp the overall
PWD structure, processes and practices.

Road fatalities in Rajasthan were above national average: the number of persons killed per 100 accidents in
Rajasthan roads was about 40 compared to a national average of 29, and the state ranked fifth in the total
number of fatalities in 2011, contributing to 6.5% of all fatalities in India.

Previous Sector Experience: The Bank has had a long engagement in India’s rural road sector in
Rajasthan through the multi-state national Pradhan Mantri’s Gram Sadak Yojana (PGMSY) program and
the Rural Roads Project (PAD para 13). This engagement had been in response to a clearly identified need
and the state government’s priority to increase connectivity in rural areas throughout the state. According to
the PAD (para 15), this project would also have synergy with other Bank funded operations such as
National Highways Inter-connectivity Improvement Project and Rajasthan Agriculture Competitiveness
Project.

Alignment with Bank Strategy: The project objectives were consistent with the Country Partnership
Strategy (for the period FY13-17) which focused on three engagement areas: Integration, Transformation
and Inclusion. Connectivity of people living in rural areas would achieve the goal of inclusion.

The project objectives continued to be relevant throughout project implementation. At completion, the
project objectives were fully aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY18–22 focus area
“investing in transport and connectivity infrastructure as a growth enabler”. In addition, the project objective
to “strengthen road sector management capacity of Rajasthan” was fully aligned with the CPFs pathway
“strengthening the public sector” for “Hows” of the World Bank engagement (para 31).

Alignment with Government and Rajasthan State Government Strategies: The project was highly
relevant to India’s development priorities as stated in the 12th Five-Year Plan (2012-2017). The plan
emphasized: (a) improved connectivity of villages with population 250 and above, (b) upgrading all

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IN: Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization (P130164)



               highways and district roads to all-weather roads, and (c) building missing links between other villages. The
               project was expected to help Rajasthan in implementing PGMSY. One of the main objectives of this type of
               program was to connect habitations in villages to main corridors and economic centers, through the
               provision of better-quality and safer road infrastructure.

               In response to the greater need for high-quality infrastructure and better rural connectivity, the Government
               of Rajasthan’s Industrial and Investment Promotion Policy (2010) also promoted widening of the state
               highways and upgrading of the secondary network.

               The relevance of the PDO is rated high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve rural connectivity.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The Theory of Change (ToC) was not a requirement at the time of project preparation.
                             Based on the information in the PAD, the ToC is retrofitted. The project was built on the premise or
                             assumption that physical investments in the rural roads (construction) in Rajasthan in conjunction with piloting
                             of cost-effective technologies for upgradation and maintenance of rural roads would improve rural
                             connectivity. This was to be measured through the outcome indicator “increased share of rural population with
                             access to an all-season road”.

                             Outputs

                                        The project constructed 2,334 km of roads, slightly lower than the original target of 2,500 km.

                                        The intermediate indicator "Cost effective technologies piloted for road design and construction and
                                          upgradation/maintenance of existing gravel roads" was partially achieved, with 61 km completed at
                                          project closure compared to the original target of 100 km. An additional 67 km was completed at the
                                          time of the writing of ICR (ICR para 27).

                                        The project introduced a Project Assessment Tool (PAT) to the Project Management Consultant and
                                          the engineers at the Public Works Department. This tool was useful in increasing the of frequency of
                                          senior engineers’ site visits, thereby improving the quality of works. It also ensured better
                                          management of environmental and social safeguards and the health and safety of workers on site.


                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization (P130164)



Outcomes

The project provided connectivity to 1,300 villages as targeted. At project closure, 80.8% of the rural
population had access to an all-season road achieving the target of 81% (baseline was 67%).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhance road safety.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The establishment of a Road Safety Strategy, implementation of Safe Corridor
Demonstration Program (SCDP) and road safety education and awareness programs, and building the
capacity for road safety audits, was expected to improve road safety. This would be measured through a
reduction in annual fatality count on the model road safety corridor.

Outputs

      The Road Safety Policy was prepared by the Road Safety Cell created under the project. The ICR
       reports (para 32) that some of the priority actions highlighted in the action plan were implemented but
       does not provide any details.

      Road safety audits were carried out for 1,025 km of project roads and roads linking the project roads.

      Road safety awareness campaigns were successfully implemented by non-governmental
       organizations (NGOs) (hired through the project) in different sub-regions (Jaipur, Udaipur, etc.).
       However, these were completed only a few months prior to the project closure.

      The intermediate indicator "Model road safety corridor(s) developed’ was not achieved. The Deeg-
       Alwar-Behror section (114 km of State Highway 14) was selected for the Safe Corridor Demonstration
       Program (SCDP). The SCDP was one of the key project activities aiming at demonstrating the positive
       impact of adequate and site-specific road safety measures to reduce road accidents and fatalities.
       However, by project closure the associated works and goods had not been procured (ICR para 33).

Outcomes

Road safety was not improved. The outcome indicator “a reduction in annual average fatality count of road
users on model road safety corridors’ was not achieved. In 2018, the actual count of fatalities was 61,
negatively exceeding the target of 30 (baseline was 46).



Rating
                                                                                                   Page 6 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization (P130164)



Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthen road sector management capacity of Rajasthan.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project would support the Roads Sector Modernization Plan (RSMP) through the
improvement of the policy framework, modernization of engineering practices and business procedures, and
institutional and human resource development of the Public Works Department (PWD). These activities were
expected to strengthen the road sector management capacity of Rajasthan.

Outputs

      A report on Human Resources policies and procedures was developed in March 2017. By the time of
       the writing of the ICR, the key recommendations were under discussion.

      The Road Sector Policy was revised, and the Financing Strategy was developed. However, the
       Policy/Strategy has yet to be approved by the Cabinet.

      The ‘Computerization of key business processes in the Public Works Department’ was not completed.

      The development and deployment of the Road Asset Management System (RAMS) was not
       completed. The contract for the System Providing Consultant (SPC), responsible for the development
       of the system, was signed on August 2, 2018, just a few months before project closure. By project
       closure, the data collection services (network condition assessment required for the system
       development and use) had not been procured (ICR para 38).

      A report on modernizing the business practices of the Public Works Department was prepared by the
       consulting firm Deloitte in September 2017. However, the recommendations have not been
       implemented.

      An Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) was adopted for the entire state.

Outcome

The project did not strengthen the road sector management capacity as most activities for achieving this
objective were either not initiated or partially completed. The Road Asset Management System was not
operationalized. New engineering and business procedures to strengthen the road sector institutional
capacity were not adopted.



Rating
Negligible



                                                                                                Page 7 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               IN: Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization (P130164)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project made a substantial contribution to improving rural connectivity throughout Rajasthan. However,
                            the project was not successful in enhancing overall road safety and strengthening road sector management
                            capacity of the state of Rajasthan. The overall efficacy is rated modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                 Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                  Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency: At appraisal, economic analysis was carried out on a sample of Phase 1 roads (513
   roads covering 510 villages representing about 1227 km). The following benefits were considered: (a) increase
   in household income through agriculture and non-agriculture based activities; (b) additional employment
   benefits; and (c) traffic related benefits such as savings in Vehicle Operating Cost (VOC) and savings in travel
   time. Both the economic rates of return (ERR) and modified ERR (assumes that the returns from the investment
   only yield the opportunity cost of capital, both at 12%) were calculated along with associated Net Present Value
   discounted at 12% (EOCC). The base case ERR was 14% (PAD Annex 6 pages 66 and 69).

   Ex-post ERR was calculated using the appraisal methodology and included the 2,400 km roads completed
   under the project. These roads provided connectivity to 1,300 villages. The ex-post ERR was 15.9%. The ICR
   (page 42) explains that although both the construction costs and maintenance costs increased about 20%; the
   benefits of value of time (VOT) savings decreased about 20%, and the benefits generated by additional
   employment decreased 3.3%; the drastically increased vehicle operating cost (VOC) savings of almost 80% and
   increased income per capita of almost 50% due to rural road connectivity resulted in better returns of the
   investment.

   The ICR notes that about 70% of civil works were completed by January 2015, that is, within one year after
   contract signature, and about 90% of civil works were completed by March 2016, within two years of project
   implementation (ICR para 26).

   Regarding Components B and C, which accounted for 12% of the total project costs, civil works experienced
   delays but were completed. However, the investments made in improving road safety management and in
   strengthening the institutional framework to modernize the sector were not achieved (because the Road Asset
   Management System was not operationalized; computerization of key business processes in the Public Works
   Department (PWD) was not completed; a report on modernizing the business practices of the PWD was
   prepared, however, the recommendations were not implemented), thus negatively affecting the overall efficiency
   of the project. (ICR para 11 and 43).

   Overall, efficiency is rated modest.




                                                                                                                           Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization (P130164)



Efficiency Rating
---


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                               14.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   88.00
 ICR Estimate                                            16.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objectives were highly relevant to the country and government strategies. The achievement of the
first objective “improvement in rural connectivity” is rated substantial; while the achievement of the second
objective “road safety enhanced” and the third objective “road sector management capacity of the state of
Rajasthan strengthened” are rated negligible. The project efficiency is modest. Overall, the outcome is rated
moderately unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional Risk. The risk that the achieved development outcomes will not be sustained is substantial.
The project contributed to the improvement in rural connectivity. However, the road sector management
capacity of the state of Rajasthan was not strengthened. The ICR notes (para 35) that the successful
implementation of the new Road Asset Management System (RAMS) requires: (a) continuous dialogue with
the relevant stakeholders (Finance Department, Public Works Department) to ensure their buy-in so that the
introduction of the new system is not seen as an additional burden; and (b) the data collection services
(network condition assessment) are functioning.

Financial Risk. The utilization of RAMs would also require allocation of appropriate maintenance budget.
The maintenance budget needs were estimated at US$800 million, compared to US$278 million actually
provisioned by the state. The current process for maintenance budget allocation is carried out by the Finance
Department on a yearly basis without long-term planning. Consequently, the financial risk is high.




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization (P130164)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was designed to support the Government's PMGSY. It was fully aligned with the Bank and
  country priorities. The project preparation was inadequate. The project could have benefitted from
  additional preliminary studies to showcase the relevance of proposed project activities to achieve specific
  outcomes (such as the need to develop a proper Road Asset Management System) (ICR para 84). There
  was lack of endorsement by decision-makers. Most of the Project Preparation Advance was unspent. The
  safeguards identification was satisfactory. However, there were some shortcomings:

        The project design was inadequate. For example, the road safety component and related
         development outcomes could have been focused on rural roads only instead of highway corridors.
         The Road Sector Modernization Component required more implementation time and buy-in from
         key stakeholders.

        The results framework was weak. There was no indicator to measure the sub-objective
         “strengthening road sector management capacity”.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project had three different Task Team Leaders over the five years implementation period. Regular
 supervision missions including technical and site visits were carried out by the team and included transport
 experts as well as financial, procurement, and safeguards specialists, when necessary. The ICR reports
 (para 76) that the Aide Memoires were candid in documenting progress, delays, and challenges, as well as
 implementation progress and development outcome ratings.

 The main shortcoming of supervision effort was the inaction regarding component 2 and 3. Even after the
 mid-term review identified that the achievement of the PDO was being adversely impacted by delays and
 non-completion of components 2 and 3, the team did not modify the scope of these components, changed
 the PDO, or extend the closing date.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory




                                                                                                  Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization (P130164)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 To measure the first sub-objective “improved rural connectivity” the project included the following outcome
 indicators: (a) an increased share of rural population with access to an all-season road; and (b) increased
 percentage of core road network in good/fair condition as a share of the total classified network. The
 indicator “increased percentage of core network in good/fair condition” was not a good indicator as it
 measures the condition of core network and not the rural roads improved under the project. The project
 could have included international roughness index (IRI) for selected roads to demonstrate that good-quality
 roads were indeed provided through the project. It also included output indicators such as the number of
 rural people with access to an all-season road.

 To measure the second sub-objective “enhanced road safety” the project included the following outcome
 indicator: a reduction in annual fatality count on model road safety corridors.

 However, there was no outcome indicator linked to the third sub-objective “road sector modernization”.



b. M&E Implementation
  The mid-term review found that it would take more time before the road asset management system under
  development would start to provide information on Rajasthan's road network condition (Amendment
  Letter to the Financing Agreement and Performance Monitoring Indicators page 3). Also, there was no
  existing data on the condition of the core road network. Therefore, the indicator “share of roads in
  good/fair condition” was dropped during restructuring (July 2017).

  To measure the road sector management capacity a new indicator “Road Asset Management System
  was Operational” was added. However, this is still an output indicator and not an outcome indicator.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports (para 65) that the project M&E findings were regularly shared with stakeholders through
  progress reports and the World Bank’s Aide Memoires after each supervision mission. These reports
  contributed to the decision to restructure the project.

  However, the M&E utilization had a major shortcoming. The increase in road fatalities during project
  implementation did not result in stronger actions by the client.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization (P130164)



  The project was classified as an Environmental Category “B” and the project was expected to have site-
  specific adverse environmental and social impacts. The following safeguards policies were triggered:
  Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Physical
  and Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), and Involuntary Resettlement
  (OP/BP 4.12). However, the degree of compliance with these safeguards is not properly addressed in the
  ICR.

  Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01). The ICR does not report on the compliance with
  Environmental Assessment safeguards.

  Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). The PAD states (para 70) that the projects would not finance roads
  passing through designated protected areas, but the larger institutional development plan for the road
  sector in Rajasthan would need to address the issues of biodiversity management and appropriate
  strategies and mechanisms would have to be built into the institutional systems to ensure that the over-all
  network planning/development and road selection/construction takes into account such factors. Accordingly,
  the operational policies on Natural Habitats was triggered for the project.

  The ICR does not report on the compliance with Natural Habitats safeguards.

  Forests (OP/BP 4.36). The project encountered major issues relating to forest clearance. For the 26 roads
  requiring forest clearance (around 3% of total project roads), road works were initiated and completed
  before getting appropriate clearances for 8 roads (ICR para 56). This was in violation of the Bank’s policy.
  The Bank escalated this matter to higher level officials in the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of
  Finance; Principal Secretary, Public Works Department – Government of Rajasthan; Chief Secretary,
  Government of Rajasthan; as well as the Bank’s management. The ICR notes (para 71) that the
  Government of Rajasthan shall ensure that proper resolution is found, even if the project is closed.

  Physical and Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). The ICR does not report on the compliance with Physical
  Cultural Resources safeguards.

  Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). The ICR does not report on the compliance with Indigenous Peoples
  safeguards.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The ICR notes that there were no major resettlement issues as
  most roads were built or upgraded in the right-of-way. Land acquisition was mainly handled through
  voluntary land donations (a common practice in Rajasthan). The mutation process (that is the actual
  transfer of the land title ownership and not just of the land use or destination) was difficult but was
  adequately managed through proper consultations with landowners (ICR para 70).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM): The ICR reports (para 73) that all audit reports were submitted, and the
  main concern raised in the reports was the lack of dedicated staff and financial management experts to
  handle financial management related issues.



                                                                                                 Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization (P130164)



   Procurement: A procurement and contract management manual was prepared for the project (ICR para
   72). Training on procurement was provided to procurement staff in all districts. There was lack of capacity
   in the Public Works Department to procure specialized equipment for the Police, Transport, and Medical
   Departments. Moreover, the coordination and collaboration with relevant departments was missing which
   led to the non-execution of a critical contract related to the deployment and installation of road safety
   equipment (ICR para 53). The works contract estimates were not based on market rate. This resulted in
   rebidding of one-third of the contracts (108 out of 328) (ICR para 54).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provided the following lessons (presented here with some minor modifications):

      Lack of full endorsement of programs by the key decision makers at preparation can
         negatively affect project outcomes. The introduction of new systems required
         endorsement from relevant stakeholders early on during implementation process to ensure
         ownership. For example, full operationalization of the Road Asset Management System
         (RAMS) did not occur by project closure because of the lack of buy-in from the Finance
         Department and the Public Works Department.

      The implementation of efficient business processes is likely to benefit from additional
         preliminary studies. Sound preparation before project approval with studies carried out to
         showcase the relevance of proposed activities to achieve specific outcomes (such as the
         need to develop a proper Road Asset Management System), is best practice. In-depth
         upstream discussions/workshops with the client – in particular the finance and technical
         departments, should also be considered for most projects.


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization (P130164)



        The mutation process (that is the actual transfer of the land title ownership and not
         just of the land use or destination) for the donated land is difficult, so clear guidelines
         need to be developed. Some commendable work was done in the project to make sure that
         the land ownership was legally transferred. This knowledge can be replicated in future
         projects in Rajasthan or possibly other states in India.

IEG’s Lesson: To avoid cost and time overruns and contract administration issues, forest
and other administrative clearances need to be in place prior to awarding contracts. The
project experience shows that some of the road works were dropped due to forest clearance issues.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a candid analysis of the issues that affected project implementation and offers an insightful
analysis of shortcomings at project preparation stage that affected the project´s outcomes. It is results oriented
and the quality of evidence is sound. Figure 2 is insightful as it highlights the major implementation gaps in what
was achieved relative to the expectations. Overall, the quality of ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 14
