     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zambezi River Basin Development Project (P133380)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0021781

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P133380                                    Zambezi River Basin Development Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Africa                                     Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16238                                   30-Sep-2016                                            5,786,276.67

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 30-May-2014                                31-Dec-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             6,000,000.00                                     6,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              6,000,000.00                                     5,786,276.67

 Actual                                          5,932,436.24                                     5,786,276.67




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Lalrinpari Sailo            Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement “The objective of the project is to advance the preparation of the Batoka
   Gorge Hydro-electric Scheme and strengthen cooperative development within the Zambezi River Basin.”

   This project is part of a broader program of support within the Zambezi River Basin which is facilitated through
   the multi-donor trust fund CIWA (Cooperation in International Waters in Africa). According to the PAD, the



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zambezi River Basin Development Project (P133380)



   program objective of CIWA is “to strengthen cooperative management and development within the Zambezi
   River Basin to facilitate sustainable, climate resilient growth”.

   For the purposes of this ICR Review, two sub-objectives will be assessed:

   Sub-objective 1 – To advance the preparation of the Batoka Gorge Hydroelectric Scheme

   Sub-objective 2 – To strengthen cooperative development within the Zambezi River Basin



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   (1) Feasibility studies for the proposed Batoka Gorge Hydro-Electric Scheme (HES) on the Zambezi River
   (Estimated cost: US $1.8 million, Actual cost: US$ 2.7 million) – The engineering studies aimed to assess,
   update, and develop a fully bankable feasibility study, complete up to the tender design and documentation
   for the development of Batoka Gorge HES and associated transmission lines to evacuate the power. The
   study is intended to facilitate mobilization of the required resources for the development of the scheme within
   the shortest possible time and address the prevailing power supply shortages within the Southern African
   Power Pool. This recipient-executed activity will be supported through the provision of consulting services,
   non-consulting goods and services, and operating expenses associated with workshops, training, and
   capacity enhancement initiatives.

   (2) Environmental and Social Assessment for the proposed Batoka Gorge HES on the Zambezi River
   (Estimated cost: US$ 1.44 million, Actual cost: US$ 1.8 million) – This aimed to evaluate the design for the
   Batoka Gorge HES and develop the Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental
   Management Plans (EMPs), Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPFs), and Resettlement Action Plans
   (RAPs) as needed for each infrastructure investment associated with the project. This recipient executed
   activity will be supported through the provision of: i) Consulting Services; and, ii) Operating expenses
   associated with workshops, training, and capacity enhancement initiatives.



   (3) Transaction Advisory Services for the proposed Batoka Gorge HES on the Zambezi River (Estimated
   cost: US$ 0.80 million, Actual cost: US$ 1.40 million including component 4 costs) - The objective of the
   Transaction Advisors is to provide legal and financial transaction advice to the Zambezi River Authority on
   the Development of the proposed Batoka Gorge HES. This will include an assessment of different potential
   transaction structures, including options for public or private funding, and public-private partnerships, with a
   view to recommending the optimal, bankable structure that takes into consideration prevailing market
   conditions, priorities of the stakeholders involved, and the technical parameters and development schedule
   resulting from the updated feasibility study. This recipient-executed activity will be supported through the




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Zambezi River Basin Development Project (P133380)



  provision of: i) Consulting services and technical assistance; and, ii) Operating expenses associated with
  workshops, training, and capacity enhancement initiatives.

  (4) Legal and Institutional Reviews to support the Zambezi River Authority (ZRA) (Estimated cost: US$ 0.80
  million, No actual cost since the contract was combined with component 3)- The objective of the Legal and
  Institutional Support is to carry out a program of activities to enhance the legal and institutional framework for
  the operation and safety of the Kariba hydropower complex, and enhance the Recipient’s capacity for water
  resource management and control within the Zambezi River Basin. This recipient-executed activity will be
  supported through the provision of: i) technical assistance; and, ii) Operating expenses.

  (e) Dam Break Analysis to ZRA (Estimated cost: US$ 1.20 million, Actual cost: US$0 as the component was
  financed by the Kariba Dam Rehabilitation Project- KDRP) The objective of the dam break analysis is to
  support the ZRA to enhance the sustainable development and efficient management of the Zambezi River
  Basin through a collaborative exercise with other dam operators in the Basin in undertaking a dam break
  analysis. This will provide a methodology and the supporting system to allow forecasters to generate a dam
  failure forecast and evaluate the consequences of a potential dam breach in the Zambezi River Basin.

  Note: the estimated costs for each of the components were taken from the ICR as they were not available in
  the PAD or Loan Agreement.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The actual project cost was US$7.5mn, compared to the appraised cost of US$6mn.
  Additional costs were incurred due to i) changes in the scope of the technical work as the project
  progressed; ii) increasingly intensive meeting and consultation schedules; iii) delays in decision making due
  to the bi-national nature of the client; and iv) change in scope after the two governments appointed the
  African Development Bank as the lead financial arranger for the project.

  Financing and Borrower Contribution: The additional funding of US$1.5mn came from the ZRA’s own
  funds after the Bank decided against additional financing in December 2018. The two governments decided
  on a Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) approach for the Batoka Gorge HES, which was a significant shift from
  the project’s original plan to publicly finance the dam and privately finance the two power stations, thus
  eliminating the need for further financing from the Bank.

  Dates: The project was restructured on three occasions during the implementation period:

        Restructuring 1, completed in September 2016, extended the closing date from the original date of
         September 30, 2016 to September 30, 2017 due to delays in the review and approval process of the
         feasibility studies and the need to ensure alignment with other assignments [from Aide memoire of
         Oct 2016]. Amount disbursed: US$ 3.48mn.
        Restructuring 2, completed in September 2017, extended the closing date from the revised date of
         September 30, 2017 to August 31, 2018 based on the estimated time needed for additional work in
         the draft proposals for the engineering studies and the environmental and social assessment. [Aide
         memoire of Sep 2017]. Amount disbursed: US$4.51mn.

  Restructuring 3, completed in August 2018, extended the closing date by three months to December 31,
  2018. This short extension happened in the context of a discussion about Additional Financing, to provide

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
                                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                        Zambezi River Basin Development Project (P133380)



                                      time for the Bank to make decisions and ZRA to pursue alternative financing. Results indicators were
                                      reformatted during this restructuring to align with the updated template. [ICR]. Amount disbursed:
                                      US$5.13mn.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               The project’s development objective (PDO) is directly relevant to Zambia’s 2018 Country Partnership
               Framework (CPF), Objective 1.3: “Access to and quality of resilient infrastructure services (initial emphasis
               on electricity and roads) increases in selected rural and small towns”. The Bank would contribute to
               increasing the access to and quality of resilient infrastructure services (initial emphasis on electricity and
               roads) in rural areas and small towns. In addition, a strong power supply is needed to achieve Objective 1.1
               of boosting the productivity of the agri-business sector. This objective falls under the focus area 1 on “more
               even territorial development”. According to the CPF, access to electricity among the rural households is a
               mere 4%. The CPF also states that Zambia’s integration within the African region has been slow. Regional
               integration is important for the country’s aim to develop its economic infrastructure and boost its
               competitiveness.

               The Zimbabwean reconstruction fund also prioritizes the need to focus on infrastructure development,
               specifically in the energy, water and sanitation areas, for private sector growth (Annex II Indicative results
               framework).

               The ICR also states that the PDO remains relevant to the Bank’s regional strategy, which emphasizes the
               need for scaling up energy services and regional integration.

               Given the the PDO’s close alignment with the Zambia 2018 CPF objectives 1.1 and 1.3 and its relevance to
               the Zimbabwean reconstruction fund strategy, the relevance of this project development objective is
               Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To advance the preparation of the Batoka Gorge Hydro-electric Scheme.


                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Zambezi River Basin Development Project (P133380)




Rationale
Theory of Change:

This project’s development objective is to advance the preparation of the Batoka Gorge Hydro-electric
Scheme and strengthen cooperative development within the Zambezi River Basin. The project would finance
the technical studies that are needed to implement the hydroelectric scheme, provide technical advisory
services and legal and institutional support to the ZRA, and conduct a dam break analysis. These activities
will facilitate mobilization of resources for development of the HES, and strengthen the cooperative
development within the Zambezi River Basin. The assumptions are that the technical studies will meet the
standards needed to mobilize resources to develop the HES, and that the legal and institutional support to
ZRA will strengthen cooperative development in the Basin.

Outputs:

      The technical feasibility studies were still in draft stages at the time of project closing. Furthermore, the
       tender design documents were not completed under this project and will be done by the AFDB,
       which was appointed as the lead financial arranger by the clients.
      The Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) were not fully completed at project
       closing but the final versions were under review at the time of ICR preparation.
      The deliverables completed for the transaction and legal advisory services include i) an economic
       analysis, ii) a risk assessment report, iii) an options analysis for the commercial structuring of the
       project, and iv) a market sounding and solicitation strategy. Since the AFDB was appointed as the
       lead financial arranger, the development of final financing and tender documents were not completed
       under this project.

For further clarification on the status of these studies after project completion, IEG asked the ICR team
whether there was any updated information available on whether these studies were completed and officially
accepted by the government. The ICR team responded that as per Zambezi River Authority (ZRA) update
(February 2020):

      The Engineering Feasibility Studies (EFS) were completed and approved in October 2019 while the
       draft Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) report -- with the associated Environmental
       and Social Management Plans (ESMP) -- was completed in September 2019.
      The public disclosure for the draft ESIA and ESMP is expected to commence within the first quarter of
       2020 after which the reports will be submitted to the Environmental Regulatory Authorities of Zambia
       and Zimbabwe for consideration and approval.

In February 2019, ZRA shortlisted three potential developers for the project, namely

    1. Consortium of Power Construction Corporation of China Limited (Power China) and General Electric
       (GE).
    2. China Three Gorges Corporation (CTG), China International and Water Electric Corporation (CWE)
       and China GeZhouba Group Company Limited (CGGC).
    3. Salini-Impregilo of Italy.




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Zambezi River Basin Development Project (P133380)



The three shortlisted firms were issued with a Request for Proposals (RfP) with a closing date of 13th
September 2019.

However, in consideration of the need to expedite the project in the wake of the obtaining acute power
shortages in the two countries and the region, the Council of Ministers (COM) for the Authority, at its Extra
Ordinary meeting held on 12th July 2019 made an emergency decision to award the contract for the
development of the BGHES to the Consortium of Power Construction Corporation of China Limited (Power
China) and General Electric (GE) on a Build, Operate and Transfer ”basis. Negotiations with the consortium
are ongoing. ZRA is proceeding with the development of the Batoka Gorge HES. The construction
commencement is expected to be in August 2020.

Furthermore, As of February 2020, the ESIA has been completed and was accepted by ZRA with the
associated ESMP. ESIA and ESMP, which will be disclosed to the public and updated according to the
feedback received. The reports will be submitted subsequently to the Environmental Regulatory Agencies of
the two contracting states for approval.

The ZRA is in the process of procuring Technical Advisory Services for implementation of the project,
including a Social Specialist and an Environmental Specialist, who will be responsible for monitoring the
implementation the Environmental and Social Management Plan and the Resettlement Action Plan.

Outcome:

With this additional evidence provided by the ICR team on the status of the studies post project completion
date, sub-objective 1 is rated as substantially achieved.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen cooperative development within the Zambezi River Basin.

Rationale
Outputs-

      The revised legal framework for the ZRA was endorsed by their respective Council of Ministers
       (COM). The proposal to include Ministries responsible for water in the governance structure was also
       endorsed.
      The dam break analysis component was moved to the Kariba Dam Rehabilitation project, which the
       ZRA is undertaking.

For further clarification on the status of the revised legal framework and the dam break analysis, IEG asked
the ICR team to what extent the legal frameworks were made operational and whether the dam break
analysis was conducted as part of the Kariba Dam Rehabilitation Project under the ZRA. The ICR team
responded that ZRA and the two governments have taken on board the recommendation to expand of the

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Zambezi River Basin Development Project (P133380)



                            Governance structure of the Authority to include the Ministries of Water from both Contracting States. To this
                            end, the Authority has since obtained approval from the COM to amend the Zambezi River Authority Acts in
                            the two States to include, as part of COM and Board Membership, the Ministries responsible for water in both
                            Contracting States.

                            Also, the Dam Break Analysis was carried out as a regional analysis for the entire Lower Zambezi Basin with
                            models developed for Batoka Gorge Dam, Kariba Dam, Itezhi-Tezhi Dam, Kafue Gorge Upper and Lower
                            Dams, Cahora Bassa Dam and Mphanda Nkuwa Dam.

                            It is expected that the dam break analysis will be completed at the end of the first quarter of 2020. ZRA also
                            expects that the outputs from the dam break analysis will be used to develop emergency preparedness plans
                            (EPP) for each dam in the Zambezi Basin by each respective dam operator.

                            Outcome:

                            With the additional evidence provided by the ICR team on the revised legal framework and the dam break
                            analysis, sub-objective 2 is rated as substantially achieved.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            While the technical feasibility studies and the ESIAs were not completed at the time of project closure,
                            additional evidence gathered from the ICR team a year after project closure, indicates that the studies were
                            completed and that the Batoka Gorge HES is advancing. Similarly, the additional evidence provided by the
                            ICR team after project completion shows that the revised legal frameworks are in the process of being
                            operationalized and that the dam break analysis is expected to be completed in 2020.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The project went through 3 restructurings to extend the project duration. Additional financing was also sought to
   address cost overruns and implementation delays.


                                                                                                                             Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Zambezi River Basin Development Project (P133380)



The cost and time overruns were due to changes in the scope of the technical work required, delays in decision
making due to the need to get two governments – Zambia and Zimbabwe- to agree on various issues. Other
delays resulted from a much higher number of meetings with both governments than anticipated, and the process
of appointment of AfDB in the end as the lead financial arranger.

There was no IRR/ERR conducted as the project only supported the delivery of studies needed for the
hydroelectric schemes. The ICR assesses efficiency based on whether the project was completed on time and
within budget and in the context of industry norms, and whether the final project costs justifies the economic gains
from hydroelectric scheme.

Since the project was not completed on time and went above the budget, the efficiency in this context is low.
However, as the ICR states, relatively low client capacity and the general complexity of this project being owned
by two governments provides context and justification on the delays and cost overruns. In terms of the projected
economic gains from the HES being built, thereby increasing electricity supply that would bring in revenue for the
governments and boost economic growth, the costs of this project seem justified.

Overall, efficiency is rated Modest- the appraisal cost estimates proved to be inaccurate as there were many
delays and an overall project cost overrun. However, as the ICR states ‘Given that these studies were
transboundary in nature, and involved relatively low capacity clients, the amount of resources and time spent on
the studies is not unreasonable’.
Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the project’s objective is substantial: accelerating preparatory efforts to support eventual
investments in electricity supply expansion is closely aligned with the development agendas of Zambia and
Zimbabwe and the Bank’s priority areas in the two countries.

Efficacy is rated Substantial as the two objectives of the project were achieved.

Efficiency is rated modest as the project closed while the studies were not yet complete and there were cost
overruns.


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Zambezi River Basin Development Project (P133380)



Outcome is thus rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR cited two risks related to the development of the Batoka Gorge HES itself. The first related to the
readiness and capacity of SAPP to optimize the economic benefits from HES (absorption of electricity,
transmission lines capacity to evacuate and trade power, and ensuring a competitive tariff). Another risk cited
was on the environmental and social impact of building HES such as on the tourism and rafting industry. he
BOT option which the ZRA ended up adopting also comes with risks related to development costs.

IEG inquired regarding the mitigation measures in place to address these risks to which the ICR team
responded that AfDB continues to provide advice to the two Governments including on the integration of
BGHES with SAPP. Furthermore, the Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) detailing the
proposed mitigation measures for the identified negative impacts of the project includes the mitigation
measures relating to the identified impacts on the rafting and tourism communities. Livelihood Restoration
Plans have been developed for the project and in the case of the rafting and tourism industry, specialist
studies have been undertaken to appreciate the impacts and thereby devise appropriate mitigation measures.
The proposed mitigation measures include adopting a reservoir operating regime that involves regulating the
reservoir levels to allow for half day rafting trips during low flows when rafting is undertaken. The mitigation
measures outlined in the ESMP will be refined after the disclosure process to take into account any further
submissions from members of the public, interested parties and other stakeholders including the rafting
community. The governments expect the project will also open up other opportunities that will enhance
tourism in the area including creation of additional lodging facilities, water sports, and fishing activities.

An additional risk that should be considered is that of likely impacts from climate change. As mentioned in
Zambia’s CPF, due to volatile rainfall the 2015/16, a national power crisis occurred as the existing dams were
not able to generate the needed power. There is a need to diversify the sources of electricity in order to
manage for these types of climate change risks.



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR (Section III A. Key factors during preparation) indicated that the project’s quality- at-entry was
  weakened by the following:

         An unrealistic time frame envisaged for a project that involves a relatively new client preparing
          complex technical studies for a large hydropower project.




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zambezi River Basin Development Project (P133380)



        Agreeing on a logistically complex governance structure involving representatives at the
         Ministerial and Permanent Secretary levels of both client countries which resulted in delays in
         decision-making.

  On the other hand, there were also factors that strengthened the quality -at-entry:

        The Bank used its convening power to help the two countries resolve a long-term debt dispute to
         move forward with this project.
        The technical and economic work that preceded the project was a solid foundation for the
         preparation of this project.

  The Bank team also accurately assessed the procurement risk as substantial, as it ended up
  materializing during implementation. Mitigation measures were also put in place to manage this risk.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR mentions that the Bank team was proactive in addressing implementation challenges faced by the
 client including extensions of contracts and resolving contractual disagreements. ISRs were
 regularly issued and were candid about the challenges faced by the project and downgraded the project
 when there were contracts that were allowed to lapse. Team continuity was reasonable with limited
 turnover of staff. The Bank team regularly engaged with the client on both high-level matters and technical
 matters, providing timely inputs and advice to the counterparts and CMU. Senior Bank staff were also
 mobilized to participate in the supervision missions to provide technical advice, quality control, and
 compliance monitoring. The ICR states that “the breadth and depth of the team mobilized were seen by
 management as best practice.”

 However, the team did not focus sufficiently on ensuring high level understanding and renewing high level
 commitment to the process during the latter parts of the project’s implementation when there were changes
 to the leadership both with the client and the Bank.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zambezi River Basin Development Project (P133380)



a. M&E Design
 The M&E framework at teh design stage (as shown in the PAD) included both the CIWA program level
 indicators and indicators that are more specific to the project. The project level indicators used were the
 global indicators for all CIWA projects to measure progress of the program.

 In the third restructuring of the project, the results indicators were restructured to align with the updated
 results framework template and were simplified which ‘improved chances for reporting on the project with
 honesty and realism’ (ICR pp 59). The results framework in the ICR also reflects more directly the activities
 and outputs of the project.

 The ICR states that the program level and project level results were “incorrectly squeezed together into the
 project level results framework” which creates a confusing results framework for administrative and
 evaluation purposes.

 Baseline indicators were included in the framework which were mostly the absence of the various studies
 and legal frameworks that the project will be delivering.

 The indicators in the ICR results framework (that relate to the project and not the program) were mostly
 specific and measurable (updated feasibility & ESIA, options for investment transaction structure assessed,
 completion of joint dam break analysis). The indicator on ‘legal frameworks for transboundary water
 management and development harmonized’ seems too ambitious for the project..

b. M&E Implementation
  Although the results framework was not well-designed at the start of the project, the ICR mentions that
  the team focused on the deliverables of the project while they were monitoring the project.



  According to the ICR, the client was fairly regular in reporting progress toward the objectives on a
  quarterly basis, although not always in writing. The client- ZRA- also took measures such as hiring a
  planning and scheduling engineer and a contract management expert to monitor project performance
  using specific software which improved the client’s capacity to monitor and report on progress.



  The results framework was also restructured to align with the new format and simplified to enable better
  reporting on the progress of the project.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR states that the M&E process as designed was used to manage the project, monitor progress,
  and inform decision making and implementation. To gather some additional information on this, IEG
  asked the ICR team to provide some examples on how the M&E process was used. The ICR team
  mentioned that the results framework was aligned with the contract management approach for the
  project, so there were separate contracts for the specific components and associated targets, including
  for the engineering studies, the environmental and social studies, the transaction advisory work, and the


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zambezi River Basin Development Project (P133380)



  dam break analysis. This created distinct workstreams that could be monitored separately, with greater
  clarity around accountabilities and milestones.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category A under the Bank's environmental and social safeguards
   policies. According to the PAD, the safeguards triggered by this project were Involuntary Resettlement
   OP/BP 4.12, Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11, Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37, Environmental
   Assessment OP/BP 4.01, Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04, Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01, and OP
   7.50, Projects in International Waterways.

   The planned assessment instruments include Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA),
   Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPFs) and Resettlement
   Action Plans (RAP). These assessments were part of the project (Component 2).

   The ICR states that the ESIAs were conducted according to the requirements of the Bank’s safeguard
   policies during the project and that each of the safeguard issues triggered were directly addressed within
   the studies. The studies were not completed at the time of project closing but are being completed under
   the same contracts and TORs.

   There was a systems issue where the safeguards were not correctly triggered in the system, and therefore
   were only assessed in aggregate via the ISRs. They were, however, assessed individually through the
   social and environment team’s own systems.

   In the ‘Risk to Development Outcome’ section of the ICR, the risk of the Batoka Gorge HES taking place in
   an environmentally sensitive area—Victoria Falls- was cited. There is potential impact on the rare bird
   species for which Batoka Gorge is a key habitat. The ESIA incorporates this risk in its plans and it is critical
   that the safeguard instruments and final detailed design documents are aligned.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: According to the ICR, the financial management systems were rated Moderately
   Satisfactory throughout the project, The ICR team added that while financial reports as well as annual audits
   were submitted on time, , disbursements were lagging while actual expenditures were always below budget.
   The ICR does not mention whether the auditor opinions were qualified or not.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zambezi River Basin Development Project (P133380)



   Procurement: Procurement was rated as a high risk in the PAD and issues materialized during project
   implementation as anticipated. While the Bank’s procurement rules were adhered to, there were ‘some
   minor deviations’ which were addressed during implementation. The ICR notes a downgrade of
   procurement from ‘Satisfactory’ to ‘Moderately Satisfactory’ in 2017 due to contract management issues.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   An unintended positive impact of this project was capacity building for the ZRA. The ICR mentions that the
   project had a significant impact on the ability of the ZRA to plan and manage feasibility studies for
   hydropower projects which is directly relevant to their mandate. Through this project, the ZRA developed
   the basic structures, staff, and procedures to implement similar projects in the future.



   Another unintended positive impact was the ability of ZRA to secure private financing for the HES. The
   additional electricity shortages, growing energy utility deficits, and deteriorating public debt situation put
   pressure on the clients to advance the project faster. It also made it less likely that the HES could be
   financed by public funds, resulting in the adoption of the BOT model.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

      Incorporating a realistic time-frame for large hydropower projects that span more than
         one country client, especially those with less capacity, can be critical to improving
         project design. The project was restructured three times to extend the project closing date
         and encountered several delays that increased project cost. The project component outputs
         were not completed at project closing. A more realistic time-frame- knowing the complexity of
         these types of projects with low capacity clients- could have helped avoid these delays and
         costs.


                                                                                                       Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Zambezi River Basin Development Project (P133380)



        Anticipating the need for and planning stronger capacity building support for clients
         with less experience in conducting feasibility studies for large complex hydroelectric
         schemes can mitigate risks related to implementation (like procurement) more
         effectively. The ICR states that while the risks identified during preparation were generally
         accurate and mitigation measures were in place, there were still delays to the project.
        Having well-designed governance structures for projects that are transboundary in
         nature involving more than one government can positively impact the speed at which
         decisions can be made to move the project forward. The ICR mentions that one of the
         causes for delays in implementation was the slow pace of decision making due to the need
         for agreement from high level government officials of two countries.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the ICR provided sufficient evidence to support the ratings for relevance of outcomes, efficacy, and
efficiency. Additional information on efficacy and efficiency would have further enriched the evidence base for
the ratings. For example, for efficacy, the ICR could have provided some more evidence/ information on how
the draft versions of the outputs were planned to be used for the advancement of the Batoka Gorge HES.
Similarly, the rating for efficiency was based on the project cost and time in comparison to industry norms. It
would have been useful to include any data on the average time and cost of similar projects in the hydropower
sector to support the rating. Other areas where more concrete evidence would have been useful include M&E
utilization and on fiduciary issues.

Overall, the report has followed guidelines and is written in a clear and concise manner. The report was also
candid about the challenges faced by the project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Zambezi River Basin Development Project (P133380)




                                                                                 Page 15 of 15
