     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021759

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P113493                                    VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                    Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-46980,IDA-55960                        30-Jun-2015                                          217,219,974.23

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Apr-2010                                30-Jun-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            150,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             249,738,360.29                                                0.00

 Actual                                         215,903,162.78                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Maria Vanessa               John R. Eriksson             Christopher David Nelson         IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Corlazzoli




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the legal agreement of 2010, the objective of the Second Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction
   Project was “to enhance the living standards of the project beneficiaries by improving: (i) their access to
   productive infrastructure, (ii) the productive and institutional capacities of local governments and communities,
   and (iii) market linkage and business innovations” (Legal Agreement V698-VN (2010), pg. 5). There were no
   variations between how the PDO was presented in the Project Appraisal Document and the legal agreement
   (PAD, para vii).


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)



   The project’s objective was revised once during the life of the project. In 2015, the original objective added an
   outcome (see (iii) below). The amended legal agreement states that the project aimed “to enhance the living
   standards of the project beneficiaries by improving: (i) their access to productive infrastructure, (ii) the
   productive and institutional capacities of local governments and communities, (iii) commune integrated
   investment planning, and (iv) market linkage and business innovations” (Legal Agreement Amendment Credit
   Number 5595VN, 4698-VN (2015), pg. 6). Afterwards, the PDO remained unchanged until the project closure.



   While the project received additional financing in 2015, a new outcome was added to the PDO at the same
   time, thereby increasing the scope of the project. Some PDO level indicators were also dropped and revised.
   The overall PDO as stated in the Legal Agreement and the PAD remained unchanged. As a result, there will
   not be a split evaluation for this project. The project will be assessed against the revised PDO.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  09-Jul-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: District Economic Development (Appraisal cost was estimated at US$57.0 million. It was
   later revised to US$91.0 million. At closing the cost was US$85.34 million). This component aimed at
   providing investment support to the District Socio-Economic Development Plans, which focused on
   productive and economic infrastructure for increased agriculture productivity, and direct local employment
   and income generation funds were supposed to explore market linkages for livelihood opportunities. The
   component also aimed at financing commune-level infrastructure and help provincial and district project
   team develop a clear understanding of pro-poor livelihoods. The component also aimed to support research
   and analytical studies to identify market opportunities, establish partnerships with banks, non-governmental
   organizations, and private sector, and provide “innovation grants” to promote innovative business ideas and
   uncover approaches for business linkages for the rural poor (PAD, para 21 and ICR, para 8).


   Component 2: Commune Development Budget Component (Appraisal cost was estimated at US$40.0
   million. It was later revised to US$114.78 million. At closing the cost was US$88.18 million). This
   component sought to finance small-scale public infrastructure subprojects at the village and communes
   level. The purpose of these subprojects was to provide infrastructure, livelihood support for the poor,
   develop the necessary skills, explore linkage with rural finance institutions and markets, and support
   women’s social and economic development activities (PAD, pg 22 and ICR, para 9). During a restructuring,


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)



  Component 2 also included the emphasis to enhance operation and maintenance of rehabilitated or newly
  constructed infrastructure (ICR, para. 16).

  Component 3: Capacity Building (Appraisal cost was estimated at US$10.0 million. It was later revised to
  US$15.0 million. At closing the cost was US$11.75 million). This component aimed at increasing capacity at
  the central, provincial, district, commune, and village level. Training would include project management,
  and knowledge and capacity strengthening linked to livelihood opportunities. Training would also be
  provided at the commune and village level to support the implementation of grants. Employment related skill
  trainings were expected to be organized with the aim to enhance necessary skills for local employment,
  identify opportunities, and assessment of local labor force needs. Training in safeguarding assets of the
  community and household aimed at improving understanding and mitigating natural disaster risks (PAD,
  para. 23). During a restructuring, Component 3 also aimed to increase the emphasis on institutional
  development to contribute to the institutionalization of participatory local development planning through
  Socio-economic Development Plan (SEDP) in the government’s national poverty reduction programs (ICR,
  para. 16).

  Component 4: Project Management (Appraisal cost was estimated at US$16.0 million. It was later revised
  to US$25.06 million. At closing the cost was US$30.63 million. This accounts for approximately 14% of the
  total project cost). This component sought to ensure effective and efficient project management by
  facilitating coordination communication, information sharing, M&E, and financial management (PAD, para.
  24).




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. At appraisal, the total cost of the project was estimated at US$165.0 million, of which
  US$150.0 million would be allocated by the World Bank and US$15.0 million from the borrower (PAD, pg.
  vi). At closing, the total project cost was US$215.90 million (ICR, pg. 41).

  Financing. A total of US$249.7 million was financed through two different legal agreements. A total of SDR
  96.6 million were provided through the IDA-4698 in 2010. An additional SDR 71 million were provided
  through the IDA-5596 in 2015 (Financial Agreement, IDA-5598, IDA-4698).

  The actual disbursement at the end of the project was US$215,903,163 (ICR, pg. 2).

  Borrower Contribution. The PAD states that the Borrower agreed to contribute towards the project a total
  of US$15 million (PAD, pg. vi). This amount was later revised to US$25 million (ICR, pg. 2). At the end of
  the project, the Borrower contributed US$ 24,721,000 (ICR, pg. 2).

  Dates. The project was approved on April 06, 2010 and became effective on August 23, 2010. It underwent
  a midterm review on January 07, 2013.

  The project underwent two restructurings and one additional financing.

  In the restructuring of January 28th, 2014, the project reallocated funds in different disbursement
  categories, changed disbursement arrangements, and made changes in procurement. The restructuring
  also changed the results framework, including one of the two original PDO indicators and introduced six

                                                                                                Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)



   more indicators at the intermediate outcome level (ICR, para. 13). The original PDO indicator was changed
   from “Project beneficiaries report an improvement of on- and off farm income of at least 10%” to “Project
   beneficiaries report an improvement of income per capita at least by 10%.” (ICR, para. 13).


   In June 19th, 2015, loan closing dates were approved from June 30th 2015 to August 31st 2015 to allow for
   the signing of the Project’s Additional Financing (ICR, para. 14).

   In the restructuring of July 9th 2015, the project received additional financing and the results framework was
   changed. The original PDO was enhanced (by adding a 4th main Outcome (increase commune integrated
   investment planning) during this additional financing and there were further changes to indicators (ICR,
   para. 15). The project end date was extended to June 30th, 2018.
   The original closing of the project was June 30, 2015, but at the second restructuring on July 9th, 2015, the
   project was extended 3 years and closed on June 30, 2018 (ICR, pg. 2).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At appraisal, Vietnam’s economic growth had led to an impressive but uneven poverty reduction. While
national levels of poverty had declined, progress in rural areas and among ethnic minorities was uneven.
For example, the Northwestern Mountain Region had the highest poverty incidence, at 43% compared with
the national average for rural areas of 18% (PAD, para. 1). Moreover, ethnic minorities lacked access to
roads and experienced poor transportation which impeded their access to education, healthcare, and
services. While ethnic minorities had access to agricultural land, they had limited market access.

Previous Sector Experience: Prior to this project, the Bank had provided support to the Government of
Vietnam for poverty alleviation efforts at the commune level. In particular, the Bank supported two
community driven development projects: Frist Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction Project (NMPRP-1)
and the Community Based Rural Infrastructure Development Project (CBRIP) (PAD, para. 8). In addition,
the World Bank was supporting poverty reduction programs from 2006 to 2010 through three development
policy loans (DPL) (PAD, para. 10).

Alignment with World Bank Assistance Strategy: The project’s objective and subsequent outcomes
were aligned with the Country Partnership Strategies (CP FY2007-2011 and CPS FY 2012-16). Both CPSs
focused on poverty reduction with a focus on ethnic minorities (CPS FY2007-11 Outcome 2.2, pg. 127, and
CPS FY 2012-16, Outcome 3.2, para. 72) and improving access to infrastructure in rural areas (CPS
FY2007-11: Outcome 2.1, pg. 124 and CPS FY2012-16, Outcome 3.2, para 73).
The project’s objective remained relevant in the new Country Partnership Framework (FY2018-20). In
particular, the project contributed to CPF’s Focus Area 1 - enable inclusive growth and privatization and
objective 2, promote private sector and agri-business development (CPF 2018-2020 pg. 23). The CPF also
sought to address and broaden economic participation of ethnic minorities, women and vulnerable groups
(CPF FY2018-20, Focus Area 1, Objective 5, pg. 23).




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)



               Alignment with Development Goals: The project’s objective contributed towards poverty alleviation and
               the eradication of hunger by investing in productive infrastructure and supporting the engagement of poor in
               agricultural and off-farm activities. The project also focused on key poor districts and communes.


               Alignment with Government Development Strategy: The government of Vietnam was committed to
               implementing pro-poor initiatives, such as Program 135 and 135-2, as well as the National Targeted
               Program for Sustainable Poverty Reduction (NTP-SPR) (ICR, para. 24). While these programs took place
               before appraisal, the ICR did not include information about the Government of Vietnam’s current policy
               towards poverty alleviation.



               Overall, the project’s objective was relevant given the context. There was also strong alignment with the
               World Bank’s Development Goal and Assistance Strategy. While the project’s objective likely contributed to
               the government development strategy, the ICR did not include evidence of recent strategies. As a result,
               the relevance of the objectives is rated as substantial.



               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             to enhance the living standards of the project beneficiaries by improving: (i) their access to productive
                             infrastructure, (ii) the productive and institutional capacities of local governments and communities, (iii)
                             commune integrated investment planning, and (iv) market linkage and business innovations.

                             Rationale

                             The project aimed to enhance the living standard of the project beneficiaries by improving four interconnected
                             outcomes, including (i) access to productive infrastructure, (ii) the productive and institutional capacities of
                             local governments and communities, (iii) commune integrated investment planning, and (iv) market linkage
                             and business innovations.

                             The theory of change assumes that ethnic minorities will improve their standards of living through better
                             access to services via improved infrastructure (roads, bridges, etc). The project aimed at not only building the
                             necessary infrastructure but also building the capacity for operations and management. However, there are
                             limitations to this assumption as there are likely other systemic factors that also affect ethnic minorities’
                             standards of living. By increasing the capacity of local government, the project aimed to improve efficiency in

                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)



planning and service delivery at the local level. The theory of change assumes that lack of capacity is
affecting the type of programs that local government can deliver. While this is true, there may be other
contributing factors such as government funding and commitment to decentralization. The project also aimed
at improving market linkages, particularly related to agriculture and fund business innovations.

While the theory of change touches on a range of important topics, the logical framework fails to adequately
link activities to the outcomes. For example, while strengthening local commune and government capacity is
a worthwhile goal, there were not sufficient activities to improve efficiency and planning. Improving living
standards was also not well defined in the logframe. Indicators to measure the objective were related to
beneficiary satisfaction and beneficiary per capita income. The beneficiary satisfaction indicator was correctly
dropped during the June 2015 restructure. A new indicator on sustained increased livelihood production
assets was added. Other indicators that could have helped to measure standard of living may have been
related to the level of well-being, level of expenditure, use and access to goods and services, etc. While the
ICR addressed this issue by using proxy data, the indicators in the logframe were unable to capture key
results of the project. For example, indicators to measure outcomes, such as improved capacity were non-
existing.

Overall Objective (PDO) -To enhance the living standards of the project beneficiaries:


Overall the project contributed to a 16% increase in per capita income of beneficiary households than that of
households in a control group (Target met, Target: 15%, ICR, para 32). A 2018 Evaluation of the
Infrastructure showed that 67% of households interviewed reported higher incomes due to higher rice yields
on the original farm area due to improved irrigation works. The increase in rice yields was up 27% compared
to before the project (ICR, para 32). While 16,000 ha of land benefited from improved irrigation schemes
(ICR, para 32), there may have been other factors that led to the improvement of per capita income and rice
yields, such as level of fertilizer and amount of labor. In addition, Vietnam experienced a drought just prior to
the project start that affected rice yields. Therefore the 27% increase in rice yields, which is a proxy indicator
for improved financial and nutritional health, has to be cautiously accepted as an indicator of improved
standards of living, in part because the baseline was abnormally low, owing to the drought. As the economic
and financial analysis suggests, while the project was taking place Vietnam experienced economic growth,
which may have also impacted the living standards of the beneficiaries living in the Northern Mountains.

Main outcome (i) To improve access to productive infrastructure,


Outputs (no targets were provided for these outputs)

      A total of 1,082 sub-projects were implemented, including 348 road sub-projects, 71 bridges, 372
         irrigation sub-projects, 199 domestic water supply sub-projects, 6 market, 17 other infrastructure
         projects, and 17 related consultancies (ICR, pg. 36) .
        3,844kms of rural roads were constructed ( ICR, para. 30).
        9,768m of bridges were built (ICR, para. 30).
        Over 13,000 sq meters of rural markets were built (ICR, para. 30).
        Water supply was provided to 15,755 households (ICR, para. 30).
        16,000 ha of land benefited from construction of irrigation schemes (ICR, para 30).


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)




Outcomes

By the end of the project at least one infrastructure sub-project had been built in every village reaching
192,000 households (ICR, para. 30). The improvement in infrastructure led to 95% of beneficiaries stating
that they saved on transportation costs (ICR, para 30). Moreover, 62% of beneficiary households reported
increased their frequency of visits to markets and farm input suppliers (Target met, Target: 60%, ICR pg.
30). The Evaluation of Infrastructure report also concluded that 76% of beneficiary households reported that
the project’s outputs decreased traveling time to farm land (Target met, Target: 60%, ICR, para. 30, and pg.
30). Beneficiary households also saved an average of 9 labor days for transporting their produce during
harvest, compared to before the project. Two thirds of the surveyed beneficiaries reported positive changes
to their production and marketing activities due to improved roads (No target provided, ICR, para. 30). The
provision of water supply to domestic households also potentially had benefits related to hygiene and
sanitation, and improved drinking water quality (No targets provided, no further quantitative information
provided, ICR, para. 30).


Overall, there was evidence from the beneficiary survey that showed there were cost-savings, reduced travel
time and improved access to market and facilities. There may have also been improved access to water
quality, although the ICR does not include any water testing results. These changes may have contributed to
the enhancement of standard of living for beneficiary households. In other words, it is likely that consumption
expenditure on everyday needs such as water and transportation were reduced, but the ICR did not provide
any quantitative or credible income data. The improvements were also unlikely to be evenly distributed as
different villages benefited from different sub-projects. The ICR also did not provide any disaggregated data
by district. The level of improvement in the quality of life would be dependent on the prioritization of the sub-
project by the commune. Finally, 35% of interviewed households considered the status of the infrastructure
worse than before the project handover (ICR, para. 80). This is problematic as it highlights the potential poor
quality of maintenance and the risk that any gains could disappear with time.

While some proxy indicators appear to demonstrate that there was improved standards of living through
improved productive infrastructure, there was no consumption expenditure data or information disaggregated
at district level. In addition, there is some evidence to suggest that the quality of infrastructure was worse than
at handover reflecting poor maintenance. On balance, this outcome is rated as modest, owing to significant
shortcomings.


Main outcome (ii) To improve the productive and institutional capacities of local governments and
communities,


Output

      24,000 farmers were trained in safeguarding assets, disaster risk reduction, and climate change
       (Target not provided, ICR, para. 31).
      18,029 commune staffs and 38,167 village staffs participating in the trainings, of which ethnic minority
       people accounted for 89.5% and women accounted for 41% (Target not provided, Interview, 2020).



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)



Outcome

According to the ICR, several trainings were provided at various levels of local government. Trainings varied
from socio economic development planning, management of infrastructure investments, procurement and
financial management, contract management and construction work supervision, and operations and
management of infrastructure (ICR, para. 43). According to the ICR, the capacity strengthening measures
enabled the Commune Development Boards (CDBs) to play a role as investment owners and village leaders
to take ownership of the development activities (ICR, para. 43). The ICR provided self-assessment evidence
to showcase the project’s contribution towards productive and institutional capacity strengthening (Interview,
2020). For example, more than 60% of CDBs felt capable of and proactively implementing SEDP processes
(Interview, 2020). Moreover 24% of the surveyed communes were confident that they were capable, proficient
and could guide their colleagues (Interview 2020). The self-assessment information is one proxy indicator to
showcase capacity strengthening, however it does not indicate quality improvement over time (Interview,
2020). Indicators related to levels of knowledge change or use were not part of the logframe. The ICR did
not mention any concrete products that were a result of the implementation of training or mentorship (such as
the use to which they applied). This information would have been helpful to assess the achievement of this
outcome area. Nonetheless, the proxy information and the volume of people trained lead this outcome to be
rated as substantial.

Main outcome (iii) To increase commune integrated investment planning,


Output (no targets were provided for the first 3 outputs; it is assumed that targets were met for the
last 3 outputs)

      7,861 infrastructures and above 900 design works were prioritized, developed and implemented by
       commune members through the Community Development Board (CBD).
      900 commune staff and 5,000 villagers received O&M training (ICR, para. 31).
      All communes undertook a risk assessment of their plans (ICR, para. 31).
      All infrastructure projects had an operations and management (O&M) group established (ICR, para.
       31).



Outcome


As of project closing, all six provinces had institutionalized the commune SEDP Guidelines (Target met,
Target: 6 provinces, ICR, pg. 33). Twenty-eight out of the 29 project districts consolidated the commune
SEDPs into their districts SDEPs. (Target exceeded, Target 60% and target met 97%, ICR, para 31). The
ICR reports that 66% of women and ethnic minorities regularly participated in planning and decision making
processes (Target met,Target 60%, ICR, pg. 31). The ICR does not include information in terms of the quality
of contribution by the women, and the extent that their voices were heard. On balance, this outcome is rated
as substantial.

Main outcome (iv) To increase market linkage and business innovations.



                                                                                                Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)



Outputs (no targets are provided except for the last output)

        13,568 common interest groups (CIGs) were supported throughout the project (ICR, para. 33)
        57,000 people were members of CIGs, with 52.3% being women (ICR, para. 33). .
        157,000 people were members of CIGs, with 52.3% being women (ICR, para. 33).
        383 CIGs had ongoing contracts with their agribusiness partners.
        243 CIGs were in their first production cycle.
        130 CIGs obtained formal status as collaborative groups (Target exceeded, Target: 50, ICR, pg. 32)

Outcome


At least 66% of CIGs established by the end of the project had an ongoing contractual business relationship
with their agribusiness partner. At least 74.7% had sustained increase in their livelihood production assets
(Target met, Target: 60%, ICR, para. 33). The value of productive assets of a CIG was considered to have
increased when the total asset value generated by the CIG was higher than the value of the initial investment.
On average, the value of the asset that each CIG generated was approximately US$10,000 (ICR, para. 33).
Each CIG on average generated an asset value that was double the initial investment of US$3,300 (ICR,
para. 33). In June 2018, 90% of CIVs were operating (ICR, para. 33).


A total of 107 productive partnerships, consisting of 1351 Common Interest Groups (CIGs) and 64 agro-
businesses were established. Of the 1351 CIGs, 578 CIGs, were in their second or subsequent production
cycles. The productive partnerships were covering over 22,000 households and involved 21 livestock
activities, 85 cultivation/crop activities and one tourism service (ICR, para 34b). As of November 2017, 82
production partnerships were facilitating commercial linkages between agribusiness partners and farmers. An
evaluation of the Performance of the PPs reports indicated higher total asset value than the total initial
investment cost. Only 60 production partnership had signed ongoing contractual agreements between the
CIGs and the business partners (ICR, para. 34b). At project closing, 381 out of the 578 CIGs (or 66%) were
operating in their second or third production cycle and had ongoing contracts with their agribusiness partners
(Target met (66% operating beyond first cycle or more), Target 60%,ICR, para 34b). Moreover, 88% of the
CIGs were making marketing decisions regarding selling outputs or buying inputs, using market information
from a minimum of two different sources (ICR, para 34a).



Finally, the project succeeded in raising additional finance through agreed upon co-financing rules with CIGs.
In total, 14% of livelihood support and production services and support for women’s social and economic
development was raised by CIG members (No Target provided, ICR, para. 44). This outcome is rated as
substantial.




Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                 Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The objective aimed at improving standards of living of ethnic minorities in the Northern Mountain region. The
                            project was able to implement at least one infrastructure project in each commune. It trained local
                            government and communes and it supported establishing CIGs in the agricultural business.


                            The ICR did not include any information on consumer expenditure and mainly relied on a beneficiary survey
                            and proxy data to showcase the objective’s achievements. While there is some data that shows that
                            individuals were able to decrease travel time, and improve access to markets, the quality of infrastructure was
                            uneven. This also implies that improvements in standards of living across households may have also been
                            uneven, particularly since different villages received different infrastructure project. The efficacy of achieving
                            the first outcome was modest. The project was successful at establishing a large number of CIGs, and a
                            subset was able to move forward to their first or second production cycle, obtain production partnerships, and
                            create linkages with agribusiness. While the project trained local government and villagers, it did not include
                            sufficient data in terms of what shifted or changed in the local government’s approach to improve standards of
                            living as a result of training. On balance, the efficacy of this project is rated as Substantial.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Scope of Analysis: A financial and economic analysis was carried out during appraisal, restructuring and at the
   end of the project. While the financial and economic analysis applied the same methodology used in the
   appraisal, some of the priorities and investments changed during the life of the project.

   Economic Analysis: At appraisal, the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) was estimated at 20.1% (PAD, para. 56).
   The annual financial return per beneficiary household was estimated at US$283 per year for livestock farmers
   and US$232 for crop farmers.
   However over the life of the project, levels of investments on key areas shifted from those that were originally
   projected. For example, it was assumed that 90% of private good investments would support crop production
   and 4% would support livestock production. However, by the end of the project 90% of investments were
   allocated to livestock production (ICR, para. 36). As a result, individual activity comparisons between ex-post
   and ex-ante economic and financial analysis results may not be valid (ICR, para. 36).

   At project closure, the ERR was estimated at 27.4% with a net present value (NPV) of US$111.2 million (ICR,
   para. 37).
   In terms of unit costs, the project’s activities costs were within the range of similar projects in the country and in
   comparable countries (ICR, para. 38). The average project cost per beneficiary household was of US$1,294 or


                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)



US$322 per beneficiary (ICR, para. 38).


Operational Efficiency: There were a few factors that negatively affected the project’s efficiency. For example,
the project experienced a few disbursement and procurement delays that affected the project’s implementation
and led to an extension of the disbursement deadline to June 30, 2019 (ICR, para. 38). At the time that the ICR
was written, there were US$34 million unspent due to budget inefficiencies (ICR, para. 38). Budget inefficiencies
included projected allocations were not sufficient for the project to fully utilize its borrowing amount (ICR, para
67). The project also spent about 14% of the total budget on operational costs.

Overall, the project generated a satisfactory ERR at a reasonable unit cost. However there were implementation
delays and disbursement and procurement inefficiencies. On balance, the efficiency of the project is rated
Substantial (ICR, para. 40).




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              27.40
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome


The project’s objective was relevant given the context. There was also strong alignment with the World Bank’s
Development Goal and Assistance Strategy. While the project’s objective likely contributed to the government
development strategy, the ICR did not include evidence of recent strategies. The relevance of the objectives is
rated as substantial.

The objective aimed at improving standards of living of ethnic minorities in the Northern Mountain region. The
ICR did not include any information on consumer expenditure and mainly relied on a beneficiary survey and
proxy data to showcase the objective’s achievements. While there is some data that shows that individuals were
able to decrease travel time and improve access to markets, the quality of infrastructure was not consistent
across all locations. This also implies that improvements in standards of living across households may have
also been uneven, particularly given that different villages received different infrastructure. The project was

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)



successful at establishing a large number of CIGs, but proportionally only a small subset was able to move
forward to their first or second production cycle, obtain production partnerships, and create linkages with
agribusiness. The project trained local government and villagers, it did not include data in terms of what shifted
or changed in the local government’s approach to improve standards of living. In a self-assessment the CDBs
also described feeling more capable and proactively implementing the SEDP process. Having said that, there
was progress in agricultural yields and improvements in households within the project areas. Thus, on balance,
the efficacy of this project is rated as Substantial.


The project generated a satisfactory ERR at a reasonable unit cost. However, there were implementation delays
and disbursement and procurement inefficiencies. As a result, the efficiency of the project is rated at
Substantial.


Therefore, the overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There are two potential risks to the development outcomes.

Operational and Management Sources for Infrastructure Project. There was a lack of commitment for
continuous operational performance and management of infrastructure projects. While the project took
precautions during implementation and trained communes on operational performance and management,
the sustainability and upkeep of the infrastructure projects are under potential threat. For example, adequate
resources to keep roads and bridges maintained relies on public sources (ICR, para. 76).

Need for continuous technical support. The achievements in this area were in part due to the technical
assistance provided to the agricultural sector but they require continuing support, particularly after project
closure (ICR, para. 78).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of the project included lessons learned from previous poverty reduction projects. The design
  team incorporated design improvements with increased focus on improving livelihoods, local area
  business development, O&M of infrastructure, and disaster risk management support (ICR, para.
  46). The project also focused on ensuring that women were at the center of the project, by enhancing

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)



  women’s voices and actions in sub-project prioritization, representation in CDBs, and financing women’s
  groups and activities (ICR, para. 47). The preparation of the additional financing (AF) also focused on
  sustainability of livelihood interventions and the institutionalization of SEDP (ICR, para. 48). The AF also
  focused on including key trainings for small infrastructure (ICR, para. 49).


  The project’s design had some shortcomings, including inadequate indicators (ICR, para 72). The project
  team attempted to solve some of the shortcomings during the first restructuring, but other shortcomings
  remained throughout the life of the project. As a result, the project was unable to fully measure its impact
  on the communes and villages. The quality at entry is rated at moderately satisfactory.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project was overseen by two Task Team members and several other World Bank team members. The
 World Bank team provided ongoing support to the client project team and conducted post-reviews of
 selected procurement packages. The team conducted regular site visits and the midterm evaluation. On
 average, there were two supervision missions per year (ICR, para 73, World Bank staff interview, January
 2020) The Implementation Support Missions highlighted concerns related to project management and
 implementation. While the recommendations in the ISM were relevant, they could have benefited from
 more stringent structure and follow up (ICR, para. 73). For example, the “status of agreed upon actions
 from last mission,” was not always captured appropriately (ICR, para. 73).

 The project had complex planning, budgeting, and financial management. There were some initial
 challenges with the seven designated accounts due to staff turnover and delayed recruitment of national
 and international experts to support project implementation (ICR, para. 51). The project was also delayed
 in purchasing vehicles due to the strict implementation of Resolution 11 on inflation control and reduction in
 public expenditure to stabilize the macroeconomy (ICR, para. 52). The delay had an impact on monitoring
 and support to districts. The project was also negatively affected by delays in funds allocation and
 disbursements. The delay had an impact on monitoring and support to districts. The project was also
 negatively affected by delays in funds allocation and disbursements. Some of these issues were resolved
 during the life of the project and the project accelerated to full disbursement (100%) in period 2010-2015
 (Interview, 2020). The project also failed to conduct an end of project survey due to budgetary issues
 which led to the inability to credibly report on final project results (ICR, para. 54).



 Notwithstanding supportive supervision, Bank performance in this regard is rated as moderately
 satisfactory as a result of the moderate shortcomings, including delays in procurement, high turnover of
 staff at district level, and insufficient monitoring.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project aimed to enhance the living standard of the project beneficiaries by improving four
 interconnected outcomes, including access to infrastructure, productive and institutional capacities or
 governments and communities, commune integrated investment planning, and market linkage and
 business innovations.


 The theory of change assumes that ethnic minorities will improve their standards of living through better
 access of services via improved infrastructure. However, there are limitations to this assumption as there
 are likely other systemic factors that also affected ethnic minorities’ standards of living. By increasing the
 capacity of local government, the project aimed to improve efficiency in planning and service delivery at the
 local level. The project also aimed at improving market linkages, particularly related to agriculture, and fund
 business innovations.


 While the theory of change touches on a range of important topics, the logic framework fails to adequately
 link activities to the outcomes. As the ICR admits, the project’s “objective is complex and has different
 layers.” (ICR, para. 55). Unfortunately, there were insufficient activities to meet the objectives particularly
 related to strengthening local commune and government capacity. Moreover, there were insufficient
 indicators to measure achievements across multiple outcomes.

 The PDO indicators were also clearly not well-defined (ICR, para. 55) For example, improving living
 standards was also not well defined in the logframe. Indicators to measure the objective were related to
 beneficiary satisfaction and beneficiary per capita income. The beneficiary satisfaction indicator was
 correctly dropped during the June 2015 restructure. A new indicator on sustained increased livelihood
 production assets was added. Other indicators that could have helped to measure standard of living may
 have been related to the level of well-being, level of expenditure, use and access to goods and services,
 etc. While the ICR addressed this issue by using proxy data, there are major flaws in the logframe.
 Indicators to measure the outcomes described within the objective were weak. As the ICR summarizes
 “despite the iterative improvements to the results framework, some indicators remained vague in their
 relevance and wording and this created challenges in interpretation and hence in measurement.” (ICR,
 para. 56). Finally, the results framework also did not include two mandatory core indicators, such as
 number of direct project beneficiaries and female beneficiaries (ICR, para. 56).


 While the PAD stated that the monitoring system was designed based on the previous phase of this project

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)



 (PAD para. 41), it failed to take into account new thinking in measurement of monitoring and evaluation.
 For example, the monitoring system was not designed to measure natural disaster vulnerability and climate
 change, two important activities (ICR, para. 56). While qualitative data was meant to be collected through
 citizen reports and most significant change methodology, findings from these methods were not included in
 the ICR (PAD, para. 41). These two methods were used by an independent firm until the mid-term review
 (World Bank Staff interview, January 2020). Thereafter the project team led the most significant change
 methodology to help gather data on key indicators (World Bank staff interview, January 2020).


 As planned, the project also implemented a randomized sample baseline (World Bank staff interview,
 January 2020). The project also conducted a follow-up survey as a part of a midterm (PAD, para. 41 and
 World Bank staff interview, January 2020).
 The project was designed with the intent to conduct an end of project survey that would include a control
 group of non-treatment villages (PAD, para. 41). Despite the intention of conducting the survey, there were
 changes to public financing and the 2016–20 medium term investment plan (MTIP) that did not enable the
 study to move forward (World Bank staff interview, January 2020). Instead, the project team decided to
 conduct multiple thematic surveys that the ICR could used to provide evidence on achievement (or not) of
 the PDOs (World Bank staff interview, January 2020). These thematic reports included (a) The
 Infrastructure Evaluation Report was based on a survey of 1296 randomly selected beneficiary households,
 covering 25 out of 29 Project districts; (b) the Livelihood Evaluation Report which contain data from 10,323
 CIGs; and (c) the Productive Partnership Report containing data on all 107 productive partnerships. (ICRR,
 para 29).



 The Monitoring and Evaluation plan was designed to be managed by staff in the district and provincial
 management units, as well as an information technology person to oversee the MIS project (PAD, para.
 41). During project implementation, M&E consultants were positioned at the Central Project Coordination
 Office (CPO) and all PPMU/DPMU of all project provinces and district (World Bank staff interview, January
 2020).



b. M&E Implementation
  Progress on CIGs were monitored through Community Facilitators, who communicated and aggregated
  data at district and provincial level by the project management units (ICR, para. 58) . Livelihood data was
  also maintained in a database of the livelihood projects (ICR, para. 58).

  Overall, the project implemented more or less the M&E system that was described in the PAD. There
  were, however, difficulties operationalizing the MIS in the early project years. Several WB ISMs
  highlighted the need to improve the MIS system and provide additional training to the M&E
  staff. Performance improved with the introduction of a web-based platform in 2012 (ICR, para. 57). By
  the end of the project, the MIS database had collected information on 26,700 investment sub-projects
  (infrastructure and livelihoods) and more than 4,200 trainings courses (Interview, 2020). It also collected
  information on key indicators (Interview, 2020).

  The project was also unable to conduct an end of project survey due to changes in the public financing
  and medium-term investment plan (ICR, para. 29). As a result, it had to rely on conducting multiple


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)



  thematic reports to provide evidence based on the achievements of the PDO (ICR, para. 29). These
  reports focused on collecting data only from project beneficiaries and did not provide comparisons with
  non-project communes (ICR, para. 29).




c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR, the M&E findings and recommendations led to two project restructurings (ICR,
  para. 59). According to the Government of Vietnam, the data collected was useful for decision-making
  (Interview, 2020). It allowed the project to revise some indicators. The project staff also worked towards
  improving the MIS system, however at times provincial management units prepared quarterly reports
  without input from district-level staff (ICR, para. 59). While large volume of data was collected
  throughout the project, as the ICR reflects “the data was not the ideal substitute for income data that
  would have been obtained from the planned end of Project household survey.” (ICR, para. 59).



  The overall rating of quality of M&E is rated as modest. There were significant shortcomings in the
  design of the M&E system, including results framework and indicator selection. The implementation of
  the M&E system had some shortcomings, particularly around the MIS. Finally, while some of the data
  was used for decision making, the MIS system faced technical delays and regular updates that led to
  reporting based on incomplete data. Data that was collected was not useful as proxy data. It was only
  an after-project beneficiary survey that measured, through proxy data, some improvements in standards
  of living.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Environmental Category “B” Partial Assessment. At appraisal, it triggered
   the following safeguards: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement (OB/BP
   4.12), and Indigenous People (PAD, pg. viii).


   The environmental impacts of the project were related to the small-scale infrastructure and livelihood sub-
   projects. The impacts were minor and localized (ICR, para. 61). They were managed by applying the Bank’s
   Environmental Code of Conduct (ECOP) and the GoV’s Environmental Protection Planning (EPP). ECOP
   was incorporated into bidding and contractual documents. The project management unit supervised the
   construction contract’s compliance with agreed mitigation measures and periodically reported to the Bank
   (ICR, para. 61).



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)



  There were no incidents or accidents throughout the life of the projects and there were no complaints
  through the established grievance redress system from local people about environmental impact (ICR, para.
  61). There were also no complaints regarding compensation for land donation issues raised (ICR, para.
  65). Only two households had queries about the level of compensation rate (ICR, para. 65).

  The Central Project Coordination Office (CPO) technical staff provided guidance on good agricultural
  practices (GAP) and waste management (ICR, para. 62). Other best environmental measures were also
  used in the agricultural activities to properly discard animal waste, reduce the demand for chemical
  fertilizers, and exploitation of fuel wood (ICR, para. 62). Natural forest screenings indicated that the project
  had no adverse impact on forests throughout the implementation (ICR, para. 63).

  About 95% of project beneficiaries were ethnic minority groups, and hence key features of Indigenous
  People were carefully considered during project design (World Bank staff interview, January 2020). The
  approved project paper was considered as an Action Plan for Indigenous People (World Bank staff
  interview, January 2020) . During project implementation, several efforts were implemented to reach ethnic
  minority groups, including the use of local languages at village consultation meetings and in relevant
  communication products (video, audio books, leaflets, etc.); fair representation of ethnic minority groups in
  meetings, surveys, and other project activities (World Bank staff interview, January 2020).

  There were some difficulties in the compliance of social safeguard policies during the first few years of
  implementation due to lack of understanding of the policies, weak information provided to the project
  beneficiaries, no systematic recording of assets provided to households, lack of monitoring reports on
  safeguard policies, and inadequate quality of Resettlement Action Plans (ICR, para. 64).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The project submitted acceptable interim financial statements and acceptable audited financial statements
  (ICR< para. 66). According to the ICR, the financial management system was well staffed and trained.


  The project experienced some challenges related to budget process, disbursement, and internal auditing.
  For example, the budget process was not efficient and allocations made in 2016-2020 were not sufficient
  for the Project to fully utilize its borrowing authority (ICR, para. 67). There were also delays in
  disbursement process due to the Ministry of Finance rules, such as the delayed signage of the
  Withdrawing Applications of the Ministry of Finance (ICR, para. 67).

  The implementation of the internal audits was not consistent throughout the life of the project. (ICR, para.
  67). For example, internal audits were carried out every year from 2011 to 2014 (World Bank Staff
  interview, January 2020). However, after 2014 no internal audits were carried out due to heavy workload of
  the Inspectorates and the absence of a legal framework for internal audits in the public sector (ICR, para
  67).


  The external audits were carried out by independent audit firms every fiscal year (World Bank staff
  interview, January 2020). For Project financial statements, the audit opinions were unqualified (World

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)



   Bank staff interview, January 2020). During the first years of implementations there were some qualified
   opinions, such as the effectiveness of internal control, contract management, and cash management
   (World Bank staff interview, January 2020). After audit reports were issued, all implementing units at all
   levels of government took action to review the mentioned issues and prepare action plans to correct or
   avoid in the future (World Bank staff interview, January 2020).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were extracted from the ICR:


    1. Infrastructure projects need to be of the highest quality in order to have sustainable
       impact on the lives of the beneficiary. For example, while the project was able to
       implement infrastructure across several districts, about 35% of interviewed households
       considered the status of the infrastructure worse than before the project began (ICR, para.
       80). Infrastructure projects were reported as below standards due to inappropriate designs,
       low quality construction, and poor supervision (ICR, para. 80). The project needed additional
       mechanisms to ensure quality, safety, functionality and compliance with environmental
       standards (ICR, para. 80).

    2. One-off trainings are insufficient to improve agricultural productivity. For example, it is
       known that in order for farmers to increase their livelihood activities, it takes several

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       VN-2nd Northern Mountains Poverty Redctn (P113493)



         production cycles. The project design emphasized practical and hands-on training, however
         not a lot of farmers completed trainings for multiple production cycles (ICR, para. 81). The
         project design also did not consider how best to provide continuous technical advisory
         services to the farmers upon completion of the project (ICR, para. 81).

     3. Local governments are better prepared for decentralization efforts if they receive
         adequate and relevant institutional capacity. For example, the project contributed
         towards building capacity at the district and provincial levels (ICR, para. 82). This work
         supported and prepared local government for the time when the Vietnam government will
         implement its full decentralization agenda (ICR, para. 82).




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear and well written. The ICR adequately described the limitations of the project’s design and
implementation, including issues with the indicators, gaps in data related to efficacy, and the poor
implementation of monitoring and evaluation systems. The ICR could have included more of the project’s
shortcomings into the efficacy section instead of leaving them for the lessons learned section. Overall, this ICR
is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 19 of 19
