     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Inclusive Growth DPG(P160544)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0021764

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P160544                                   Inclusive Growth DPG

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                               Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D2060                                 22-Jun-2018                                      102,811,740.55

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Jun-2017                               22-Jun-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                         100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                      102,811,740.55                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof      Clay Wescott                 Malathi S. Jayawickrama       IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The objective of the Inclusive Growth Development Policy Grant (DPG) as set out in the Program Document
   was to: (i) enhance the policy framework to expand access to economic opportunities for the vulnerable; and
   (ii) strengthen the policy and regulatory framework for private sector development (Program Document, page
   5).




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 10
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Inclusive Growth DPG(P160544)



b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   The operation had two pillars reflected in the PDO.
   Pillar 1: enhance the policy framework to expand access to economic opportunities for the
   vulnerable. This included: adopting a policy addressing the country’s internally displaced persons (IDP) and
   returnee crisis; reforms to the legal governance framework for land management and public land acquisition;
   and establishing a regulatory framework supporting financial inclusion through e-money. These initiatives
   were to broaden access to economic opportunities to excluded populations in Afghanistan, including
   returnees, the internally displaced, the rural poor, and newly urbanizing populations.

   Pillar 2: strengthen the policy and regulatory framework for private sector development. This pillar
   included: adopting a policy governing public-private partnerships; reforms allowing private investment in new
   telecommunications technologies; reforms to the business licensing process; and the establishment of a
   legal framework for accounting practice and the accountancy profession. These initiatives were to contribute
   to improvements in policy conditions for private sector investment, supporting job creation, growth, and
   increased revenues over time.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   Program cost and financing. The IDA commitment under the operation was US$100 million. It was fully
   disbursed.
   Dates. The operation was approved on June 13, 2017, and became effective and closed on June 22, 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  The operation was relevant to country needs, government strategy and the World Bank Group’s Country
  Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY17-FY20. Following a period of strong growth, largely driven by NATO
  military presence and significant transfers from the donor community, the country had been facing reduced
  aid and security presence, slowing economic activity and declining fiscal revenues over the previous five
  years, and this was likely to continue to be the case. The DPG provided budget support while being
  conditioned to government priorities and the CPF. It was in line with key elements of a recent national
  development policy framework, notably social inclusion and private sector development, and it was set within
  a broader multi-donor engagement to support recurrent spending which was managed by the World
  Bank. The operation supported all three pillars of the CPF – building institutions, supporting inclusive growth,
  and promoting social inclusion.



  Rating
  High


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 10
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Inclusive Growth DPG(P160544)




   b. Relevance of Design
       The results chain was straightforward with prior actions that were likely to accelerate processes that
       plausibly would facilitate the creation of economic opportunity and private sector development, while
       emphasizing bottlenecks that vulnerable groups were likely to face, for instance absence of formal land
       ownership records. In some instances, target indicators were not clearly specified (see section 9a).
       A stand-alone operation instead of a programmatic series was chosen in view of a fluid political and security
       situation, and an uncertain macroeconomic outlook. Growth prospects were considered limited, albeit
       positive, in the short run, and the fiscal outlook challenging. Still, fiscal sustainability analysis undertaken by
       the Bank suggested that non-security aid commitments would be sufficient to meet growing expenditure
       needs. Support was also provided by the IMF under a three-year extended credit facility arrangement to
       consolidate gains in macroeconomic management and structural reform. Conditional on continued reform
       progress and realization of expected aid levels, Afghanistan’s macroeconomic framework was deemed
       adequate for the operation, while recognizing substantial downside risk.



       Rating
       Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To expand access to economic opportunities for the vulnerable

    Rationale
    This objective was to be achieved by adopting a policy framework addressing the crisis arising from the
    influx of returning migrants and growing numbers of IDPs; improving fairness and efficiency in land
    governance; and facilitating access to financial services through e-money.

    Policy framework for return migration and IDPs. A cross-government policy framework guiding a
    coherent policy response to the ongoing displacement and returnee crisis was approved by the government
    as a prior action. It aimed at registering undocumented returnees arriving through major border points, and
    providing them with identification documents, facilitation services for re-establishing businesses; and
    community-level assistance to mitigate conflicts.

    As a result, four major border points providing certificates (that gain access to the other services) were
    opened as intended. However, they are not yet fully operational due to still inadequate biometric registration
    at other border points. Reintegration information centers have been established in 17 provinces (with a



                                                                                                             Page 3 of 10
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Inclusive Growth DPG(P160544)



    target of 25 in 2019). Effective implementation of community-level assistance was underway but constrained
    due to the large number of returnees and IDPs.

    Land management system. The government approved and submitted to the National Assembly a land
    management law intended to improve security of tenure for the various categories of land users and provide
    more accessible procedures for formal titles to be issued; and a land acquisition law intended to ensure
    fairness and efficiency in the acquisition of land for public purposes.

    Submission of both laws to the National Assembly were prior actions. They subsequently came into force by
    Presidential Decree. In Afghanistan, the constitution allows for laws to be passed by Presidential Decree
    when Parliament is not in session. Once Parliament is again sitting, the laws have to be formally
    ratified. The laws come into effect in practice as soon as the Presidential Decree is signed.

    As a result, the number of landholders currently without formal land ownership records provided with formal
    ownership through the administrative processes established under the new land management law had
    reached 2100 by the closing of the operation, exceeding the target of 500. In addition, gender disaggregated
    records of land ownership are now maintained in the digital registration system, achieving the target.

    An estimated 70 percent of land acquisitions are provided with public notice through media at least 6 months
    in advance of acquisition and social impact assessment, partially achieving the target of moving from zero to
    100 percent. However, the Ministry of Urban Development and Land does not yet have adequate systems in
    place to fully verify this estimate. That was being prepared under the Bank's Land Administration System
    Project.

    Financial services. The Central Bank issued new regulations governing electronic money institutions
    supporting the development of e-money systems and expanded access to financial services as a prior
    action. As a result, the number of registered non-bank electronic institutions under those new regulations
    rose from zero to 3, meeting the target. However, there was a minor shortcoming with the results indicator
    (see Section 9a).



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     To strengthen the policy and regulatory framework for private sector development

    Rationale



                                                                                                      Page 4 of 10
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Inclusive Growth DPG(P160544)



This objective was to be achieved by establishing a policy and legal framework to better manage risk under
public-private partnerships; by adopting an open access and competitive provisioning policy to encourage
new private investment in fiber-optic technology; unifying processes to reduce the cost and time taken for
investment licensing and business registration; and introducing a new accountancy law to establish the
legislative basis for a regulated accounting profession in Afghanistan and thus addressing important
constraints to private sector development in the country.

Public-private partnerships. The government approved a public-private partnership (PPP) policy and
approved and submitted to the National Assembly a PPP law, establishing a policy and legal framework for
PPPs (prior action). The law subsequently came into force through a Presidential Decree. The results
indicator – that 100 percent of PPP transactions with invitations for expressions of interest are published on
PPP unit website – has so far only been achieved in five out of ten cases. The reason was that of the five
not recorded on the website, two unsolicited and negotiated proposals were received before the law came
into force, but they still comply with the law. Three unsolicited and negotiated proposals that comply with the
law were received after the law came into force. Thus, although the target was not met for technical
reasons, the broader objectives of the policy and law were met.

Competition in telecommunications. The country’s High Economic Council approved an open access and
competitive provisioning policy, allowing mobile network operators to invest in national and metropolitan
fiber-optic networks, and the policy has been published on an official government website (prior action). The
results indicator - the share of fiber-optic network (by value of investment) under management of the state
utility (Aftel) declining from 100 percent to less than 80 percent – has so far not been achieved. Aftel was
still the only provider, but completion of private investments planned or underway are expected to reduce
public ownership to 80 percent.

Business licensing. The Ministry of Commerce unified processes for investment licensing and business
registration within the new Afghanistan Central Business Registry (prior action). However, the results
indicator – a decline in the average number of days taken to renew a business license from 120 days to 25
days – included tax clearance as well as business licensing: the former required 120 days to process, while
the latter required 2-3 days. The reform included only business licensing, which fell to a few hours, while tax
clearance remained outside the reform and still was at 120 days. While the time taken to renew a business
license fell, it still also required 120 days for tax clearance.

Establishing an accounting profession. The Recipient’s Cabinet has approved and submitted to the
National Assembly a new Accountancy Law to establish the legislative basis for a regulated accounting
profession in Afghanistan, and the law was adopted by Presidential Decree March 2017 and approved by
Parliament July 2018. The results indicator was an increase in the number of Afghan national and resident
accountants with accreditations recognized under the accountancy law. The actual achievement was an
increase from an estimated 20 to 79, compared to a target of at least 100, in part reflecting slower-than-
expected certification of practicing accountants and accounting students.




                                                                                                    Page 5 of 10
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Inclusive Growth DPG(P160544)




    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  Relevance of objectives was rated high, reflecting its strong alignment with the Bank’s CPF, government
  policies, and country challenges. Relevance of design was rated substantial, taking into account a logical
  results framework as well as mostly reasonably ambitious targets and an acceptable macroeconomic
  framework. Efficacy was rated substantial for one objective and modest for the other. The outcome rating of
  moderately satisfactory indicates moderate shortcomings in the operation's achievements of its objectives.


  a.      Outcome Rating
          Moderately Satisfactory


  6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

  Political and governance risks, as well as macroeconomic risk, were rated high. The former reflect an uncertain
  security situation and power-sharing arrangements in government, which may have implications on policy as
  well as stability within the bureaucracy. The macroeconomic outlook includes significant uncertainties related to
  the country’s heavy dependence on aid and implications of any variations in external support on fiscal
  sustainability and service delivery. Capacity risks remain across agencies, but are mitigated in part by linked
  technical assistance such as the Afghanistan Land Administration System Project that is working to continue
  processes of recording land acquisition and enforcing compliance of legal requirements.


  a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
          High

  7. Assessment of Bank Performance

  a. Quality-at-Entry
       The project was strategically relevant – it provided budget support while focusing on measures to expand
       private sector development, future revenue mobilization, and social protection. The operation focused on a
       series of immediate interventions that were underpinned by complementary investment projects, as well as
       technical assistance and advisory services that supported the longer time horizon implied by some results
       targets. The operation also drew on lessons learned under prior development policy operations (DPOs) in

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 10
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Inclusive Growth DPG(P160544)



  Afghanistan, notably that the DPO could be an effective tool to focus government decision making in a
  volatile environment, and it drew on ongoing Bank and USAID technical assistance that informed the
  design of the policy actions. The choice of a stand-alone development policy operation also reflected
  legitimate concern about the risks of engagement, as well as the need for budget and policy support. The
  results framework was straightforward, although some of the targets under Objective 2 may have been too
  ambitious.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  With permanent in-country presence, the Bank team was able to work closely with the government and
  development partners on the ground during policy implementation and react quickly to provide advice in a
  situation of continuing armed conflict, occasionally compensating for cancelled missions. In doing so,
  existing structures for coordination with government and donors appear to have been used effectively to
  ensure progress. That said, implementation did encounter challenges: several changes over time in sector
  teams influenced implementation as the team priorities shifted, causing some disruptions in
  implementation. This may have contributed to the issues with M&E design mentioned in Section 9a, at
  least some of which could have been adjusted drawing on the experience during implementation (for
  instance PPP, business licensing reform and certification of accountants).


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  The operation was conceived and implemented during an unstable time with increasing refugee returns,
  other IDP issues, and political tensions within government. These factors must have affected borrower
  performance. Still, the ICR points out that government commitment to the policies being pursued under
  the operation remained strong, reflected in that all areas experienced progress.


  Government Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  Not assessed.


                                                                                                Page 7 of 10
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Inclusive Growth DPG(P160544)




  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The results framework was designed with a logical causal link between actions and expected
  results. However, in a few instances, output indicators were used when outcome level results would have
  required a longer time horizon that did not fit into the timeframe of the operation. Some indicators were
  ambiguous: the PPP indicator excluded unsolicited proposals and direct negotiations; the indicator for
  business licensing included tax clearance, influencing the baseline and target; the indicator for electronic
  money reform likewise was unclear about the baseline and target; and data systems for public land
  acquisition were incomplete.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Ministry of Finance was given responsibility for M&E of the operation. Both the Ministry and the Bank
  team in the field tracked indicators against policy goals (targets) on a continuous basis. Regular meetings
  between the Bank team and government officials on the ongoing work program was the routine in Kabul.



c. M&E Utilization
  Use of information from the M&E process was used to coordinate with concerned units in the government,
  and to identify need for technical assistance support (notably in the case of the land authority).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  No safeguard policies were discussed in the ICR.



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 10
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Inclusive Growth DPG(P160544)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
No fiduciary issues were discussed in the ICR.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.



d. Other
   None noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                              Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory     ---
                              Satisfactory
Risk to Development
                              High                    High                        ---
Outcome
                              Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory     ---
                              Satisfactory
Borrower Performance          Satisfactory            Satisfactory                ---
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                 ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

IEG agrees with the lessons presented in the ICR, as summarized below

DPOs may be more effective when coordinated with other ongoing operations and advisory
services. The operation supported a set of complex reforms across a broad range of sectors, achieving
reasonable outcomes. Emphasis was placed on complementarity of the operation with ongoing investment
projects and DPOs that provided incentives to implement the reforms, as well as contributions from relevant
analytical work. Such processes help to focus scarce government capacity on key policy priorities.

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 10
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Inclusive Growth DPG(P160544)




Good working relationships between Bank staff and government agencies are critical to proactively
managing risks. In this case, there was good staff continuity across most areas. However, in the case of work
to support the accountancy profession, a better handover process ensuring greater consistency between Bank
teams on implementation of the accountancy law could have enabled new Bank staff in this area to support a
better outcome.

Results frameworks need enough attention during design to ensure indicators have appropriate
baselines and targets. In the case of this operation, for instance, the indicator for renewal of business licenses
turned out to have a baseline and target that were not meaningful for measuring results on business licensing.

In addition, IEG adds another lesson.

Policy operations can be effective in expediting the drafting and executive review of laws, paving the
way for parliamentary approval. A previous IEG learning product on policy operations found that in many
cases, prior actions supporting laws submitted to legislative bodies were unsuccessful as the laws submitted
were not approved by the time of the operation’s closure. In this case, the process of approval by Presidential
Decree when Parliament was not in session sped up the process of adoption so that targeted results could be
achieved during the operation.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides an adequate discussion of the rationale of the operation to allow for an assessment of the
results and ratings of the operation. It offers a thorough discussion of efficacy, and in various places,
assessment of the results framework. These are useful observations, and drawing a distinction between the
short term and longer term implications for implementation would have further strengthened the analysis.




a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 10
