     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tunisia: Ecotourism and B. Conservation (P120561)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0021914

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P120561                                      Tunisia: Ecotourism and B. Conservation

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Tunisia                                      Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-13636                                     31-Jul-2018                                             4,161,545.34

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Jan-2013                                  31-May-2019

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               4,270,000.00                                       4,270,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                4,270,000.00                                       4,161,545.34

 Actual                                            4,270,000.00                                       4,161,545.34




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Katharina Ferl               Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson         IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. vii) and the Financing Agreement of March 5, 2013 (p.
   5) the objective of the project was “to contribute to the conservation of desert biodiversity in the three recipient
   targeted national parks ("National Parks" or "NPs")”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tunisia: Ecotourism and B. Conservation (P120561)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included three components:

   Component 1: Promoting enabling conditions for Protected Areas (PAs) management, Sustainable
   Land Management (SLM) scale up and ecotourism development (appraisal estimate US$1.4 million,
   actual US$1.56): This component was to finance:

   i) Reinforcement of the institutional legal and strategic framework for the management of the recipient's
   national parks by: (a) revising the national legal and institutional framework regarding management of
   national parks (NPs) and ecotourism development, as well as the national classification of ecotourism
   management; and (b) developing an international, national and local ecotourism marketing strategy to
   promote the NPs, including communications packages;

   ii) Building and mainstreaming national and local capacities in sustainable land management and
   biodiversity conservation using an integrated natural resource management approach by: (a) strengthening
   the technical capacity for the management of the NPs through the provision of goods, consultants' services
   and training; and (b) reinforcing project diverse stakeholders' respective capacities to take part in or take
   advantage of, positive project outcomes in the NPs through various training such as protected area
   management and related fiduciary matters, ecotourism planning, tourism product development, marketing
   and sub-contracting, and tourist hosting.

   iii) Establishing and running the monitoring and evaluation system for the project through the provision of
   goods, consultants' services and training in the acquisition and operation of the M&E system and related
   capacity strengthening of relevant project institutional stakeholders.

   Component 2: Supporting the implementation of Integrated Natural Resource Management (INRM) in
   targeted NPs and their adjacent areas (appraisal estimate US$2.37 million, actual US$2.51 million):
   This component was to finance:

   i) Implementation of priority investments identified in the Management Plans of the NPs, through the
   provision of goods and civil works such as signage, the construction and rehabilitation of welcome kiosks,
   guard posts, lodging for staff and observation towers, track rehabilitation, clearing of footpaths, as well as
   soil and water conservation works.

   ii) Implementation of: (a) a program of Community-based Sub-projects aiming at improving the management
   of the National Parks and adjacent areas; and (b) a program of Microenterprises-based sub-projects aiming
   at improving the ecotourism, through providing civil works, goods and consultants' services.

   iii) Implementation of the rehabilitation of the existing eco-museum and the establishment of an eco-shop in
   existing structures in each of the Natural Parks, through the provision of goods, consultants' services and
   civil works.




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tunisia: Ecotourism and B. Conservation (P120561)



   Component 3: Project Management (appraisal estimate US$0.20 million, actual US$0.20 million): This
   component was to finance:

   i) Support to the Ministry of Environment (MoE) in carrying out the project management and implementation
   through the provision of goods, consultants' services and training.

   ii) Audits for the project and incremental operating costs for the project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$9.05 million. Actual cost was US$7.86 million.

   Financing: The project was financed by a Bank Trust Fund in the amount of US$4.78 million which was
   fully disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$4.78 million. Actual contribution was
   US$3.58million.

   Dates: The project was restructured three times:

         On May 29, 2017 the project was restructured to i) add two PDO indicators to better reflect
          additional biodiversity and social concerns (“number of local species reintroduced in targeted
          national parks” and “decline in community park conflicts”); ii) extend the closing date from July 31,
          2018 to January 31, 2019; iii) reallocate funds from "consultant services" category to ‘goods, works,
          and non-consulting services’ category. This was necessary to ensure successful implementation of
          remaining activities; and iv) reflect the new name of the implementing agency (thereafter called
          Ministry of Local Affairs and the Environment).
         On May 25, 2018 the project was restructured to extend the closing date from July 31, 2018 to
          January 31, 2019 to allow for more time to use the financial surpluses generated by the Tunisian
          Dinar devaluation.
         On January 13, 2019 the project was restructured to change the closing date to May 31, 2019 to
          allow for more time to use the financial surpluses generated by the Tunisian Dinar devaluation.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 1), at the time of the appraisal, the tourism sector played an important role in the
Tunisian economy, particularly in terms of employment generation. Mass beach tourism constituted by far
the bulk of tourism activity and capacity. Most of the tourism in Tunisia was directed towards "all inclusive"
tourism in coastal areas with few linkages to the local communities. Tunisia's large potential for tourism in
the desert and rural areas of the interior has not been realized. Tunisia has created a large number of
protected areas (PAs) in the interior of the country but these PAs have not been utilized for tourism due to a
number of reasons such as lack of specific product conceptualization and development in these areas, low

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Tunisia: Ecotourism and B. Conservation (P120561)



               capacity of tour operators, unclear administrative and regulatory procedures and incentive systems, weak
               coordination between the different regulatory authorities, and a lack of financing. Tunisia's desert
               ecosystems have a high potential for addressing rural economic diversification and employment creation
               needs through an ecotourism model linked with biodiversity protection in managed PAs.

               However, the PDO only covers biodiversity conversion and did not cover all the aspects of the project.
               Therefore, the PDO itself did not support any of the government policies as outlined in the ICR such as the
               country’s National Forest Strategy (2015-2024) which focuses on introducing different aspects of
               ecotourism in Tunisia or the five year plan (“TUNISIA 2020”) which the government launched in 2016 and
               aimed to have significant impact on the agriculture sector, rural development and income for farmers.
               Furthermore, the project’s PDO on biodiversity did not support any of the pillars of the Bank’s most recent
               Country Partnership Framework (2016-2020). Given that the PDO is formulated in such a way that it does
               not cover all aspects of the project components and does not align well to national and Bank strategies, the
               project’s relevance of objective is rated Modest.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To contribute to the conservation of desert biodiversity in the three recipient targeted national parks ("National
                             Parks" or "NPs")”:

                             Rationale
                             The project’s theory of change (as stated in the ICR) assumed that outputs such as the reinforcement of the
                             institutional legal and strategic frameworks and the mainstreaming of national and local capacities built was to
                             result in more efficient management of parks. Also, the project’s theory of change assumed that outputs such
                             as implementing a program of community-based sub-projects, rehabilitating existing eco-museums and
                             establishing an eco-shop was to result in greater participation of local communities in planning and
                             implementing of development activities and creation of jobs for women. All these outcomes were to result in
                             higher-level outcomes such as the protection of desert biodiversity in three national parks, diversification of
                             rural economy, and reduced human pressure on natural resources. The ICR (p. 7) assumed that the
                             government is committed to reinforce institutional and legal frameworks for the management of national parks
                             and that awareness among stakeholders is widespread in regard to the connection between loss of
                             biodiversity, unsustainable management of desert areas and vulnerable livelihoods.

                             However, it is not clear why, for example, the rehabilitation of existing eco-museums and the establishment of
                             an eco-shop would necessarily result in the creation of jobs for women. Also, it is not clear how this was to
                             result on diversification of the rural economy. Furthermore, the expected higher-level outcomes such as the
                             protection of desert biodiversity, diversification of the rural economy and reduced human pressure on natural

                                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Tunisia: Ecotourism and B. Conservation (P120561)



resources were not all covered in the project’s PDO which only included the conservation of desert
biodiversity. The logical chain of the Theory of Change is thus flawed and not clear and convincing.

Outputs:

      The project reached a total of 1,805 beneficiaries, not achieving the target of 2,000 beneficiaries. 65
         percent of the beneficiaries were female (above the age of 20), achieving the target. However, it is
         unclear how the project estimated this percentage. According to the Bank team (March 16, 2020) out
         of these beneficiaries 1,173 were youth (women and men under the age of 20), not achieving the
         target of 1,300 youth.
        637 jobs were created, achieving the target. Out of these jobs 250 were created in Dghoumes,
         surpassing the target of 65 jobs. 284 were created in Bouhedma, surpassing the target of 84 jobs, and
         103 were created in Jbil, surpassing the target of 75 jobs. 20 of these jobs were for women.
        Three local species were reintroduced in targeted national parks, achieving the target of three.
        The number of key staff in targeted parks increased from three staff in 2013 to 12 staff in
         2018, surpassing the target of 9 staff.
        485 staff was trained, mostly members of local communities, not achieving the target of 600 staff.
        201 sub-projects were supported by the project, surpassing the target of 184 sub-projects.
        12 Innovative Sustainable Land Management techniques were piloted and promoted, not achieving
         the target of 13 techniques. It is unclear, however, to what degree the techniques were adopted by the
         local farmers as no evidence was provided for the uptake. The following techniques were promoted:
              o In Dghoumes: i) Blackcurrants to avoid erosion on natural trails, protect the natural
                 environment and favor the development of vegetation that can be grazed by wildlife; ii) small
                 earth dam to collect water, feed the groundwater, water livestock and create biodiversity in the
                 park; iii) dry prayer benches, a technique of soil works to limit the water runoff and
                 consequently the water erosion.
              o In Bouhedma: i) rehabilitation of a 2 kilometer seguia or hydraulic network towards the eco-
                 museum; ii) gabion dry stone to retain water and infiltration which allows the development of
                 spontaneous vegetation; iii) Acacia raddiana to avoid water erosion, increase of forage units
                 for wildlife and soil fixation.
              o In Jbil: i) fixing and raising dunes by dry palms to avoid erosion by silting and the protection of
                 infrastructure; ii) closure with delimitation of the area to be protected, reduction of wildlife and
                 large mammal exits, better management of sanitary control of wildlife and finally increase of
                 the number of mammals.

According to the Bank team (December 13, 2019) these activities resulted in reduction of soil erosion due to
water and wind, reduction of silting.

Outcomes:

The Park Management efficiency score increased from 190 in 2013 to 224 in 2019, achieving the target of
224. The project used different parameters to track efficiency such as: i) existence of a Management Plan
and related priority investments; ii) purchase of equipment (including uniforms of eco-guards, road signs etc.);
iii) activities aimed at preserving biodiversity and ecological and cultural goods. The maximum efficiency
score of 224 was achieved adding the scores of the three different NPs together. However, assessing each
NP against the maximum score of 224, the scores were rather low.


                                                                                                       Page 5 of 13
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Tunisia: Ecotourism and B. Conservation (P120561)




                                  The Park Management efficiency score for Dghoumes NP increased from 54 in 2013 to 72 in
                                   2018, surpassing the target of 65.
                                  The Park Management efficiency score for Bouhedma NP increased from 76 in 2013 to 85 in 2018,
                                   not achieving the target of 84.
                                  The Park Management efficiency score for Jbil NP increased from 60 in 2013 to 67 in 2018, not
                                   achieving the target of 75.

                            Having acknowledged these moderate shortcomings, progress against the targets still warrants a substantial
                            rating.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of the single objective is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency:

   The PAD did not conduct a traditional Economic analysis since Economic and financial rate of return analyses
   are not usually conducted for this type of Global Environment Facility project. Instead, an incremental cost
   analysis was conducted which identified global environmental benefits such as sustainable management of
   natural resources, protection of threatened dryland and desert biodiversity, and protection against erosion and
   desertification.

   The ICR conducted a benefit-cost analysis taking the following assumptions into account: a real discount rate of
   6 percent per annum and a disbursement period from 2013 to 2018. Also, the right-of-way, including the price of
   land and any structures on the land, was not included in the analysis.

   The analysis included the following benefits: i) 492 people were permanently employed; ii) 197 households
   benefited from income generation activities that increased the average monthly income by TND 300. According
   to the Bank team (December 13, 2019) income generating activities included handicrafts, petty trade, carpentry,



                                                                                                                          Page 6 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Tunisia: Ecotourism and B. Conservation (P120561)



hairdressing, catering services for visitors to the park and tourists, and activities related to agriculture and animal
husbandry. It is, however, unclear why the analysis included benefits such as 492 people being permanently
employed when the number of jobs created was 637 as stated in section 4 above.

The analysis did not include the reduction of land degradation in and around the parks or the number of park
visitors since this data was not available. Costs were defined as the project cost.

The analysis calculated a Net Present Value (NPV) of USD3.5 million, an Economic Rate of Return (ERR) of 64
percent and a benefit-cost ratio of 2.1 indicating that the project was a worthwhile investment.

Operational Efficiency:

The project experienced several implementation delays due to institutional and procurement inefficiencies. Also,
due to the devaluation of the Tunisian Dinar the project’s closing date was extended to allow for the
implementation of project activities that could be implemented through the additional resources being available.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was rated Modest as the PDO formulation did not encompass the project’s intended
outcomes and as such was not in line with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework. Efficacy and
Efficiency were rated Substantial. Therefore, the overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


                                                                                                         Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Tunisia: Ecotourism and B. Conservation (P120561)



According to the Bank team (October 25, 2019) the government is now more committed to the project’s
objectives than at the time of project approval. Biodiversity is growingly valued in Tunisia as a key driver of
sustainable development and there is a general political commitment to stress the nexus between poverty
reduction and environment protection or between efficient agricultural development and the sustainable use
of natural resources and to promote sustainable tourism. All these elements are included in the new 2014-
2020 National Strategy for the Green Economy. Also, it is expected that the new government will provide the
necessary funds to ensure the sustainability of project outcomes The ICR provides limited information
regarding the risks to development outcome.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (p. 19) the project’s design was built on solid diagnostic of national and regional
  development priorities and was closely aligned with the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy. The Bank
  team stated (October 25, 2019) that the project design benefitted from the lessons learned mainly from
  the Tunisia Protected Areas Management Project/PAMP (P048315) which closed in February 2009. The
  project drew lessons from the main barriers for the implementation of operations at local level and hired a
  partner institution (UTSS) with specific capacities which facilitated greatly its implementation. Major
  lessons learned were the following: importance of the implication of local population for the national parks
  management; importance of the Management Plan prepared with local populations; the integration into
  the plan of income-generating activities; the positive impact of coupling park management activities with
  local partnership and awareness initiatives; and the emphasis on providing parks with more institutional
  and financial autonomy. Also, the project was integrated into the regional MENA-DELP project and
  benefitted from its knowledge base.

  The Bank identified relevant risks during project preparation. The Bank team (October 25, 2019) stated
  that one of the most important risks identified during preparation was related to the potential coordination
  problems between different regional and national institutions. The risk was successfully mitigated by
  effectively providing the PMU with clear procurement and fiduciary responsibilities. The operations
  manual, which was consistently and adequately revised, clearly addressed institutional and organization
  issues. Another risk was linked to the lack of technical capacities of regional staff (especially in some
  regional representations of the ministry of Environment), but in this regard the project organized several
  initiatives aimed at building and strengthening their technical and administrative capacities.

  However, a major shortcoming in project design was the disconnect between the PDO and content of
  components. While the PDO only focused on biodiversity conservation, the project’s components
  included activities in different areas such as land management, ecotourism development and integrated
  natural resource management. Also, the project’s M&E had several shortcomings in resulting in
  insufficient documentation of project outputs and outcomes, and the majority of indicators were lacking a
  baseline (see section 9a for more details).




                                                                                                     Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tunisia: Ecotourism and B. Conservation (P120561)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 20) the Bank conducted bi-annual supervision missions with technical experts in
 financial management, procurement and safeguards. The ICR (p. 20) stated that the aim of these missions
 was to stress environmental issues and challenges, identify implementation challenges and find adequate
 solutions, adapt project activities to changing conditions, and provide guidance on project monitoring and
 evaluation. According to the ICR (p. 20) the Bank team ensured that the project benefitted from other Bank
 projects such as the MENA-DELP project and the Oasis Ecosystems and Livelihood project and supported
 knowledge sharing on community-based participatory development.

 The Bank team restructured the project three times to allow for more time to use the financial surpluses
 generated by the Tunisian Dinar devaluation and to add two PDO indicators to better reflect additional
 biodiversity and social concerns (“number of local species reintroduced in targeted national parks” and
 “decline in communities parks conflicts”). However, the Bank did not revise the PDO to align it with project
 design and national and Bank strategies. The Bank team also failed to improve the M&E system to ensure
 sufficient and reliable M&E data.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD did not include a theory of change to document how key activities and outputs would lead to
 intended outcomes, and the project’s objective did not include the regulatory and legislative framework
 activities which were implemented under component 1. Furthermore, the Results Framework did not
 adequately capture the contribution of the project’s components and outputs towards achieving the
 outcome, which are significant shortcomings. The original Results Framework did not sufficiently reflect
 biodiversity and social concerns. And finally, the majority of indicators lacked a baseline.

 The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) within the General Directorate for Environment and Quality of Life
 (DGEQV) was to be responsible for the project’s M&E activities. The project was to use the multi-project
 M&E system which was being used under the Bank financed Second Natural Resources Management
 Project (PGRN2), for which the DGEQV was responsible for the M&E under one of the components.




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tunisia: Ecotourism and B. Conservation (P120561)




b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 18) during the project’s Mid-Term Review (MTR) in December 2015, the Bank
  team identified the absence of an effective M&E system. The Bank addressed this issue by emphasizing
  the necessity to develop a better tailored M&E system that could serve as a multi-project system to also
  be used by other projects. A local consultant was hired and developed a system with close support by the
  Bank and the M&E department of the Ministry.

  After these issues were addressed, M&E data was systematically collected at the local level involving
  beneficiaries, analyzed and validated through field visits and supervision missions. The project
  developed its own M&E system and stopped using the multi-project M&E system used under the Bank
  financed Second Natural Resources Management project.

  In May 2017, the project was restructured to add two PDO indicators to better reflect additional
  biodiversity and social concerns (“number of local species reintroduced in targeted national parks” and
  “decline in communities parks conflicts”). According to the ICR (p. 18) progress reports were submitted on
  a timely basis to the Bank.

  According to the Bank team (October 25, 2019), the new M&E system produced reliable and good quality
  data, particularly because it linked data collection at local level, with the implication of local stakeholders
  and their processing and analysis at national level. The Bank team also stated that the M&E system is
  likely to be sustained as it is used for other projects as well. There was, however, a discrepancy between
  the targets stated in the PAD and the targets used in the ICR for many of the indicators. It is therefore
  unclear whether the project (in addition to the IR) measured progress towards the wrong targets (such as
  for PDO indicator "direct project beneficiaries" and intermediate outcome indicators "park management
  efficiency score", "additional key staff in targeted parks", "number of person trained", "number of
  agreements between the NP and community association", "sub-projects supported by the project",
  "number of projects managed by woman", and "innovative SLM techniques piloted and promoted in
  targeted NPs and their surrounding areas").

  The M&E rating in the ICR was Modest.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 18) the project’s M&E system was used to report implementation progress
  towards the outcomes and was not used as an integrated management tool. Also, M&E data was used
  to inform the project’s restructurings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 13
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Tunisia: Ecotourism and B. Conservation (P120561)




a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
  (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), and OP/BP 4.11 (Physical and Cultural
  Resources). According to the ICR (p. 18), compliance with the safeguards policies was satisfactory
  throughout project implementation. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was
  prepared. Target communities were consulted during project preparation and implementation.

  The ICR (p. 19) stated that to address potential restrictions to access rights for the local communities living
  inside the Bouhedma National Park, a Process Framework was prepared and disclosed prior to project
  appraisal. Communities located in the park were continuously consulted during preparation and
  implementation and no physical or economic displacement was experienced.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  According to the Bank team (October 25, 2019) the project generally complied with the Bank’s financial
  covenants. During the Mid-Term Review the project’s financial performance was considered to be
  unsatisfactory due to its low disbursement rate which was at 10.6 percent for the overall project (6.5
  percent for component 1 and 9.7 percent for component 2). According to the Bank team (October 25,
  2019) the Bank addressed the Financial Management issues by close monitoring and supervision (twice
  per year) including field visits. The Financial Management team also tested during some supervision
  samples of payments submitted under withdrawal application, with samples reaching in some of the tested
  withdrawal application 82.99% of the total payments of the withdrawal application. No material anomalies
  were identified.

  The Bank team stated (October 25, 2019) that the audit reports had unqualified opinions. Audit reports for
  2015, 2016 and 2017 were systematically received with three months delays (submitted in October). The
  audit report for 2018 should cover the period from the 1st of January 2018 to the 31st of May 2019 and is
  due no later than the 31st of October. This audit report has not yet been submitted.

  Procurement:

  According to the Bank team (October 25, 2019) the project followed the Bank’s procurement guidelines. At
  the beginning of the implementation, because of internal pressure, the PMU tried to use both, national and
  Bank, procurement procedures resulting in significant delays. However, after the Mid-Term Review, only
  the Bank’s procurement guidelines were followed resulting in a substantial improvement of the
  procurement and fiduciary procedures. The Bank provided training and technical assistance to project staff
  on the main Bank procedures. In addition, the prior and post procurement review was an opportunity to
  advise the PMU on how to better implement procurement.




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tunisia: Ecotourism and B. Conservation (P120561)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   The project did not take gender issues properly into account and jobs were mostly created for men. While
   the project claimed that it had 65% female beneficiaries, it did not account for how these women benefitted
   or how this number was estimated. The figures related to women and youth are inconsistent in the ICR.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   Relevance of Objectives was
Outcome                         Satisfactory             Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   Modest.
                                                                                   Shortcomings in M&E,
                                                                                   disconnect between PDO and
                                                                                   activities included in the
Bank Performance                Satisfactory             Moderately Satisfactory   components and lack of Bank
                                                                                   supervision to make necessary
                                                                                   modifications during
                                                                                   implementation.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                   Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                      Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 20 to 22) included several lessons learned which were adapted by IEG:

      Stressing the link between socioeconomic development and environmental protection
       of biodiversity is important for taking advantage of potential synergies. This project
       combined activities that generated income, improved local conditions, and supported
       alternative livelihoods while at the same time protecting fragile natural resources and
       biodiversity.
      Careful planning and implementing responsible ecotourism can have a positive
       impact on the value of natural assets and ensure the ecological sustainability and the
       economic profitability in the long-run.




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Tunisia: Ecotourism and B. Conservation (P120561)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise and covers a wide range of important project features. However, the review provided limited
information on critical areas such as Financial Management and M&E. The ICR did not provide any information
on procurement and how the Bank addressed Financial Management and procurement issues. Furthermore,
there are several inconsistencies between numbers included in the main document and the Results
Framework. For example, while the main document stated that 12 SLM techniques were piloted and promoted,
the number in the Results Framework is 13 SLM techniques. Also, the Results Framework p. 34) stated in the
table that 65 projects (approx. 32 percent out of a total of 201 sub-projects) were managed by women.
However, in the comment section it said that 65 percent of sub-projects were managed by women. The ICR
also failed to use the indicator targets as stated in the PAD. Finally, the lessons learned were not sufficiently
specific to learn from this project’s implementation experience.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 13
