     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



                                                                             Report Number: ICRR0021984

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P129961                                 SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Bosnia and Herzegovina                  Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16646                                31-May-2019                                          5,059,340.46

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Jan-2014                             31-May-2019

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          5,575,758.00                                   5,575,758.00

 Revised Commitment                           5,575,758.00                                   5,059,340.46

 Actual                                       5,059,340.46                                   5,059,340.46




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Joachim                   J. W. van Holst            Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Vandercasteelen           Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Sustainable Forest and Landscape Management Project
   (SFLMP) as stated in the Grant Agreement dated April 01, 2013 (p.46) was "To build capacity of forestry
   sector stakeholders and to demonstrate approaches for sustainable forest and land management through
   integrated management of vulnerable forest, scrub and pasture landscapes”.




                                                                                              Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



   The PDO and Global Environmental Objective (GEO) indicated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD para
   12) were the same.

   For the purpose of Section 4 of this review, the PDO has been divided into two sub-objectives which are
   subsequently referred to in Section 4 as Objectives 1 to 2 as follows.

   Objective 1: build capacity of forestry sector stakeholders for sustainable forest and land management

   Objective 2: demonstrate approaches for sustainable forest and land management



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1. Enhanced Planning and Monitoring for Sustainable Forest and Landscape
   Management (SFLM) (estimated cost at appraisal: US$1.07 million; actual cost at closing: US$0.85
   million). This component aimed at strengthening the enabling environment for sustainable forest
   management. The component had three subcomponents:

         Subcomponent 1.1. Forest Certification Support. The subcomponent helped to certify new forests
          using FSC standards and supported annual audits and recertification of previously certified forests.
         Subcomponent 1.2. Forest Road Strategic Plan. This included two main activities: (a) preparation of
          a forest roads master plan and (b) adoption of forest road rehabilitation guidelines to minimize
          environmental and social impacts.
         Subcomponent 1.3. Forest Management Information System (FMIS) Enhancements for
          Mainstreamed Decision Making. This involved two key activities: (a) introduction of information
          related to climate change and (b) dissemination of information to stakeholders.

   Component 2. Demonstration and Replication of SFLM Techniques in Vulnerable Areas (estimated
   cost at appraisal: US$4.23 million; actual cost at closing: US$4.48 million). This component aimed at
   implementing pilot activities to demonstrate already developed sustainable forest management practices to
   substantially improve forest/habitat management, which would help BiH’s climate change mitigation and
   adaptation program. The component had four subcomponents:

         Subcomponent 2.1. Afforestation - Assisted Natural Regeneration and Stand Rehabilitation.
          Activities under this included afforestation of fire-affected sites and karst areas and post-planting
          management such as weeding.
         Subcomponent 2.2. Multipurpose Forestry Demonstration Techniques. This subcomponent involved
          activities such as thinning of forests, conversion of coppice forest to high forest, biomass
          management, hunting and wildlife management, forest-based tourism, and removal of waste
          dumped illegally in the forest.



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



         Subcomponent 2.3. Fire Management Technique Demonstration and Implementation. This
          subcomponent intended to engage local communities in implementing appropriate small-scale
          fire management interventions. Activities included rehabilitation of firefighting access roads,
          purchase of equipment (vehicles, high-pressure water pumps, and firefighting accessories), and
          training.
         Subcomponent 2.4. Local Stakeholder Capacity Building. Under this subcomponent, the project
          provided various trainings to stakeholders at the local administrative and community levels to
          participate in various forest management-related activities.

   Component 3. Project Management (estimated cost at appraisal: US$0.28 million; actual cost at
   closing: US$0.25 million). This component supported project management in both entities. This included
   (a) operational support in project management, financial management (FM), and procurement; (b) annual
   audits; and, (c) project evaluations at midterm and closing.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project costs. At appraisal, the total cost of the project was estimated at US$5.58 million (PAD p7). As the
   exchange rate between the grant currency (US$) and the local currency (KM) improved over the
   implementation time of the project, some budget freed up. Moreover, both PIUs managed to implement
   agreed activities below budget, thereby generating additional savings. Increased project funds from these
   two sources was used to finance additional project activities, within the overall scope of the project (ICR
   para 33). Therefore, at closing, the total cost of the project was US$5.06 million.

   Financing. The appraised amount of finance to cover the total cost of the project was provided through the
   Global Environment Facility (GEF) (PAD p7).

   Borrower contribution. Neither the legal documents, nor the PAD, stipulated that the borrower made a
   financial contribution (ICR p2, PAD data sheet).

   Dates. The project was approved on Jan-15-2014 and became effective on Jun-09-2014. The Mid Term
   Review (MTR) was undertaken on Apr-24-2017. The original and actual closing date coincided on May-31-
   2019.

   The project did not undergo a restructuring or benefitted from additional financing.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. After the armed conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) ended in 1995, the country has
evolved into a single sovereign state with a decentralized administrative structure, transferring governance
to two autonomous entities (the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) and the Republika Srpska
(RS)), and one autonomous district (Brcko District). With this change in governance, a unique and complex
political, administrative and institutional structure arose in BiH. As the country and its infrastructure has


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



been rebuilt in the last decades, the economic situation in BiH improved, and it became a potential
candidate to join the European Union (EU). However, the BiH is facing several development challenges,
including residual ethnic tension, a bloated civil service, an unemployment rate at 27 percent, a restrictive
environment for private sector growth, low workforce participation, and a poverty rate that has remained at
15 percent since the global financial crisis in 2008 (PAD p1, ICR p5).

BiH is one of the most forest rich countries in Europe, and even though the forestry sector has a relatively
limited contribution to GDP, the sector is strategically important in terms of export revenues and job
opportunities. However, despite its relative importance, the management and resource utilization of the
forestry sector remains underdeveloped for several reasons (ICR Annex 5). Mirroring the country’s
institutional structure, forest management institutions are decentralized resulting in different and complex
institutional and legal frameworks for forest resource management. Most of the forest is publicly owned, but
forest management enterprises are inefficient and not market-oriented. There is a lack of central forest
policies at state level which complicates policy harmonization at a decentralized level, and a forest law is
absent for the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH). The unsettled policy framework creates a lack
of clarity on the roles, responsibilities, and mandates of the different institutions in forest management.
Proper and sustainable management of the sector is further complicated by the lack of forest certification,
limited physical accessibility, and lack of proper forest monitoring information. A substantial part of BiH’s
forest is characterized as having low productivity, and harvesting rates are low, illustrating an inadequate
focus on production-oriented sustainable forest management. Technical capacity is also low due to
insufficient experience, skills, and knowledge of staff; and lack of up to date technology, equipment and
capital investments (ICR para 4-6; Annex 5).

The concept of sustainable forest and land management (SFLM) is common in both objectives. The first
objective refers to building up the capacity of forestry sector stakeholders for SFLM. But, the focus is limited
to building technical capacity and increasing the potential of commercial (certified) wood production. Many
of the technical and productivity issues in the forestry sector, however, are caused by the complex
institutional and legal framework; the project did not attempt to address those issues.

The second objective refers to 'demonstrate approaches for SFLM'. The formulation of the second
objective is however unclear, as it could be interpreted as the (i) demonstration of SFLM techniques or (ii)
the demonstration of FLM techniques to achieve SFLM. Follow up communication with the World Bank
team clarified that the first interpretation holds. However, the demonstration of SFLM techniques is an
output that refers to the delivery of activities, and not to the effective usage of techniques that result in
SFLM. The implicit assumption is that the delivery of SFLM demonstration activities will result in effective
implementation of SFLM to achieve the higher-level outcomes of sustainability and export (assumptions 5
and 6 in the Theory of Change). While the sustainability effect of the latter is indeed more difficult to capture
in a short time frame, using outputs as an objective lowers the ambition for project achievements and the
relevance of the projects. Hence, the second objective could have been more precisely defined using a
higher-level outcome. The latter could, for example, be the higher uptake of appropriate techniques for
SFLM. Moreover, no clear definition of what 'to demonstrate' entails, i.e., is 'to give a practical explanation
and exhibition of' (as per the definition in the Oxford Dictionary) or to delivery activities on the ground.

Alignment with strategy. The project is fully consistent with both the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
for FY2012-2015 (under the pillar ‘strengthen sustainable use of key natural resources, such as water and
forests, and improve climate change adaptation’) and the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
2016-2020 (under the ‘building resilience to natural shocks’ focus area).



                                                                                                       Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



               Previous sector experience. The project builds upon previous World Bank work in the forestry sector (and
               more broadly in the natural resources and environmental sector) of BiH. After the war, the Forestry Project
               (P045134, FP, 1998 – 2003) supported the recovery of the forest sector and the protection of forest
               ecosystems. The successful implementation was continued in the Forest Development and Conservation
               Project (P079161, FDCP, 2003–10) with a focus on strategic planning exercises, including the second state
               forest inventory. The Forest and Mountain Protected Areas Project (P087094, FMPAP, 2009–13)
               strengthened the institutional and technical capacity for protected area management and expanded the
               national network of forest and mountain protected areas. Most recently, the Republika Srpska (RS) Forestry
               Development Strategy (2011–2021) supported the aims of sustainable development of forestry to enhance
               and maintain all forest functions.

               Conclusion. The PDO is substantially relevant to the government objectives and priorities, the World
               Bank’s CPF framework and to the rationale for GEF financing. The relevance of the second objective in the
               PDO ("to demonstrate approaches for sustainable forest and land management") is, however, rated as
               marginally substantial given its output focus (as defined by the World Bank task team) and hence its low
               level of ambition.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To build capacity of forestry sector stakeholders for sustainable forest and land management.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The Theory of Change (ToC) is built around the project’s aim to support BiH in the
                             sustainable management of the country’s forests and associated natural landscapes. The approach of the
                             project was to build capacity for improved and SFLM at central and local level of governance. Objective 1
                             focusses on improving the technical capacity at the level of (decentralized) government institutions, by
                             investing in an enabling environment for SFLM (ICR paras 12 and 13). The following specific areas of
                             capacity building were addressed by the project (see ICR para 13). First, forest road accessibility was
                             assessed and inventoried for the development of a road master plan that would attract future road
                             investments. Second, forest products managed in an environmentally, socially, and economically sustainable
                             way were certified and would provide access to higher value export markets for forest products. Third,
                             improvement of the quality (and timing) of information on forest resources and their change patterns would
                             improve the monitoring of essential forest management elements. All of these activities were expected to
                             strengthen the financial basis in BiH for SFLM and improve the base for an economically feasible forestry
                             sector.



                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



Outputs. The following outputs were reported in the ICR (Annex 1, pg 44):

      Three climate change mitigation and adaptation indicators (carbon stock, area lost to fire, area under
       insect/pest attack) were included in FMIS (original target 3; target achieved). The ICR could have
       been more explicit on what exact activities were undertaken to update the FMIS; and whether capacity
       of government institutions has increased to keep the system up to date, and if so, use the data for
       improved policy making. Moreover, as mentioned in the ICR (para 44), in RS the public enterprise
       responsible for forest management used funds outside the project to add climate change indicators to
       their FMIS system.

21 government institutions provided with capacity-building trainings. These included three institutions from RS
(RS Sume, MAFW, and Forest Inspection) and 18 from FBiH (MAWF – Federal Forest Institute and Forest
Sector - 2; CFMCs - 9; Firefighting municipality department - 1; Forestry Faculty

      Sarajevo; Local Community - 5; and municipalities). The ICR could have been clearer on the selection
       criteria of government institutions to be supported.
      Two databases of over 5,000 roads in RS and of 4,586 roads in FBiH (the FBiH database includes
       2,906 forest truck roads and 1,680 public forest roads).
      Equipment purchased for office and firefighting in RS: 10 computers and 30 GPS devises, 2 digital
       laser distomats (this is a cross line laser equipment), optical distomat, and communication equipment;
       protective field gears (jacket winter/summer - 13; trousers winter/summer - 13; winter/summer shoes -
       13; trouser belt - 4; vest - 2; cap - 4; and shirt - 4). In FBiH: 12 laptops, 12 desktops, 1 color printer, 2
       dictaphones, a projector with stand and screen, 2 external hard disks, 73 mobile devices, 2 digital
       calipers and hunting cameras, 1 server, 1 field vehicle, 1 firefighting truck, 285 firefighting backpacks
       and high-pressure pumps, wood-chopping machine, motor cutter, clearing saws, and chain saws.

Outcome. As only a general PDO-level indicator was defined for this project in the PAD (ICR Annex 1.B p44),
there no specific PDO indicator for this objective. However, the project’s achievement regarding two out of
four intermediate outcomes and their achievements reported in the PAD are listed below:

      1.87 million ha of forest in BiH was certified for FSC (original target 1.85 million ha; target achieved)
      One strategic forest road master plan in RS completed (original target 2; target not achieved)

Conclusion. Based on the project’s outputs and intermediate outcomes the project has been successful in
increasing the size of certified forests, supporting annual audits for re-certification, updating the FMIS, training
staff in government institutions, and providing technical equipment. Since the project increased the size of
newly certified and re-certified forests, it is likely that certification efforts supported by the project allowed
access to higher value markets. The certification efforts are clearly attributable to the project, as the ICR (para
41) mentions that ‘the certification would have been continued without the project; however, the scale of
achievement would have been much smaller’. Access to better information on the road network and forest
monitoring indicators are likely to lead to more informed management, planning, and investments by the
concerned policy makers. The project was, however, not able to complete the road master plan for FBiH by
project closure because of delayed access to information from decentralized government institutions.

While all these outputs and intermediate outcomes might have increased the capacity of the forestry sector
stakeholders to manage forests in a sustainable way, limited evidence to support this claim is provided in the
ICR. First, the only indicator aimed at assessing the project’s achievement of capacity building was the PDO

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



indicator of “the (number of” land under sustainable land management” which is only weakly linked to capacity
building (as is acknowledged in the ICR in para 88). Second, the results framework allows an assessment of
the achievement of the project in terms of the supply of technical assistance to forestry stakeholders, but it
cannot provide direct evidence that capacity of the supported government agencies has increased due to the
project. While the project successfully increased the area of certified forest in BiH, there is no evidence in the
ICR that sales or private investments in forests have improved, and hence the country’s access to
environmentally sensitive markets has improved. It is further uncertain that the road master plan has
effectively led to increased investments, as evidence is only provided on the number of roads digitalized.
Similarly, while the ICR provides evidence that the project increased access by forest management to
relevant georeferenced information, no evidence is provided whether the project has led to higher capacity to
analyze and interpret the information, and eventually to improved decision making (and hence investments)
regarding climate change mitigation.

However, in follow up communications with IEG the World Bank task team provided various examples of how
project experiences have contributed to the preparation and management of follow up projects as well as to
improved forestry policy making (at least in RS). Such additional evidence available only after the ICR was
prepared indicates that the project has indeed contributed to the capacity of the forestry sector stakeholders,
and hence the efficacy rating for Objective 1 is substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To demonstrate approaches for sustainable forest and land management.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The ToC in Figure 1 of the ICR assumes that the tangible and targeted demonstration
and implementation activities will demonstrate appropriate techniques for and approaches to SFLM in BiH
(ICR para 13). Together with the first objective, it was anticipated that this would increase the country’s basis
for sustainable and economically feasible forest management; and eventually lead to the long-term outcome
of “Increased export, to environmentally sensitive market, improved carbon sequestration, and climate
resilient sustainable forest management to optimize forest production”. However, it is unclear in the ToC how
the project expects the demonstration activities to contribute to the sustainability of forest and land
management in BiH beyond the fact that the ToC assumes these activities would be maintained and scaled
up (ICR para 16). The ICR could have been more explicit on what is meant by sustainability and what aspects
of demonstration activities were expected to lead to more sustainability of forest and land management.

Outputs. The following outputs were reported in the ICR (Annex 1 p45):

      933.5 ha rehabilitated fire-affected areas and bare lands through reforestation/afforestation (560 ha
       planted in 5 cantons in FBiH; 373.5 ha in mostly unfavorable site conditions in RS).
      In Republika Srpska (RS), thinning in 491.4 ha and coppice treatment in 150.8 ha (total 642.3 ha). In
       FBiH, thinning in 511 ha and coppice treatment in 261 ha. In FBiH, 1,842 ha of area under enhanced
       production on state lands includes thinning, coppice, afforestation, reforestation, protection of forest

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



         services and fire management. The ICR (para 50) states that the quality of forests had improved by
         visually comparing project with non-project areas.
        Tourism facilities constructed: FBiH has constructed 4 canopies (one with sanitation facilities), 5 hiking
         and 2 walking paths, and a football playground in Central Bosnia Canton. Similarly, in Kresovo
         municipality, 4 canopies and 2 lakes/reservoirs (Lake Vaganj and lake Torine) have been constructed.
         The ICR does not provide information on whether these facilities are up and running, and if so, how
         many visitors (and revenues) have been attracted.
        In RS, hunters’ cottage in special hunting area ‘Kamenica’ and an Eco-visitor center Mosor – Kupres
         have been established.
        RS has rehabilitated 26.7 km of firefighting access roads in 14 sections of 4 regions, and FBiH has
         rehabilitated 22.1 km. The ICR does not mention how many fire roads were existent and in need of
         rehabilitation at project appraisal, which makes it difficult to interpret the magnitude of the
         achievement.
        Equipment with state-of-the-art technology for a new Mediterranean nursery in Trebinje, automation
         system with sensors for temperature and moisture, and irrigation boom, and for an existing nursery in
         Doboj Nursery Production Systems (batch mixer with belt, dibbler flexi filler, precision seeder, tray
         covering unit - roller conveyer, automatic seeder for oak, manual seeder for broad-leaved species,
         growing tray - Type 1, Type 2, and Type 3; and irrigation system (holding area irrigation boom
         28×100 m and growing frames). The ICR (para 53) states that the Doboj nursery achieved 14% of its
         production capacity, no information is given about the Trebinje nursery.
        70 game repellents installed in three hunting grounds in RS to improve wildlife and traffic safety. The
         ICR (para 54) notes that road traffic accidents with wildlife have been dramatically reduced.
        Cleaning of dumping sites in 12 micro-locations. The ICR (para 54) states that local communities have
         shown increased awareness of waste disposal and changed disposal behavior, but it is unclear based
         on which evidence this statement is made.

Outcome. The general PDO-level indicator defined in the PAD is the “land area where sustainable land
management practices were adopted as a result of project (ha)”. While the PDO indicator is not specifically
linked to this objective in the PAD, we use the PDO indicator to assess the achievements of the second
objective. At the time of completion, the land area covered with sustainable land management practices was
3,325 hectares of which about 1,000 ha was reforestation and the remainder forest restoration, which was an
achievement of 18% over the original target of 3,000 hectares. However, while this indicator provides
evidence on the size of the demonstration activities undertaken by the project, it provides little evidence on
how the demonstration activities have contributed (or were expected to contribute) to the sustainability of
forest and land management.

The ICR listed the achievements of the following intermediate outcome indicators:

      1,030 hectares of area restored or re/afforested (original target 1,000; target achieved)
      934 hectares of area re/afforested (original target 1,000; target not achieved)
      2,484 hectares of area under enhanced production on state lands (original target 2,000; target
         achieved)
      38 demonstration subprojects completed relating to innovative SFLM methods (original target 28;
         target achieved)
      43 demonstration subprojects completed related to fire control (original target 22; target achieved)


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 21
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



                            Conclusion. The project has successfully (i.e. with respect to the original targets) achieved the intermediate
                            outputs of the area restored or re/afforested; the area under enhanced production on state lands, the
                            demonstration subprojects completed relating to both innovative SFLM methods and fire control.

                            Rehabilitation and reforestation of forests increased the size of land covered with forest in BiH and hence the
                            potential for economic and societal benefits of forest services. Improved management of existing forests
                            improved the productive capacity of the forest and allowed the production of more valuable commercial
                            timber. Addressing the issues of illegal waste dumping and supporting ecotourism allowed diversification into
                            non-timber forest services and the creation of healthy recreational and economic benefits for local
                            communities. All these activities are likely to have demonstrated to different stakeholders in the forestry
                            sector the importance and benefits of SLFM.

                            There is certainly evidence on the delivery of a number of outputs contributing to the achievement of
                            Objective 2 (“to demonstrate approaches for SFLM”). However, the evidence is mainly limited to
                            “rehabilitation of forests and reforestation”, and it is questionable as to what extent that replanting forests is a
                            demonstration activity. The verb “to demonstrate” is defined in the Oxford Dictionary as “to give a practical
                            explanation and exhibition of” and it is not clear how some activities have been selected (see efficiency
                            section) and how the project approached the explanation of activities to beneficiaries. The ICR also did not
                            provide evidence that “demonstrating approaches for sustainable forest land management was also expected
                            to lead to building capacity for Sustainable Forest and Landscape Management (SFLM)” as assumed in the
                            project’s design (ICR, para 16).

                            The PDO indicator, namely “Land area where sustainable land management practices have been adopted as
                            a result of the project (ha)” is the corporate indicator adopted by the World Bank Board. However, the PDO
                            indicator was labeled so that outputs where directly linked to the project (i.e. “[…] as a result of the project
                            (ha)”. As a consequence, the baseline value is assumed to be zero, as there were no project demonstration
                            activities before the project. Any change in the PDO indicator is attributed to the project activities by definition,
                            and the PDO indicator was therefore assumed to be achieved. While it is hard to imagine that there has been
                            no area in BiH where sustainable land management has been adopted, an impact evaluation would have
                            been useful in providing evidence on the extent to which the demonstration activities of the project contributed
                            to more sustainable forest and land management in BiH.

                            Since the IEG ICR review team accepted the World Bank team’s interpretation of Objective 2 as the delivery
                            of demonstration activities (outputs), this review concluded that the achievement of Objective 2 was
                            substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                                                                                                                                  Page 9 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



  Based on the substantial efficacy ratings for both objectives, the overall efficacy of the project is rated
  substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Methodology. The PAD undertook an economic and financial efficiency analysis only for the second component
of the project. As the first project component involved capacity building of institutions, the PAD stated that the
benefits are not quantifiable (para 43). Instead, the analysis at appraisal focused on the economic benefits
arising from improved forest productivity and from improved forest productivity together with biomass production
leading to carbon sequestration.

The ICR (para 106), however, notes that the economic analysis in the PAD had methodological shortcomings
leading to inaccurate results. The main issues with the original analysis were (ICR annex 4): (i) the incremental
financial and economic impacts of reforestation activities were based on the entire target of 3,000 ha of forest
under SFLM, while only 1,000 ha of forest was effectively regenerated, (ii) the wood price used in the analysis
was seriously overestimated because only export prices were taken into account, (iii) the benefits of carbon
sequestration services were incorrectly estimated due to point (i) above and because of the double counting of
production and carbon sequestration services; and (iv) overestimation of commercial harvesting volumes.

The ICR therefore undertook a new economic and financial analysis using a revised approach to the analysis
conducted in the PAD at the time of appraisal: a similar discounted cash flow model was used, the EX-ACT
model was adapted, and changes were made to the ‘with- and without-project’ scenarios and calculation of key
benefits. The ICR also undertook some sensitivity analysis with respect to changes in the amount of wood
harvesting, wood prices, and carbon prices.

Economic Efficiency. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) calculated at appraisal accounted for the
social value of carbon sequestration services (using the FAO EX-ACT approach for 25 years) and resulted in an
EIRR of 19.2 percent. Using a revised and improved methodology, the ICR estimates the EIRR at 12.7 percent
at project closing.

Financial Efficiency. In the original analysis in the PAD, the financial internal rate of return (IRR) was
calculated at the appraisal, both with and without carbon benefits, and was estimated at 8.5 percent over a
lifetime of 25 years. Financial efficiency was based on export driven valuation of forest products and standing
timber. Using a revised and improved methodology, the ICR estimates the FIRR at 5.8 percent at project closing
(accounting for carbon benefits).

As shown above, the economic and financial analysis conducted in the ICR generated lower rates of return
compared to the PAD. The ICR (para 62), however, notes that “the decline in the economic performance
(compared with the PAD estimates) is due to changes in the analysis and not due to weaker project
performance”. The ICR (para 64) further notes that “the IRR achieved by the project is acceptable for
afforestation and reforestation projects with long rotation periods and not particularly high annual natural forest


                                                                                                       Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



growth rates”. This review concludes that the estimated economic IRR is creditable, reflecting the increasing
social cost of carbon and increasing importance of climate change mitigation over time. It also reflects the trade-
off between the harvest size of the available harvestable commercial wood and the carbon sequestration
services of non-harvested wood.

The updated economic and financial analysis presented in the ICR has a few issues itself. First, the numbers
used in the analysis are not consistent with those reported in the ToC on page 11 of the ICR or in the indicator
discussion of Annex 2. For example, the ICR (para 3) states “increase in forested area and thinning (1,893 ha)”
but it is unclear where this number comes from. Second, the analysis focused only on the benefits from
increased area of forest rehabilitated or reforested, and does not discuss changes in efficiency that are related
to the demonstration sub projects and their intermediate outcomes (IO 2.3 and 2.4). As capacity building at local
and central (see below) levels was part of the PDO, this seems like a missed opportunity to discuss how efficient
the project was in improving capacity (see below).

Implementation aspects. Implementation and management of the project was under the responsibility of the
PIUs in the two entities, which – as discussed in section 8a – had experience and technical expertise in World
Bank forest projects. In both entities, the staff turnover in the PIU and the respective ministry was small (ICR
para 65). Both these aspects led to an overall efficient implementation of the project. Even more so, because of
the appreciation of the local currency, and savings by the PIU, the project was able to implement additional
activities under component 2. The project was not restructured or extended despite implementation delays, most
likely because the Country Management Unit became more involved towards the end of the project.

Several delays in implementation were noted in the ICR. First, adding new components to the FMIS (IO 1.3) was
delayed in FBiH because the existing FMIS was found to be dysfunctional at the time of appraisal. This indicated
that the status and readiness for improvement of the FMIS was not (properly) assessed before the project was
implemented and hence additional efforts need to be undertaken to get the FMIS operational by the end of
the project. Moreover, the PIU needed to use external support to the FMIS given the lack of in-house technical
expertise (ICR para 72). Second, the complex institutional framework because of the high level of
decentralization in BiH was considered as a risk to the project in the PAD, and did cause implementation delays
in the preparation of the forest road master plan and the identification of forests suitable for certification. This
was a particular issue in FBiH, where the limited cooperation and coordination between different agencies (at
the federal sector ministry, the PIU, the cantonal authorities, and CFMCs) affected project implementation (ICR
para 77). Third, the ICR (para 87) also mentions delays in the fieldwork of demonstration activities linked to
unfavorable weather conditions and seasonality of activities, which could have been anticipated to some extent.
Fourth, there were delays in procurement because of late initiation of the procurement process (e.g. purchase of
the firefighting vehicle, ICR para 104) and a lack of a detailed mapping of potential local service providers (ICR
para 104 p32).

Conclusion. The PAD provided a partial assessment of the project’s efficiency as it did not undertake an
economic and financial assessment of the capacity building objective. While capacity building aspects are
indeed difficult to quantify, some intermediate outcomes refer to tangible investments in certified forests for
which the efficiency could have been assessed (and probably would have contributed to providing the needed
evidence that the project was efficient overall). For example, the economic and financial benefits of having more
certified forest (IO 1.1) could have been included in the analysis because there are clear economic benefits (e.g.
higher prices) from access to higher value markets.

The ICR (para 68) states in the discussion of ‘other outcomes and impacts’ that “Capacity building was the
objective of the project, so it has significantly improved better understanding of sustainable forest management”.


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



However, the delays in project implementation mentioned above, and procurement delays discussed in section
10b of this review, illustrate that capacity regarding project implementation and management has not been fully
enhanced. Delays were caused by the highly decentralized policy framework in FBiH and the uneven basis of
SFLM activities between entities to start with (e.g. RS already had forests under FSC certification). This implied
that project activities were implemented by the many different agencies within the same sector, but with limited
coordination between agencies and across entities. In follow up communications with IEG the World Bank team
clarified that the decentralized structure within FBiH and unclear mandate of the entity Ministry of Agriculture,
Water Management and Forestry were an ongoing issue and led to delays in data collection and project
implementation. RS had a less complex institutional structure, and hence implementation was more efficient and
there were no adverse implementation issues.

Based on follow up communication with the World Bank team, the second objective of the project is to be
interpreted as to demonstrate SFLM activities. The ICR mentions that “the demonstration ambition of the project
appears to have been less developed” (ICR para 73). The ICR provides the example of forest thinning, where it
argues that a demonstration activity should ex-ante start with testing different thinning intensities in different
locations, and demonstrate (and communicate) the optimal thinning intensity based on field evidence to
implementing agencies. This did not happen in the project. Hence, if the project objective is to demonstrate
SFLM, then a profound discussion of what the project considered as a SFLM activity should have been
provided, as well as evidence (‘demonstrate’) on the effectiveness of a chosen activity over its alternatives.

Given the delays and challenges due to the complex institutional framework undermined implementation
efficiency in the FBiH, and the unclear definition and selection of demonstration activities, this review rates the
efficiency of this project as modest.

Note: The coverage/scope percentage in the table below is only an estimate, as it is unclear how much of the
project’s funding was allocated to the forest rehabilitation and reforestation activities for which the rate of return
was calculated.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         75.90
 Appraisal                                                    19.20
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         80.40
 ICR Estimate                                                 12.70
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome


                                                                                                         Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)




Based on a critical review of the evidence in the ICR (and from follow up communication with the World Bank
team) of the project’s achievements with respect to relevance of objectives, efficacy of achievements, and
efficiency of implementation; IEG rates the project as Moderately Satisfactory.

The relevance of the project’s objectives is rated substantial, but only marginally so as the second objective to
demonstrate SFLM activities is an output and not an outcome. The project could have been more relevant if it
tried to contribute to an intermediate outcome such as the effective uptake or implementation of the SFLM
activities that the project promoted.

The overall efficacy of both objectives is rated substantial as the ICR provides evidence on the number of
government staff trained, forest certified, roads rehabilitated, equipment purchased, game repellents installed,
etc. The PDO indicator in the PAD was only linked to Objective 2 of the PDO, and without baselines or a
counterfactual derived from an impact evaluation, proper attribution remains difficult. Efficiency is assessed as
modest as the efficiency analysis is solely based on a partial economic and financial analysis of the
demonstration component of the PDO, implementation issues in FBiH, and unclear selection of demonstration
activities.

Based on these results, the project's overall outcome had moderate shortcomings and is rated moderately
satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR identified one major risk to development outcomes (para 110-111) arising from the lack of adequate
financial resources to carry out SFLM practices on a regular basis. The project was embedded within existing
PIUs and based on existing forest management plans. Nonetheless, additional investment is needed to
complement improved capacity and to ensure the sustainability of project outcomes and resilience to climate
change impacts. To address these concerns, the World Bank is in discussion with the entity and state
authorities regarding a follow-up investment finance project as agreed in the CPF 2015–20 and to build upon
the lessons learned from the SFLM project (ICR para 111).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  During the design of the project, the World Bank drew on previous operations and sector work in the
  country (see section 3 in this review). The project was also relevant to the country’s current economic
  and environmental challenges. The World Bank identified activities in the project in a consultative and
  participatory process.


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



  The projects were implemented by a PIU that had been established for other World Bank-financed
  forestry projects. The ICR (para 75)) further notes that PIU staff were well trained and acquainted with
  World Bank operational, fiduciary, and safeguards procedures at the time of project preparation. Hence,
  both PIUs have technical competent people to manage the project, but the ICR highlighted that the PIU in
  FBiH did not have the adequate number of staff fully dedicated to the project.

  The project has been strongly embedded within local governance structure and agencies. The PIUs in
  Bosnia and Herzegovina implemented most of the project activities through local forest administrations
  and management companies in consultation with local stakeholders. This indicated the appropriate
  selection of stakeholders engaged with, implementation through the existing forest policies and
  ministries, and contributes to the scale up of project activities. For example, the ICR (para 48) notes that
  the Bank’s activities regarding the forest certification were largely based on the forest management plans
  (at the time of project appraisal) in consultation with forest management agencies. This assured
  commitment and buy-in of the implementing agencies.

  However, the ICR (paras 72-77, para 106) identifies several issues of concern in the project’s design.
  First, some aspects of the Results Framework were unclear and needed improved explanation, which
  indicated unclear design of the framework. Second, the ICR states that “the piloting and demonstration
  activities such as thinning for the project were not based on solid assessments, were reflected in very
  limited documentation and communication, and lacked systematic follow up”. Third, as discussed in
  section 5 of this review, there were implementation delays caused by the dysfunctional FMIS and the
  limited cooperation and coordination within FBiH, aspects which could have been addressed before
  project appraisal. Fourth, the delays caused by the difficulty of attracting competitive bids had not been
  identified as a risk in the PAD but affected project implementation. Finally, as mentioned above in Section
  5 of this review the ICR noted that the economic analysis at appraisal had serious methodological issues
  (inaccurate assumptions on incremental production, prices, and carbon sequestration services), which
  led to an overestimation of the potential benefits of the project.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (para 107) the World Bank adequately supervised the project and provided sound
 support to project implementation. It was stated that implementation support missions were undertaken
 twice a year and one technical mission was conducted. During these missions, implementation bottlenecks
 were identified, and feedback was given on next steps to take, fiduciary aspects and environmental
 safeguard compliance. Randomly selected sample sites were visited for safeguard supervision, and in one
 site an issue of wastewater management practices was identified (and quickly resolved by the PIU).

 During one of the implementation support missions, the World Bank cautioned against the cumbersome
 verification process for venders to engage in World Bank financed operations, but it is unclear whether this
 affected implementation.

 The World Bank requested careful reviews of proposed solutions to identified problems and strived for
 guidance from within Bank departments before responding to client proposals. Two analytical studies were

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



 conducted to better understand regulations and analyze the value chain of the forest sector, which
 provided guidance on the topics and encouraged follow up engagements of local government agencies.

 The World Bank consulted with relevant stakeholders (e.g. the EU) to explore potential long-term financing
 opportunities for the forestry sector in BiH and organized a multi-stakeholder workshop.

 At the end of the project, when implementation delays in FBiH could potentially undermine the achievement
 of the PDO, the Country Management Unit also got involved in monitoring the project’s progress and
 helping to resolve implementation challenges.

 The ICR (para 113), however, notes a few missed opportunities at the time of the MTR to adjust some of
 the design flaws regarding the unclear results framework and anticipate project implementation delays
 linked with the low baseline quality of the FMIS system.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 By design in the PAD (para 37) the M&E reporting was coordinated by the implementing agencies and the
 PIUs and supported by the cantonal offices, facilitating organizations, community-based organizations,
 project beneficiaries and other stakeholders. Outcome monitoring and project impact assessments was
 expected to use and analyze the primary data (from the project sites and beneficiaries) collected by field-
 based partners, as well as specialized data collected with external technical assistance. The M&E was
 expected to be consistent with existing structures in the FMIS; reporting would build upon existing formats
 prepared under other projects implemented by the respective PIUs (PAD paras 37, 38). As such, the M&E
 system was well embedded in the local institutions and would likely to be sustained after project closing.

 The overall quality of the M&E was, however, rated modest in the ICR, and this was mostly influenced by
 some weak aspects of M&E design. Specifically, the ICR noted issues regarding attribution
 of achievements to the project and the unclear definition of activities and indicators. In addition, the ICR
 review flagged some additional issues. These are discussed below.

 First, and as discussed in section 4 above, the link between the one PDO indicator and the capacity
 building component of the project is unclear, and the ICR acknowledges that an “additional PDO-level
 indicator covering capacity-building outcome and associated intermediate indicator might have been
 helpful” (para 88).




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



More importantly, as stated in the ICR, the M&E design lacked a focus on impact evaluation aspects that
would allow for a better interpretation of results in terms of attribution/impacts of the project. For example:

      Achievement in the M&E is identified by comparing the situation before the project versus the
       situation after the project. No impact evaluation was developed to look at the counterfactual
       outcome, i.e. what would have happened at the project sites without the project support. As a
       consequence, the extent to which achievements in the project can be attributed to the project is
       limited.
      Most indicators measuring outcomes and objectives in the results framework were project outputs
       rather than an outcome or objective indicators. For example, the PDO indicator is the ‘Land area
       where sustainable land management practices were adopted as a result of project’. A more useful
       indicator would have been the ‘Land area where sustainable land management practices were
       adopted’ (i.e. without ‘as a result of project’). This is similar for all other indicators except for
       indicator IO 1.1, where the area of certified forest was not linked to the project.
      Consequently, nearly all indicators had a baseline value of 0 because the indicators were
       formulated as outputs directly linked to the project. The project hence did not take stock of the
       existing status before implementation of the activities.

Moreover, as highlighted in the ICR, there were also a few shortcomings with the indicators. For example:

      It was unclear how the target of 3,000 hectare for the PDO-level indicator was set. According to the
         WDI (2019)[1], BiH had 21,850 square kilometers in 2013. As such, the target of forest under
         sustainable management is only 0.14% of the total forest, and it is unclear whether this was
         sufficiently ambitious as an indicator or not.
        The indicator IO 1.3 measures the number of climate indicators included in FMIS. However, as the
         ultimate goal of the project is to build capacity, it is unclear whether the project just delivered new
         indicators, or also supported capacity to maintain, update, and use modern information systems.
        Similarly, indicator IO 1.4 is a service delivery output of equipment, not an intermediate outcome of
         increasing technical capacity.
        There is substantial overlap between the intermediate results indicators ‘IO 2.1(a) Area restored or
         re/afforested (Core Indicator) [ha]’ and ‘IO 2.1(b) Area re/afforested (Core Indicator) [ha]’. Both
         indicators are core indicators and have the same annual target, so according to the ICR (para 89) it
         is “unclear whether the target is for restoration or reforestation/afforestation”. It is further unclear
         why the outcomes achieved at completion are different, and suggest that IO 2.1(b) is a subset of IO
         2.1(a). But if so, then reforestation/afforestation accounts for 91% of the target achieved for IO
         2.1(a). A better definition and explanation of the indicators and their targets would have been useful.
        The ICR (para 89 further notes that “Some intermediate indicators appeared to be accounting the
         same project activity twice as a number of demonstration projects and areas are covered by those
         projects”.
        There is also a substantial overlap between indicator IO 2.2 and the two IO 2.1 indicators, so it is
         unclear what the added value was of this indicator.

The definition and labeling of some objectives and outcomes (and their indicators) are confusing:

      The indicators for IO 2.3 and 2.4 refer to the number of subprojects completed, but as the ICR notes
         (para 90), it is unclear what the definition of subproject entails. Also, it is unclear how the number of
         subprojects is linked to the number of beneficiaries and the quality of support provided. i.e. one can

                                                                                                       Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



        either provide a few trainings to a larger audience or more training sessions to smaller groups. Is
        the implicit assumption that training in more – but smaller – groups improved capacity building?
        There is no discussion or supporting evidence of this assumption.
       The labeling of the PDO-level indicator is somewhat confusing, as in the PAD (para 17) the
        indicator is referred to as ‘Total land under improved management using SFM techniques’ but in the
        ICR it is labeled as ‘Land area where sustainable land management practices have been adopted
        as a result of the project’ (ICR para 19 p16). Sustainable land management is a broader concept
        than sustainable forest management (e.g. soil conservation measures), and in the definition of the
        indicator only forest activities are included (ICR para 19). A more consistent labeling of ‘SFLM’
        would have been useful.
       Component two of the project refers to “Vulnerable Areas” while in the PDO reference is made to
        “vulnerable forest, scrub and pasture landscapes”. Did vulnerable areas encompass the vulnerable
        forest, scrub and pasture landscapes, or was it a broader concept?
       The ICR (para 90) further discusses the unclear definition of the aspects ‘subprojects’, ‘innovative
        method’ and ‘vulnerable forest’ of some indicators in the result framework.

 [1] World Development Indicator data on forest area (in square kilometer) was accessed via
 https://data.worldbank.org/ on 12/4/2019.



b. M&E Implementation
  The PIUs in both Bosnia and Herzegovina regularly measured the indicators in the Results Framework
  and reported to the World Bank for inclusion in the Implementation Supervision Reports and updated
  GEF tracking tools for climate change mitigation, land degradation, and sustainable forest management
  at the MTR stage.

  The ICR (para 91), however, notes the irregular and non-systematic collection of gender disaggregated
  data, the lack of formal progress reports since the MTR in FBiH (because of the slowdown in technical
  preparation and decision making) and the lack of collecting follow up data.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (para 93) notes that M&E data on performance and results progress were used for
  management and decision making. The example is given of the added demonstration activities after the
  MTR, which were selected using M&E data to ensure their contribution to the appropriate result
  indicator. The project also organized communication and dissemination activities on project activities.
  However, the ICR also notes that “the M&E data were used to provide evidence of inputs and
  achievement of outputs but were not leveraged further to provide evidence of outcomes. This gives a
  somewhat limited picture of the project achievements”.

  Based on the assessments of the project’s performance on three aspects of monitoring and evaluation
  this review rates the quality of M&E in this project as modest.




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category ‘B and Two Safeguard policies are triggered by the
   project: Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 and Forests OP/BP 4.36 (PAD para 56)

   Environmental Safeguards. The instrument used for the environmental assessment was a stand-alone
   Environmental Management Framework (EMF) covering the primarily demonstration activities under
   Component 2. The EMF was disclosed and distributed online, and after public consultation the final EMF
   was disclosed on November 1, 2013 (ICR para 95). Site-specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs)
   had been prepared, reviewed, and approved by the World Bank for each activity when applicable. Field
   visits to randomly selected sites were part of the implementation support missions for safeguard supervision
   (see also section 8b).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The ICR (para 97) notes that the Financial Management (FM) arrangements by “both PIUs remained
   adequate and satisfactory to the World Bank’s requirements throughout the project period”. The World
   Bank assessed the FM satisfactory at project appraisal with moderate risks and compliance was
   satisfactory in all aspects of FM.

   Both PIUs hired dedicated FM specialists, prepared quarterly interim financial reports, and had adequate
   Internal controls and audit systems. Planning and budgeting were adequate as both PIUs prepared annual
   plans and budgets based on detailed Procurement Plan for all project activities (which was entered and
   analyzed in the accounting software). The World Bank received annual external audit reports (except for
   the first year) and the auditors did not find accounting problems and internal control deficiencies and
   issued an unmodified (clean) opinion on the project financial statements (ICR, para 97-100). During one of
   the implementation support mission, one case of internal control weaknesses was found, but the issue was
   successfully resolved by the end of the mission.

   The ICR states that the disbursement arrangements for both PIUs were satisfactory and no ineligible
   expenditures occurred (ICR, para 101).

   Procurement aspects were assessed strong by the World Bank in both the PIUs at the project appraisal
   and implementation, while risks were rated low. Both PIUs followed the World Bank
   procurement guidelines and complied with the provisions in the Legal Agreements. Procurement Plans
   were regularly updated, reviewed, approved, and disclosed; and each contract financed was agreed
   between the client and the government and followed the appropriate methodology (ICR para 102). The
   procurement post review (conducted in June 2018) indicated that procured goods and services properly,
   timely, and transparently; and no possible issues of inappropriate practices, questionable actions,
   noncompliance fraud or corruption (ICR para 103). Toward the project’s end, a private company alleged

                                                                                                 Page 18 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



  the FBiH PIU of mis-procurement and submitted a letter to the World Bank. However, based on
  clarifications by the FBiH PIU, there was no breach of policies, principles of public procurement, or World
  Bank guidelines (ICR para 104).

  Delays, however, in procurement arose as several unsuccessful bidding processes had to be repeated
  (because of an insufficient number or too expensive bids) and it was difficult to find local contractors for
  small-volume works (e.g. for remote feeder roads). This has led to delays in implementation which,
  according to the ICR para 105), could have been avoided by a more detailed mapping of potential (service)
  suppliers.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The main ‘other impact’ that is discussed in the ICR is the mobilization of private sector financing, where it
  is stated that “The project did not formally mobilize the private sector, but the private sector has benefited
  from the project achievement” (para 69). While the ICR states that there could be potential positive
  spillover effects from private owners’ willingness to replicate activities, after observing the benefits of the
  forest certification on the project supported public forests, it is unclear from which additional information
  (e.g. conversation with private land owners) this assessment was made. Moreover, public investments in
  the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) could also crowd out the private sector, as they were not directly
  supported by the project. For example, the ICR states that Ikea has been supporting the forest certification
  in parallel to the project, but it is unclear whether private forests are targeted.

  Other unintended impacts that could be of concern for sustainability are the following. First, ecotourism
  was developed and supported in the project, but it is unclear whether there were measures to ensure its
  sustainability. The only evidence is with respect to infrastructure, but not capacity or awareness of the
  ecological aspects of tourism. For example, it is stated that during the ICR mission problems in the
  wastewater management practices were observed in one of the ecotourism facilities, but the PIU resolved
  this problem adequately and quickly (ICR para 96).

  Second, opening roads for improved access of firefighting might increase illegal firewood collection or
  timbering. It is unclear whether measures were taken to address illegal activities. The ICR however
  mentions the increased awareness of illegal waste disposal, and that “Nearby communities have gradually
  been changing their behaviors and avoiding disposal in and around the sites where the project intervened”
  (para 56). However, no evidence is provided in the ICR on how the behavioral change has been induced
  and how it was achieved.



d. Other
  Gender. Although the gender-related indicators were not formally included in the Results Framework at
  appraisal, the PAD (para 54) states that gender disaggregated data related to capacity building would be
  collected “to inform how forestry planning and sustainable management initiatives effect men and women
  and their communities”. However, the indicators used for the intermediate outcomes did not allow the
  collection of gender disaggregated data (due to the lack of indicators at beneficiary level).




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   High


12. Lessons

IEG has drawn following lessons based on those reported in the ICR (para 112-119) with some
changes in language:

      For a demonstration project to be replicable and guide policy, careful planning is
       required. In this project there were deficiencies in the monitoring of the results on
       demonstration plots and an absence of control plots. Consequently, it was not possible to
       assess whether the results of the demonstration plots were attributable to the project or
       not. The lesson is that to gain any benefit from a demonstration project it needs to be
       carefully implemented and appropriate counterfactuals need to be established if the
       demonstration plots are to be useful for technical or policy purposes.
      Cost and complexities in investing in information systems and new technology are
       often underestimated resulting in implementation delays. In FBiH, insufficient funds and
       the underestimation of the task at hand to upgrade the FMIS information system resulted in
       project implementation delays. The lesson is that the costs of upgrading existing information
       systems or investing in new technologies need to be properly assessed at appraisal, and that
       sufficient funds need to be available to procure competitive service providers.

IEG draws the following additional lesson:

Projects that aim to enhance the weak capacity of decentralized government institutions
need to assess the root causes of this weakness during appraisal. This project aimed to
enhance the low capacity of the forestry stakeholders (regarding policies, strategies and planning)
in the context of the decentralized and complex institutional and policy framework of the different
entities of BiH. However, while the project sought to address the complex decentralized forest policy
in BiH, the implementation of the project itself was negatively affected by the complexity of the
institutional setting, and especially so in FBiH. The lesson is that a project’s appraisal needs to
properly assess how a weak decentralized government could affect implementation capacity and
pose a risk for project outcomes.



13. Assessment Recommended?


                                                                                                  Page 20 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SUSTAINABLE FOREST & LANDSCAPE MGT (P129961)




  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was logically written with enough attention and information on the project background, implementation
and outcomes achieved and it complies with OPCS guidelines. The Theory of Change (ToC) is presented
concisely and it is clear how project activities were expected to contribute to the PDO. At the same time, the
ICR critically assessed some elements of the ToC, the methodology of how achievements were measured, and
the methodology of the financial and economic analysis. These subtle comments appropriately signaled some
limitations of the project which were elaborated in this ICR review. As confirmed in IEG’s communication with
the project TTLs, no additional information on baselines or impact evaluation was available, and the ICR had to
rely on interviews with key informants and field visits to compare demonstration plots with control plots to
observe project achievements. The economic and financial analysis originally presented in the PAD is critically
reviewed and a more appropriate methodology is applied in the ICR, using more realistic assumptions that were
conservative and verified in the literature, providing more reliable assessment of efficiency. The lessons are
based on evidence of the project’s implementation and outcome and are useful for a broader audience.
Throughout this ICR review, several shortcomings or limitations of the ICR are highlighted, but none of these
are considered as substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                 Page 21 of 21
