     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021739

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P123394                                    Punjab Health Sector Reform Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                   Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52580,TF-15283                         31-Dec-2017                                           61,545,885.64

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 31-May-2013                                31-Dec-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                     20,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             71,097,249.88                                                0.00

 Actual                                         61,744,679.94                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Rocio Manchado              Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Behrens                      IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Garabito




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective was to support the implementation of the Punjab Health Sector Strategy,
   by focusing on the improvement of the coverage and utilization of quality essential health services, particularly
   in the low performing districts of Punjab (Financing Agreement, 12/2/2013, p.5). The statements of objectives
   in the Project Appraisal Document and ICR add a sentence: to contribute to this objective, the project will
   focus on building the capacity and systems to strengthen accountability and stewardship in the Department of



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



   Health. Although some outcome targets were revised at a 2017 restructuring, this review will not perform a
   split rating, as targets were revised upward.

   The project targeted the 18 districts of Punjab with the lowest rates of performance in terms of nutrition and
   health outcomes.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project initially included four components:



   Component 1: Improving Health Service Delivery (Appraisal: US$28.34 million; Actual: US$27
   million). This component was to enhance coverage, quality, and utilization of an essential package of
   health care services (EPHS), including outreach and community-level interventions for primary health care
   (PHC).　

   This component had three subcomponents:

         Integrated Maternal Neonatal and Child Health (MNCH) and Lady Health Workers (LHW) programs,
          and the expansion of 24/7 basic and comprehensive Emergency Obstetric Neonatal Care (EmONC)
          and Family Planning (FP) services.　
         Introduction of preventive nutrition services by scaling up the provision of micronutrients and
          deworming, and expanding the delivery of behavior change communication with a focus on the
          prevention of malnutrition during pregnancy and in the first two years of life. Therapeutic nutrition
          services were to be delivered, including commodity support micronutrients and ready-to-use
          therapeutic foods in 12 districts and urban slums in the 9 cities with the highest prevalence of acute
          malnutrition.
         Expansion of coverage of HIV/AIDS preventive services, including treatment and care services for
          population subgroups vulnerable to HIV infection [injectable drug users (IDUs) and men who have
          sex with men] in targeted cities, and support for provincial integrated biological and behavioral
          surveillance.　



   Component 2: Enhancing Efficiency and Effectiveness of the Health System (Appraisal: US$34
   million; Health Result Innovation Trust Fund (HRITF) Grant US$10 million; Actual: US$10 million).


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



This component aimed at strengthening management and accountability, and improving the quality of care
through regulations and standardization of services.

This component had three subcomponents:

      Strengthening the PHC Contracting Out System to support an ongoing initiative of the
       government for outsourcing Basic Health Units (BHUs) in 14 districts to the Punjab Rural Support
       Program (PRSP), to manage BHU provision of the EPHS for primary health care services. The
       contract with the PRSP was to be revised into a results-based contract linking payments to
       achievement of district-wide annual performance targets. The revised contract was to include health
       facility management as well as ensuring that the full EPH services were provided, including
       community-based services.
      Formalizing Results-Based District Management Contracts for performance management in all 36
       districts between the provincial Departments of Health (DoH) and the District Health Offices. The
       contracts were to include performance indicators related to the delivery of EPHS, including
       integrated MNCH/FP, nutrition services, and control of communicable disease. The districts were
       to receive a results-based payment based on their performance, using data from the District Health
       Information Systems (DHIS) and independent assessments.　
      Enhancing Governance and Accountability Mechanisms to support: (a) regulatory reforms to
       operationalize the Punjab Healthcare Commission by standardizing health facility registration and
       licensing, thus improving quality of care in the public and private sectors; and (b) strengthening
       social accountability for empowering communities, using third-party results validation through regular
       Health Facility Assessments and household surveys, data dissemination, community-based
       monitoring/auditing, and strengthening complaint mechanisms.



Component 3: Strengthening Provincial Department of Health Management Capacity (Appraisal
US$22.66 million, Actual: US$10 million). This component was to strengthen and reorganize provincial
DoH management systems and improve their stewardship functions.

The following thematic areas were to be included:　

      Strengthening stewardship functions to support a functional review of the DoH and organizational
       restructuring of provincial offices by focusing on: (a) increasing the institutional capacity of the
       Directorate General Health Service (DGHS) office to provide technical support to the districts; (b)
       supporting DoH policy and strategy roles and functions by strengthening the Punjab Health Sector
       Strategy (PHSS) Program; (c) strengthening the monitoring and evaluation cell in the DGHS office to
       monitor service delivery performance by improving the quality of the DHIS and institutionalizing the
       Health Facility Assessment and impact evaluation; and (d) building human resource (HR)
       management functions by supporting the establishment of an HR cell with skilled staff, and
       developing an HR strategy and HR database for health.
      Restructuring the Punjab Health Foundation (PHF) to review its mission and objectives, and to
       reorganize and strengthen its capacity to enable public financing for the private sector.
      Building fiduciary functions in the DoH to improve internal control for accountability and management
       effectiveness by establishing financial management and procurement structures, including: (a)
       establishing a procurement function in a separate and independent wing; (b) operationalizing sector-
       specific standard operating procedures and manuals in line with the Punjab Public Procurement

                                                                                                Page 3 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



       Rules; (c) establishing a capacity building program for field staff; (d) analyzing supply chain
       management from manufacturer to patient to ensure quality provision of health care by measuring,
       improving, and monitoring processes; (e) establishing an independent financial management unit; (f)
       strengthening budget management through capacity building; (g) enhancing non-salary district
       allocations; and (h) developing systems for internal audit.
      Supporting the roll-out of environmental and medical waste management in two pilot districts to
       ensure that zero infectious waste goes out of medical facilities. The project was to build on that
       experience, enabling Punjab to expand environmental and medical waste management and
       successful practices across the province.



Component 4: Improving Capacity in Technical Areas for Equitable Health Services for All
(Appraisal: US$15.00 million; HRITF Grant was US$11.5 million; Actual: US$1.74 million). This
component was to finance innovative pilots to guide policy development in results-based financing and
alternative financing approaches, as well as strengthen existing analytical capacities in technical areas.

This component had three subcomponents:

      Implementing results-based financing pilots in two districts to support incentives for health staff to
       enhance performance and improvements in service quality.　
      Piloting of alternative financing models in two districts, including (a) a voucher/cash incentive
       delivered at the health facility level to increase demand for health services, using support from HRIT,
       and (b) an insurance/social protection scheme with varying premium levels for a set of services from
       the public or private sector.
      Supporting needs-based technical assistance (TA) and capacity building activities, including: (a)
       developing a secondary care and tertiary care package; (b) performing analytical work and research
       on the use and quality of secondary care services, urban health care assessment, and a
       performance review of tertiary care hospitals; and (c) supporting capacity building activities to
       strengthen the DoH and its units’ ability to implement the project, including financial management,
       procurement, environmental and social management, monitoring and evaluation, and verification of
       disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) using third-party assessment.
      Impact evaluation (IE) for results-based financing pilots. The IE was to measure the impact of
       different results-based financing approaches and was to be managed by the Bank.



Revised components:



The components were revised during the 2017 restructuring. The management and stewardship reforms
under Components 2 and 3 were dropped, as they were not being implemented. Instead, it was decided to
focus the remaining short period of the project on service delivery, particularly on family planning and
maternal health, and to expand the scope by adding a new Component 5 to provide nutrition interventions
aimed at reducing stunting in Punjab.



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)




  Component 4: Improving Capacity in Technical Areas (revised cost US$9 million, HRITF Grant
  canceled; actual cost US$1.74 million). This component was scaled down considerably, reducing the IDA
  amount by US$6 million and canceling the US$11.5 million HRITF support for results-based pilots and IE.
  The component was restructured to continue supporting selected needs-based analytical work and
  research, and any innovative pilots to guide policy development. Some of the new activities included filter
  clinics for large hospitals, roll-out of health care waste management in tertiary care hospitals, and evaluation
  of ongoing programs to formulate policy options. Furthermore, this component was to provide support to
  newly bifurcated departments of health to enable proper functioning and strengthening of their fiduciary and
  oversight responsibilities through the strengthening of procurement and financial management capacity.
  Analytical work was to cover the use and quality of secondary care services, urban health care, and a
  performance review of tertiary care hospitals.



  Component 5: Strengthening Nutrition Interventions (Appraisal: US$37.82 million; Actual US$13
  million). This component was to focus exclusively on nutrition activities to address the persistently high
  burden of stunting and malnutrition in Punjab. The additional support to nutrition interventions, already
  provided under Component 1, aimed at incentivizing the Primary and Secondary Health Department to
  provide essential nutrition services to more districts for children under 24 months of age through the
  following: (i) universal screening and counseling in the targeted districts; (ii) expansion of coverage to
  uncovered union councils in the districts; (iii) Outpatient Therapeutic Program extension; (iv) establishment
  of Stabilization Centers with functional referral linkages; and (v) consolidation of existing fragmented
  trainings into a comprehensive nutrition training by level of service. The government established a Multi-
  sectoral Nutrition Cell at the Planning and Development Department, financed through the Annual
  Development Plan; the cell was to provide support to a set of multi-sectoral nutrition activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


  Cost

  The PAD (p. vi) reported a total estimated cost of $1,116.50 million, of which the Bank and the HRITF were
  to finance US$28.34 million for component 1, US$44 million for component 2, US$22.6 million for
  component 3, and US$26.5 million for component 4. At the 2017 restructuring, the revised Bank costs were
  US$31.58 million for component 1, US$10.8 million for component 2, US$10.8 million for component 3,
  US$9 million for component 4, and US$37.82 million for component 5, for a total Bank cost of US$100
  million (ICR, p. 62). At the 2018 restructuring, the revised costs were US$25.5 million for component 1,
  US$10 million for component 2, US$10.5 million for component 3, US$2 million for component 4, and
  US$18.82 million for component 5, for a total Bank cost of US$66.82 million (ICR, p. 62).

  Actual Bank costs at project closing were US$27 million for component 1, US$10 million for component 2,
  US$10 million for component 3, US$1.74 million for component 4, and US$13 million for component 5, for a
  total actual Bank cost of US$61.74 million (ICR, p. 62).



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)




Financing

According to the PAD (p. 11), the project was to be financed by an IDA credit of US$100 million, along with
a US$21.5 million HRITF Trust Fund (TF–15283), a UK British Department for International Development
(DfID) parallel fund of US$165 million that included approximately US$25 million for TA, and a borrower
contribution of US$830 million. Total estimated project financing was therefore US$ 1,116.5 million.

The project included four components, the first three financed through 15 DLIs (total estimated US$85
million) and the fourth using the traditional investment financing reimbursement modality through a
designated account (US$15 million). The Bank's contribution to the project was co-financed by US$21.5
million grant from the HRITF to support the implementation of Components 2 and 4 (US$10 million and
US$11.5 million respectively).

DfID was to finance a parallel program (2013-2019) of US$140 million aimed at reducing child and maternal
mortality by focusing on three priorities: to improve care around delivery, to increase immunization
coverage, and to transform primary health care facilities. These priorities overlapped with World Bank-
financed project objectives as part of a concerted effort in support of PHSS to improve health outcomes. An
additional US$25 million from DfID was to support TA to enhance health sector capacity, and to develop
innovative and evidence-based policies related to reproductive, maternal, neonatal, and child health and
nutrition.

The US$21.5 million HRITF Grant was canceled on January 26, 2017, due to delays, indecision, and
inaction on preparing and implementing planned results-based proposals.

At the 2018 restructuring, US$29 million in Bank funds that were not going to be used were cancelled. The
remaining US$0.4million of unspent funds were canceled in June 2019.

Actual Bank financing was US$ 61.74 million. The ICR did not include the actual borrower and DfID
contributions to the project.



Dates

The project was approved on May 31, 2013 and became effective on January 17, 2014. A mid-term review
was undertaken on August 13, 2015. The project was restructured three times:

      January 17, 2014. A level 2 restructuring extended the due date for the signing of the HRITF Grant
       Agreement from August 31, 2013, to April 30, 2014, to allow for the IDA Credit to become effective,
       as this was a suspension clause in the Financing Agreement.
      February 15, 2017. A level 2 restructuring changed the implementing agency and added: (i) revision
       of components; (ii) change in the results framework; (iii) change in implementation arrangements;
       (iv) changes to financial management and disbursement arrangements to align with the three new
       implementing agencies, using the reimbursement modality; (v) change in procurement
       arrangements, with two new agencies setting up procurement functions; (vi) change in the eligible
       expenditure category to include nutrition interventions using a reimbursement modality; (vii)


                                                                                               Page 6 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



          reallocation of credit proceeds to align with the changes in components; and (viii) extension of the
          closing date by one year to December 31, 2018.
         December 28, 2018. There was a change in components and costs, cancellation of financing, and
          reallocation between disbursement categories. The disbursement deadline was extended on an
          exceptional basis (grace period) from April 30, 2019, to May 31, 2019, to enable all disbursements of
          eligible expenditures to be documented.
         The project closed on December 31, 2018.



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objectives were relevant to country conditions at appraisal. At that moment, it was unlikely that
Pakistan would achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) due to the challenge of a growing
population, an unstable political climate, the negative impact of the global economic crisis, and the
devastating floods of 2010 and 2011. Punjab was home to about 60% of the country's total population,
determining the trend of national economic growth and poverty reduction. Hence, Punjab held the key to
Pakistan’s progress towards attaining the MDGs. Also, the country required substantial investments in
human development. Progress in this area had been slow and uneven in Pakistan, remaining as one of the
weakest performers in the South Asia Region on maternal and child health outcomes, and characterized by
significant inequity in health service access and utilization between regions. Also, in April 2010, the
Parliament passed the 18th Amendment to the Constitution that enhanced provincial autonomy through
devolving federal powers and responsibilities.

This project was to support the implementation of the next five-year strategic plan 2012-2017 prepared by
the DoH for the first phase of reforms. Recognizing limited achievements in intermediate health outcomes
and poor performance in the health sector, the DoH developed an extensive situation analysis (March
2012) and a consultative process involving all stakeholders. Based on the results, in 2012, the DoH
developed the PHSS 2012- 2020. This strategy established the DoH priorities for the delivery of healthcare
services based on available resources. Also, the government of Punjab initiated interventions focusing on
strengthening governance and accountability, scaling up the People’s Primary Health Initiative and the
Punjab Rural Support Program evaluation (TRF 2010), which evidenced positive results.

The objectives were also relevant to the World Bank/Pakistan Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2010-
13 that sought to support Pakistan’s efforts to address major institutional, policy, and financing constraints
to increase its capacity to achieve and sustain high economic growth rates, to manage conflict, and to
improve social indicators and the capacity of its population. The CPS was organized around four pillars; the
fourth envisioning improving human development and social protection, emphasizing performance and
building capacity. This pillar also recognized the need to build governance and service delivery at the
provincial level following the devolution of responsibilities to provinces. The CPS included explicitly two
critical outcomes related to the health sector: expanding the use of modern contraceptive methods from
26% to 30% (project target for Punjab was 35%) and increasing child immunization by 20% (project target
for Punjab was 40%), both of which were also PDO outcome indicators. The project also assisted Punjab in




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



               improving sector performance and helped to accelerate its progress towards achieving the health-related
               MDGs 1, 4, 5, and 6.

               The CPS’s approach to achieving its goals was based on six critical areas of improvement, three of which
               were included in the project: (i) increased focus on results and the explicit inclusion of performance and
               results-based contracts; (ii) increased focus on governance and accountability, strengthening the DoH
               stewardship and management functions; and (iii) building partnerships for sustained results, which this
               project’s design envisioned through its partnership with DfID.

               At closing, the project's PDO of supporting the PHSS remained relevant to the CPS at closing (FY15-19)
               that focuses on four strategic pillars: (i) transforming the energy sector; (ii) supporting private sector
               development; (iii) reaching out to the underserved, neglected, and poor; and (iv) accelerating improvements
               in services. The last two include social protection, contraceptive methods, and child immunizations, but do
               not mention nutrition. Although during the project's life there was a change of focus on service delivery, the
               new approach was accommodated with an open dialogue, and the restructurings and the relevance of the
               objectives continued to be aligned with the Country Strategy.

               The Bank had previous experience in Pakistan, with two of three prior health projects closing in 2010-12.
               However, despite this experience, the Bank team might have underestimated the complexity of this project
               and not allowed adequate time for implementation, given the country's and province's development status
               and capacity. Also, the project development objective was not clearly stated, making difficult to understand
               if the focus was reform of the health system (institutional strengthening and accountability) or just
               improvement of the quality and utilization of service delivery. The PDO was so broad that it left room for
               different interpretations and changes of approach when the government went through a transition time with
               new priorities.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the coverage of essential health services, particularly in the low performing districts of Punjab.

                             Rationale
                             The project’s theory of change was based on the premise that scaling up the implementation of the EPHS,
                             establishing a comprehensive EmONC in the BHU and MNCH/LHW programs in Rural Health Centers
                             (RHCs) as well as Tehsil (THQ) and District (DHQ) Headquarter Hospitals, would enhance the coverage of
                             these services. The February 2017 restructuring focused on certain aspects of service delivery, such as
                             maternal health, and on expanding the scope of the project by adding a new component (Component 5) to
                             provide nutrition interventions. This new component aimed exclusively at activities to address the persistently

                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



high burden of stunting and malnutrition in Punjab, building on nutrition interventions already provided under
Component 1.



Outputs

      The number of people who received essential health, nutrition, and population services reached
         11,503,280 in 2018, exceeding the target of 11,500,000. However, only 6,503,280 women received
         this service, short of the target of 7,500,000.
        The number of THQ hospitals providing 24/7 comprehensive EmONC services increased from the
         baseline of 40 in 2012 to 50 in 2018, not enough to reach the target of 75.
        The number of RHCs providing 24/7 basic EmONC services increased from the baseline of 150 in
         2012 to 311 in 2018, exceeding the target of 291.
        The percentage of pregnant women registered with LHWs receiving iron and folic acid tablets during
         the last pregnancy increased from the baseline of 10% in 2012 to 60% in 2018, reaching the target of
         60%. Also, 15,000 LHWs were trained on family planning and nutrition.
        Although a minimum of six HIV/AIDS service contracts with non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
         were planned, only five were signed; however, the Bank team considered this outcome achieved (ICR,
         p. 8). The hired NGOs provided services in 12 sites to IDUs and female/male/transgender sex workers
         (ICR, p.21).
        16 of 18 DHQs (88%) in 18 low performing districts provided comprehensive EmONC services. This
         essentially achieved the target of 90% (ICR, p. 21).
        Nutrition commodities were procured through a contract with UNICEF. Component 5 also
         reportedly helped to scale up the provision of micronutrients and deworming for adolescents (ICR, p.
         67; no specific information was provided). However, a second contract with UNICEF was not signed
         during the project due to bureaucratic roadblocks, and US$19 million of the original allocation had to
         be cancelled (ICR, p. 21).



Outcomes

      The percentage of children ages 12-23 months fully immunized increased from the baseline of 43%
       (MICS 2011) to 76.5% in 2018, almost reaching the revised target of 80%. Also, 2,450,000 children
       were immunized, not reaching the target of 2,500,000. The baseline in the 18 low performing districts
       was 23.9% with a target of 60%, exceeded with an actual achievement of 75%.　
      The percentage of children ages 0-24 months in the 18 low performing districts receiving the basic
       package of nutrition service increased from a baseline of 10% to 84% in 2018, exceeding the revised
       target of 80%. The total number of women and children who received basic nutrition services reached
       6,540,000, exceeding the target of 6,500,000.

The improvement in the indicator of children fully immunized contributed to the increase of full child
immunization by 20% across Pakistan (ICR, p. 19). This progress was mostly due to the achievement of the
target in the 18 low performing districts.



                                                                                                  Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



The project contributed to enhancing access to the EPHS and operationalized the integrated management of
three community-based programs (LHW, MNCH, and nutrition program) (ICR, p .21). It has also led to the
expansion of comprehensive obstetrical care (basic and comprehensive emergency obstetrical and neonatal)
and family planning services across Punjab, particularly in 18 low performing districts (ICR, p. 67).
Nevertheless, while the number of RHCs providing emergency services exceeded the target, the number of
THQs did not reach the goal as envisioned. Also, the number of women who received these services did not
reach targets.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the utilization of essential health services, particularly in the low performing districts of Punjab.

Rationale
The theory of change was based on the principle that the integration of the MNCH with the nutrition and LHW
programs, as well as the expansion of 24/7 comprehensive EmONC and HIV prevention services, would
improve the utilization of the EPHS.



Outputs

      The monthly average of family planning clients provided with products and services at RHCs
         increased from the baseline of 62 in 2012 to 72 in 2018, not reaching the target of 100.
        The daily average number of outpatient visits per BHU increased from 40 in 2012 to 62 in 2018,
         exceeding the target of 60; and per RHC increased from 140 in 2012 to 289 in 2018, far exceeding the
         target of 180.
        A planned media campaign for family planning services was not adequately designed or implemented
         (ICR, p. 14). The media campaign was launched by the Population and Welfare Department. A third-
         party evaluation found that the messaging was not sufficiently specific (ICR, p. 22).
        The Punjab Population Innovation Fund (PPIF), established to fund innovative projects to improve
         quality and accessibility of family planning services, was made fully operational (ICR, pp. 14 and 58).
         However, it did not achieve the target of 5 contracts; only 2 contracts were signed during
         implementation.
        The increase in FP services intake in the 18 project districts was considered to be achieved, as the
         Bank team agreed to consider the provision of services by the PWD (3,935,548) in addition to those
         provided by the DoH (2,434,147) (ICR, p. 22).



Outcome



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)




      The percentage of women using any modern contraceptive method increased from the baseline of
       29% in 2012 to 29.9% in 2018, far from the target of 35% (the MICS 2011 refers to a baseline of
       35%). The percentage in the 18 low performing districts reached the target of 28.5% in 2018 from a
       22.6% baseline in 2012.
      The percentage of IDUs who reported using a new syringe at their last injection increased from the
       baseline of 50% in 2012 to 65% in 2018, not reaching the target of 75%.

There was no improvement in the use of modern contraceptive methods in the province of Punjab. MICS data
showed a decrease from 30.8% in 2014 to 29.9% in 2018 (ICR, p. 19), and only the 18 lower-performing
districts reported achieving the target. Safe injection practices for IDUs did not reach the target. Also, the
verification report on the LHW program training sessions noted that the entire training system for LHWs had
to be revamped for a number of reasons, including that there was no tracking of who received training and no
guidelines or training handbook (ICR, p. 21).



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the quality of essential health services, particularly in the low performing districts of Punjab.

Rationale
The theory of change was based on the premise that the adoption and implementation of service standards,
regulations, governance, and social accountability measures would improve the quality of service delivery and
health care system facility functionality. The project envisaged reviewing and trying different managerial
approaches, including contracting out services and performance-based management, as part of a results-
based orientation of the PHSS. The project also aimed at improving provincial DoH management capacity by
promoting the use of existing data and reorganizing the DGHS to respond to its new role and main functions
of stewardship and leading technical agency.



Outputs　

Quality:

      The monthly average number of deliveries taking place at one RHC increased from the baseline of 33
       in 2012 to 65 in 2018, exceeding the target of 60.　
      The percentage of children 9-59 months of age being screened (at least biannually) for malnutrition in
       the targeted districts increased from 10% in 2016 to 70%, not meeting the target of 80%. Also, the
       percentage of children 6-59 months of age correctly identified with severe acute malnutrition (SAM)
       screened in the same districts increased from the baseline of 1.0% in 2016 to 1.4% in 2018, extremely
       far from the target of 90%. Finally, the proportion of children with SAM registered for treatment at



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



       stabilization centers in these districts increased from the baseline of 1% in 2016 to 77% in 2018,
       exceeding the target of 40%.

Efficiency and Effectiveness of the Health System

      The percentage of districts with their respective BHUs providing all essential drugs increased from the
       baseline of 74.0% in 2012 to 96.56% in 2018, exceeding the target of 85.0%.
      The percentage of LHWs with stock-outs of family planning methods decreased from the baseline of
       80% in 2012 to 7% in 2018, exceeding the target of 10%.
      The project supported the implementation and adoption of an Environmental and Medical Waste
       Management Plan (EMWMP) in secondary health care facilities in 17 districts to ensure the safe
       disposal of infectious waste through training and awareness campaigns. 25 incinerators were
       installed, 37 vehicles were procured, and yellow rooms were built (ICR, p. 26).

Strengthened provincial DoH management capacity:

      The percentage of districts that were able to use more than 90% of released funds in the same FY
       increased from the baseline of 20% in 2012 to 61% in 2018, not reaching the target of 75%.
      The percentage of the budget allocated for preventive programs, out of the total provincial
       development health budget, increased from 7.0% in 2012 to 11.7% in 2018, not reaching the 20%
       target.
      PHF capacity was strengthened to channel public financing for the private sector.



Outcomes

Quality:

      The percentage of births attended by skilled health personnel increased from the baseline of 58.5% in
       2012 to 76.4% in 2018, exceeding the revised 75.0% target. The number of deliveries attended by
       skilled health personnel reached 2,513,280, exceeding the target of 2,500,000. The same happened
       in the 18 low performing districts, with an increase from 45.4% in 2012 to 68.4% in 2018, exceeding
       the 65.0% target.

Efficiency and Effectiveness of the Health System:

      The number of Category 1 and 2 Health Care Establishments (HCEs) issued with provisional licenses
       (certificate of registration) by the Punjab Healthcare Commission increased from a baseline of 100 in
       2012 to 2,353 in 2018, exceeding the target of 500 (ICR, p. 49).
      The percentage of community members satisfied with government health care services in 2018
       reached 88.5%, exceeding the revised 80.0% target.

There was a visible change in some key health care quality indicators, including the monthly average number
of deliveries that took place at one RHC and the number and percentage of births attended by skilled health
personnel. Also, the PHCC was made operational for regulation/licensing of health facilities (ICR, p. 9).
However, although the project's initial PDO indicator was to have 500 Category 1 HCEs (hospitals with 50+

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 24
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



                            beds) issued with provisional licenses by the PHCC during the 2017 restructuring, the indicator was
                            rephrased as Category 1 and Category 2 HCEs (hospitals with <50 beds, including RHCs) issued with a
                            license. The target for the PDO indicator remained at 500. For this reason, progress on the PDO indicator is
                            not evaluable, since the revised PDO indicator does not have the relevant target to cover both sets of HCEs.
                            There was no change regarding client satisfaction. Furthermore, the definition of indicators had some
                            shortcomings, for example, the baseline was set at 0% and the target at 80%, even though the 2014 Health
                            Facility Assessment (HFA) results showed overall satisfaction with BHU and RHC services to be around 87-
                            92%. Also, a community satisfaction survey performed as part of the 2018 HFA reported overall satisfaction
                            of 93%, higher than the 85.5% reported in the final ISR.

                            The project validated service delivery results through assessments, surveys, and reports to improve
                            accountability. However, although the Annual Health Reports and the HFAs were not published with the
                            planned frequency, both provided valuable information about facility functionality. The latest 2018 HFA stated
                            that the average index for those health facilities with availability of medicines and supplies was 63%, from
                            29% in THQs to 42% in BHUs with 24/7 services. This data contrasts with the 96.6% reported in the ICR for
                            the respective BHUs providing all essential drugs and with the 7% percentage of LHWs reported with stock-
                            outs of family planning methods (ICR, p. 23). Also, the 2018 LHW Third-Party Evaluation revealed a higher
                            percentage of stock-outs of medicines and FP supplies (30-97% range across all categories). Moreover, this
                            LHW evaluation reported no significant difference in service delivery performance over the last decade, with
                            severe gaps in coverage, knowledge, and skills of LHWs and supervisors (ICR, p. 23).

                            The PHCC designed and implemented a Complaint Management System in DHQ hospitals for patients
                            to submit their complaints through an Emergency Helpline (ICR, p. 9). The ICR claimed that this innovation
                            helped to settle 70% of all registered claims, to impose fines on guilty parties (PKR 47 million), to initiate 47
                            criminal proceedings, and to stop 43 HCEs from the provision of services (ICR, p. 24). However, the ICR also
                            stated that there is poor record-keeping of complaints, which prevents proper analysis. The validation
                            exercise showed that most claims are not solved at the local level but instead escalated, and that public
                            awareness of the Complaint Management System is minimal (ICR, p. 25).

                            The DoH did not enable a culture of performance-based management at the district level, as it did not provide
                            performance management contracts in 14 ongoing & new districts (ICR, p. 23), and did not transfer budgetary
                            resources as planned. Also, the HFA highlighted significant deficiencies across multiple aspects of service
                            delivery and important gaps in human resources, with low percentages of positions filled, particularly at the
                            THQ and DHQ hospitals, and only 43-44% of needed clinical specialists available. The HFA also indicated
                            equipment shortages in THQs (55%) and DHQs (54%), limited availability of management personnel, and low
                            application of facility standards (ICR, p. 23). Finally, the project could not reach the 80% target of low
                            performing districts of Punjab having attained a minimum increase of 5-10 percentage points in the composite
                            index (scorecard), based on the list of key performance indicators measured against the 2012 baseline.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                              Page 13 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)




  OVERALL EFFICACY
  Rationale
  Progress was made to improve access to health care services through the integration of MNCH services with
  the nutrition and LHW programs, and the expansion of 24/7 EmONC. However, there are still challenges
  related to the use of modern contraceptive methods, and reaching the targets of children ages 12-23 months
  fully immunized in the province of Punjab. Also, there has been a series of changes in the government's
  reform priorities; the reforms supported under the project, including fiduciary management, human resources,
  and M&E, have not been implemented as planned. Some management and stewardship reforms under
  Components 2 and 3 were dropped after the February 2017 restructuring (ICR, p. 14). The project did build
  some technical capacity in planning and management, including financial management and procurement,
  developing minimum service delivery standards, and training for managers. At the end of the project,
  however, the DGHS transformation to a steward of the health system was not fully functional. Mechanisms
  and processes to connect policy and planning with implementation were not developed, including the
  involvement and regulation of the private sector (ICR, p. 25). Also, during the 2017 restructuring, Component
  4, aimed at improving capacity in technical areas, was scaled down considerably and restructured to support
  only selected needs-based analytical work and research and innovative pilots to guide policy development
  (ICR, p. 14).



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
Neither the PAD nor the ICR included a traditional economic or financial analysis. The ICR estimated the MNCH
economic benefits based on disability-adjusted life years. The estimate was that for US$1 invested by the
project, the return would be in the range of US$2.96 - 8.88 when considering the under-five mortality rate,
resulting in an economic benefit of US$192–577 million (ICR, p. 29). Also, the ICR indicated a percentage
reduction of stunted children from 33% to 31.5% between 2014 and 2018. Overall, it likely underestimated
benefits by not including the potential increase in overall economic productivity as a result of the project (ICR, p.
29). Lastly, the establishment of 12 drop-in-centers at the cost of US$5.67 million is estimated to have prevented
at least 6,500 people from becoming infected with HIV. This benefit would save US$41.15 million in generic
treatment costs; therefore, every US$1 spent on HIV prevention saved US$7.25 in treatment costs, potentially
having a high economic return (ICR. p. 29).

The ICR also stated that after the 2017 restructuring, the redirecting of resources to MNCH and nutrition would
allow more efficient use of funds and enhance equity in service provision. However, the cancellation of funds
and the dropping of institutional strengthening indicators had a negative impact not only on project efficiency but
on the efficiency of the health system (ICR, p. 30).

Although joining efforts to support country initiatives such as the PHSS is considered best practice, the merger
of two different frameworks that overlap the project objectives may have created confusion. For instance, the
Bank team raised concerns that the financing modality focused on DLI-related indicators that tracked all actual
expenditures closely developed a misalignment with the original reform program, limiting its scope significantly.
Also, the DLI modality did not provide sufficient incentives for policy changes in the DoH partly because DLIs
were delinked from expenditures required to achieve results (with Policy and Strategic Planning Unit and other


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



units not getting funding from the government to meet the DLIs). The reduction of the attention to planned
management reforms supported by the Bank-financed DLIs led to a progressive disconnection that affected the
implementation of the project to less than 25% disbursed by mid-2015. Also, during implementation support
missions, engagement with a new Health Roadmap team (led by the Chief Minister from 2014-2018) and DfID
decreased gradually. The Health Roadmap model elevated decisions to the top leadership level but also
reduced the involvement and empowerment of technical specialists in decision making. There was an increase
in the BHUs' financing and utilization rates; however, the exclusive focus on roadmap indicators led to increased
hiring at BHUs at the expense of higher levels, leading to human resource shortages (ICR, p. 36).

There were some shortcomings regarding the delivery of funds. For instance, the Bank did not provide the initial
advance of US$17 million, which could have potentially eased pressure during implementation. Also, while
the PPIF received some funds, the internal auditor considered them insufficient to allow the PPIF to enter into
contracts with providers; therefore, this DLI could not be met (ICR, p. 37).

The project was planned to be implemented over four years. This timeline might be considered too ambitious
given the fact that during election years, often very little can be done, especially after a change of government
that produces a change of management. Some of the new staff did not have any knowledge of the reform
program or the project design and its financing modality. As a result, the level of understanding and commitment
decayed, and the project had to be extended for a year to implement new activities after the 2017 restructuring
(ICR, p. 31).

Due to two general elections and a bifurcation of the DoH during the life of the project, there were several
changes in leadership and management, without the time required for every new officer to understand the
dynamics of the project (ICR, p. 21). These changes led to discontinuity in decision making and reform
directions. The lack of a transition mechanism to ensure a smooth transfer of responsibilities within the
government created an environment where every new incumbent revisited the entire project process and, in
most cases, reverted previous decisions and agreements (ICR, p. 34). This turnover severely affected
decisions in critical areas such as the results-based financing model, district management performance-based
contracting, and the contracting model for low performing districts to utilize the HRITF Grant.

Several delays in signing harmed project implementation; for instance, the delay in signing the HRITF grant
agreement delayed the opening of the Designated Account for Component 4, hindering the operationalization of
expenditures and financial management arrangements until late 2014. This situation also prevented a fund
advance in the amount of US$17 million for expenses under the Eligible Expenditure Program to finance the
DLIs until January 15, 2014, as the project effectiveness was declared only on January 17, 2014. Furthermore,
as the 2013 funds were not utilized, DfID did not release its second tranche for 2014-2015 for GBP23 million.
Moreover, there was no budget allocated for the independent verification of DLIs in 2014; the confirmation only
took place in October of that year, while the disbursement for the 4 DLIs was made in March 2015, two years
after project approval (ICR, pp. 30-31). The Planning and Development Department did not allow the signing of
the second major contract with UNICEF for nutrition commodities in the summer of 2018 (US$4 million) because
the PC-1 document for the Integrated Reproductive Maternal, Neonatal, and Child Health and Nutrition Program
expired in June 2018.

During the project implementation, there were two cancellations of funds for a total of US$50 million, out of the
total US$120 million planned for the project, and in June 2019, the remaining US$2.2 million was cancelled
(ICR, p. 31). The change of government priorities, after the general elections in May 2013, led to three years of
debate that caused severe delays in internal reviews and approvals of results-based proposals and the
cancellation of the US$21.5 million HRITF grant in 2017. The DoH lost a large amount of funding to support its


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



reform program, including vouchers for MCH, health insurance, results-based financing for health facilities, and
performance contracts for district health officials. Likewise, the Bank-executed portion of the HRITF (US$1.5
million), to finance the impact evaluation, was also cancelled. For this reason, Component 4 was never
implemented. In December 2018, there was a second significant cancellation of SDR20.8 million (est. US$29
million) to enable Pakistan to retain these cancelled funds in its portfolio (ICR, p. 36).

One of the most significant changes that affected the implementation and progress of the project was the
administrative decision of dividing the DoH into two departments in 2015: the Specialized Healthcare and
Medical Education Department and the Primary and Secondary Healthcare Department. The latter assumed the
overall responsibility for the project, supported by the Policy and Strategic Planning Unit (PSPU), initially named
the Punjab Health Sector Reform Program. This division caused the project to progress at a slower pace, and
some reforms, such as fiduciary, human resources, and M&E, were only partly implemented. There were
changes in some of the senior management and gaps in implementation capacity. With several people who
worked on the preparation of the PHSS gone, the high levels of commitment to the implementation of the Health
Roadmap between 2014-2018 reinforced a much higher focus on service delivery, away from the project's
planned management and structural reforms (ICR, p. 35).

The bifurcation of the DoH, the frequent changes in its leadership, and the Roadmap focus, along with the
limited disbursements, the delays in several activities, and the incomplete reform implementation, led to
considering cancellation of the project during the Quality Enhancement Review (QER) in early 2016. The
consensus was that given the high rates of stunting, the project would be restructured, and the priority would
become enhancing equity in service provision by ensuring that all the population of Punjab has equitable access
to basic MNCH and nutrition services (ICR, p. 37). As a consequence, to ensure the relevance of the overall
context, some related DLIs were dropped, with a reduction of the budget allocation of 57% (US$71.66 million to
US$30.6 million) for components 2 to 4. The remaining resources were redirected to MNCH (Component 1) and
nutrition interventions (Component 5). These two components eventually accounted for 66% of project costs
(ICR, p. 37).

The 2007 restructuring also added two new agencies to implement the new Component 5, the Integrated
Reproductive, Maternal/Neonatal, and Child Health Unit (IRMNCH) to provide health sector nutrition
interventions, and the multi-sectoral nutrition cell. Also, the Punjab Planning and Development Department
offered technical advice, evaluation, and coordination of multi-sectoral nutrition interventions. The division into
two departments made it even harder to implement the initially envisaged reforms under the PHSS. The creation
of three implementing agencies, with three Designated Accounts, gave them autonomy over their finances but
added complexity to their management (ICR, p. 37). After the July 2018 elections, the Planning and
Development Department did not allow the PSPU to enter new contracts for the remaining six months of the
project nor to incur any further expenditures. This decision resulted in the cancellation of the already negotiated
contract with UNICEF for US$4 million in nutrition commodities, which at the same time led to a complete
standstill of the project (ICR, p. 37).

Given the disruptions caused by change in strategy and priorities, and resulting staff turnover and unavailability
of funds at several levels, project efficiency is rated Modest.




Efficiency Rating


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is rated Substantial across the entire project, as the objectives continued to be
consistent with Bank and government strategies, and responsive to the needs of the country. Efficacy and
Efficiency were both rated Modest, based on numerous shortcomings and inefficiencies during
implementation. These ratings are consistent with significant shortcomings in the project's preparation and
implementation, producing an Outcome rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

As described in the ICR, the proposed Punjab Human Capital Project, under preparation, is expected to
continue supporting the development outcomes achieved by the Punjab Health Sector Reform project by
supporting the government's strategy to improve health performance, especially in maternal and child health
and nutrition outcomes, with a focus on service delivery. DfID is expected to continue to
support maternal/child health and nutrition activities. The government's sustained commitment to key health
outcomes to meet the SDGs and to improve the efficiency of health sector allocations would contribute to the
maintenance of the development outcomes. The goal is to reach a target for overall public health expenditure
of 3% of GDP by 2025, and to ground the 2019-2028 Punjab Health Sector Strategy in a focus on Universal
Health Coverage and quality of health care. The project's achievements in monitoring and evaluation, health
waste management planning, and some institutional and management advances will be essential for the
design and implementation of the new project.

The support to the PPIF for contracting out FP services at the community level and to the Punjab Healthcare
Commission, which issues licenses to both public and private providers, led to the improvement of quality
services in the private sector. The PPIF experience showed that there might be viable, more productive, and
less expensive alternatives to the provision of FP services that need to be reviewed and piloted. For

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



instance, FP needs to be fully integrated with overall health service provision in order to be more effective at
increasing demand. In addition, a woman-centered focus needs to be broadened to involve other family
members (husband and mother-in-law).

Significant staff changes put at risk the achievement of this project's objectives. A full-time project director
selected on a competitive basis, with strong expertise in project management, would ensure effectiveness
and sustainability. Also, key staff should be trained before implementation on monitoring processes and key
procurement rules and procedures.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  DfID, the Bank, and the government collaborated in the design and planning of the PHSS. The Bank
  and DfID adopted a common approach, using DLIs to support this project in alignment with the CPS and
  the PHSS. However, while the project design incorporated lessons learned from previous Bank
  engagements, focusing on developing institutional mechanisms and supporting management reforms
  (ICR, p. 34), the project became highly complex in relation to the operational and country contexts. Also,
  the team might not have sufficiently considered previous experiences in the country, bearing in
  mind existing time and institutional capacity constraints. For instance, 18 months for project preparation,
  with the Project Concept Review approved in May of 2013 (ICR, p. 33), was not enough time to evaluate
  the country’s capacity and context. Also, the time agreed for implementation, only four years, was very
  short considering the likely impact of two general elections. In addition, the implementing agency did not
  have enough capacity to manage a highly complex project. As the ICR mentioned, analytic work
  conducted during preparation concluded that "overall poor management and systemic weaknesses were
  the primary causes behind many of the failed healthcare initiatives and poor health outcomes," and that
  "there needed to be a clear provincial level health policy, implementation plan with clear targets,
  supported by deployed capacity and resources in order to advance the healthcare agenda in Punjab"
  (ICR, p. 33).

  The preparation team did not present an economic and financial analysis (ICR, p. 29). The overall project
  risk was rated as "Substantial," but mitigation measures were clearly inadequate as some of the identified
  risks had significant negative impact during implementation. Likewise, two critical issues not identified
  during the assessment had a negative effect: the lack of consensus on government innovation pilots, and
  the misalignment with intended project outcomes due to the strong focus on DLIs and the Health
  Roadmap (ICR, p. 34).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



 Across the project's lifetime, the Bank team was open to discussion, review, and redesign of the project
 and its components with every new government leadership, in alignment with the existing CPS and the
 PHSS. The Bank also identified and resolved threats to the achievement of relevant development
 outcomes proactively. During implementation, the Bank team raised concerns that an excessive focus on
 Roadmap indicators was developing a misalignment with the original reform program, limiting its scope
 significantly. Numerous shortcomings led to consideration of cancellation of the project during the QER in
 February 2016. Still, considering the progress made and the very high stunting ratings in the country, the
 agreement was to simplify the project with more focus on nutrition and service delivery. The Bank worked
 closely with the government to design the 2017 restructuring and add a new component, against the
 recommendations given during the QER. The restructuring took about two years, due in part to some WB
 team delays (ICR, p. 43). Creating a new component and establishing new implementing agencies added
 complexity to the process, causing more delays and complications with funds disbursements. The
 PDOs were not reviewed and aligned to the new component.

 Some decisions by the Bank regarding approval and payments of DLIs remained unclear. For instance, the
 Bank's response to the submission of the verification results for the last payment took four months, a period
 between January and April 2019; the DLI payment for the establishment of the PPIF took more than 21
 months after its achievement in July 2017. Furthermore, some decisions, such as the rejection of the media
 campaign or the payment of NGO contracts, were considered arbitrary (ICR, p. 43). Although there was
 good reporting by the Bank and preparation for the mid-term review and QER to discuss options for project
 restructuring, after mid-2016, the information available was not sufficient to provide information about the
 state of the project and clarify these decisions (ICR, p. 43).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project was the result of close collaboration between the Bank and DfID, using a new financing
 modality, a common reform framework, and a results-based approach. The project included two new
 mechanisms to be monitored, the performance-based contracting at the district level, and the requirement
 for third-party verification of DoH data. As noted in the ICR, the project turned out to be very complicated,
 even more so when a new component was added after restructuring. Overall, the objectives and project
 design were consistent with the goals of the PHSS and with the Bank’s CPS. The PDO indicators included
 measures of coverage, quality, utilization, and system performance, and 13 intermediate results
 indicators measured the performance of Components 1-3 (ICR, p. 37). However, the results framework and
 PDO indicators did not include measures for critical components such as the management reforms that
 were included as part of the original 15 DLIs. Therefore, the PDOs were not aligned with the government's
 request to support management and governance reforms and strengthen stewardship functions, as noted
 by the Bank team during a Quality at Entry Review. Most of the indicators measured performance in

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



 service delivery for women and children (ICR, p. 32). Baselines and targets were included for all indicators;
 however, in some of them, the sources of data were confusing and not coherent, making the results not
 comparable over time.

 The project envisioned improving the reform program's M&E system by strengthening the M&E cell in the
 DGHS office and integrating various vertical management information systems. Districts were to report
 monthly using DHIS, which was operational in Punjab. The third-party DLI assessment was to
 support monitoring and evaluation, and also to support regular HFAs for monitoring the implementation of
 the reforms in primary and secondary health facilities and providing inputs for the Quality Care Index.
 Lastly, the HFAs were to be instrumental for the improvement of accountability and transparency of health
 service provision.



b. M&E Implementation
  One important issue that had negative impact on M&E during implementation was excessive attention to
  the Health Roadmap indicators, with less attention to other indicators of importance for the monitoring of
  the PDO-level indicators and intermediate results indicators of the project. The processing and approval
  of the PC-1 document (a required government planning and approval document) for M&E took almost
  three years. The DGHS M&E office was not functional due to shortcomings with human resources.
  Moreover, the planned DHIS to generate data on administrative and operational activities of health
  facilities was not developed, the validation process was not strong enough to be useful, and data
  aggregation and analysis were not adequate.

  Although the results framework and baselines were updated during the life of the project, there were still
  some shortcomings; for instance, some baseline data were not internally consistent, and there were
  discrepancies between the restructuring paper and the legal amendment for some indicator targets that
  were not addressed during the 2017 restructuring.

  The project developed a series of third-party evaluations, instrumental in identifying gaps and providing
  recommendations for reform of the health system. For example, the assessments to verify the
  achievement of DLIs produced information and data for M&E. Other assessments that provided essential
  findings were: the third-party evaluations of the comprehensive EmONC services in DHQs, the review of
  the contraceptive supplies and FP visits, a review of the complaint management system in secondary
  healthcare facilities, and the review of the healthcare waste management system in DHQs and THQs.
  Third-party evaluation of the LHW program assessed its performance and identified points for
  improvement.



c. M&E Utilization
  The third-party validation consultants, the assessment of the LHW Program, and the HFA provided vital
  information to assist the government in making improvements to service delivery. Also, the Policy and
  Strategic Planning Unit (PSPU) reported that the log frame matrix and assessments were fundamental
  to monitoring project activities, providing context and data that supported decision making on
  effectiveness and functionality of the system. This information provided valuable inputs for the




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



  preparation of the proposed Human Capital Project to continue supporting development outcomes
  related to coverage and utilization of quality health and nutrition services.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered safeguard policy OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment due to the management of
   medical waste generated at health facilities in Punjab, the absence of scientific disposal methods, and the
   renovation of existing physical infrastructure. The project was classified as Category B. An EMWMP was to
   help in reducing the risk of infection and safety and health hazards. The EMWMP also outlined
   arrangements for internal and external monitoring, capacity building needs, awareness among medical
   professionals and communities, and budgetary arrangements for implementation. The ICR (pp. 39-40)
   described the different levels of responsibility for the coordination of the implementation of the EMWMP.

   Reporting systems were designed, and regular training on health and medical waste was organized in all 57
   hospitals. The DLI related to the implementation of environmental health and medical waste
   management was achieved. All 57 hospitals at the DHQ and THQ levels implemented and followed the
   standard protocols and maintained waste audit records through three color-coded registers. A separate
   budget code was created in each hospital management budget to ensure the continuous supply of funds,
   healthcare supplies, and maintenance. An online management information system (MIS) for hospital waste
   was established. A waste collection firm prepared the MIS and recorded the information in health care
   facilities, and a third-party firm reported satisfactory implementation of hospital waste management.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management

   The ICR (pp. 40-41) described the financial accounting, auditing, and reporting of the project as
   moderately satisfactory in terms of adequacy and consistency with the Bank financial management
   guidelines. The ICR also reported that the interim unaudited financial reports were received on time, audit
   reports were acceptable, and the staff suitable. The PSPU consolidated financial reporting under the
   project with the other two agencies, maintaining financial management responsibility for the funds
   disbursed to it. It was recommended that the financial management specialist would remain as part of the
   team until the end of the grace period to strengthen internal controls and standardization of documentation;
   however, this recommendation was not followed. Also, despite the extension of the grace period to mid-
   June, 2019, the three Designated Accounts were still not closed, and the government had not returned
   unused funds.




                                                                                                  Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



   There were no specific PC-1 to cover the DLIs' cost; the departments had to use their budgets to fund
   those activities needed to achieve the DLIs. For example, the PSPU used district budgets and the TA
   component. The ICR described different ways the DoH obtained funds for DLI activities.

   After 2017, changes in the government system, such as the introduction of the Designated Accounts’
   revalidation, led to delays and a slowdown of disbursements. The Borrower’s ICR noted that the project
   was stopped twice and had to be revalidated, which affected the progress of the project significantly,
   leading to reduced efficacy and efficiency.

   The PSPU estimated that approximately 45% of its time was not spent on implementation, and that over
   the project period, 28.5 months were spent purely on bureaucratic delays without funds to operate. For
   instance, delays in opening the new Designated Accounts in 2017 left no funds available for two units to
   implement the new Component 5, while the Finance Department decided to freeze all donor funding in
   2018 by declaring all donor funds to be part of a "lapsable fund." Donor funding had been part of a "non-
   lapsable fund" before (ICR, p. 31).



   Procurement

   At project preparation, the Bank and DfID designed implementation arrangements and risk mitigation
   measures related to procurement, based on the results of a joint assessment of procurement capacity and
   the existing system throughout different levels. Also, the Bank organized procurement training sessions,
   some of them with DfID.

   Procurement was part of the DoH administrative structure, but for Components 4 and 5, these activities
   were developed by separate staff under the PSPU, IRMNCH, and MNCH. Overall, the implementing
   entities followed Bank procurement guidelines. However, the ICR (p. 41) described some shortcomings
   related to the DoH's staff capacity, such as a lack of skills, training, and knowledge of the public
   procurement rules. In the other units, the capacity of staff was adequate, but there were frequent changes
   and delays in the procurement plan. The procurement cell’s objective of building capacity was not
   achieved, as the cell was burdened with all government procurement for DoH.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                  Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



                                  Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                  Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                  Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                                  Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                                                                    Shortcomings in the design,
Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Modest                      implementation, and utilization of
                                                                                    M&E are noted.
Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 45) offered several useful lessons, including the following adapted by IEG:

        The engagement and coordination of development partners can ensure that agreed
         outcomes are pursued consistently. In this case, different priorities regarding M&E caused
         misalignment with original project objectives and distance between partners.
        Intricate project designs, particularly reform-oriented, have a better chance of success if they
         fully address the existing technical capacity, commitment, and challenging contexts. In this
         case, the Bank team did not consider the implementation performance experience that
         several health and nutrition projects had faced in the past, most notably the lack of
         capacity in the implementing agency to manage such a complex project.
        Projects using the DLI modality require that governments ensure adequate allocation of
         resources to fund DLI activities. In this case, there was no specific PC1 for the achievement
         of the DLIs, causing each department to use limited budget from the existing PC1 to meet
         the objective.
        When a country's commitment to an original project design changes, timely restructuring can
         align a project's PDOs, indicators, inputs, and targets with the new priorities and context. In
         this case, two elections and a new government led to a change in the focus of the project,
         canceling some indicators related to institutional strengthening and creating a new
         component to improve the delivery of nutrition and family planning services.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a comprehensive narrative of the project’s experience. It was result-oriented and candid. The
evidence presented was well referenced, with annexes that included relevant information to support the
description and analysis of the project's achievements. The ICR was internally consistent and followed
guidelines. However, the theory of change, as presented, was confusing: the links between outputs, outcomes,
and objectives were not clear. For example, there were not objectives and outcomes related to the institutional
reform, and the links between outputs, outcomes, and objectives overlapped with the DLI indicators. For this

                                                                                                      Page 23 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Punjab Health Sector Reform Project (P123394)



reason, the analysis of efficacy did not follow a clear storyline. Also, the efficiency section did not include an
economic and financial analysis. While the ICR's lessons were insightful, they were not tightly linked to the
description of project experiences and the narrative of the challenges that the project faced, such as the
division of agencies, the change in financial management, the impact of frequent changes in leadership and
management staff, or the successful management of safeguards.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 24 of 24
