     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ:Teacher Education Improvement Project (P111394)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022006

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P111394                                   GZ:Teacher Education Improvement Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 West Bank and Gaza                        Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-97315,TF-A1241                        30-Jun-2019                                            8,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Jun-2010                              30-Jun-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            8,000,000.00                                    8,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             8,000,000.00                                    8,000,000.00

 Actual                                         8,000,000.00                                    8,000,000.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz        Judyth L. Twigg               Joy Behrens                   IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Trust Fund Grant Agreement (page 6) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 5),
   the project objective was as follows:

           To improve the competencies and skills of class teachers teaching grades one to four in West
           Bank and Gaza thereby contributing to enhancing student learning in primary schools.



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ:Teacher Education Improvement Project (P111394)




   Additional Financing (AF) was approved for the project in order to scale up successful activities; key output
   and outcome targets were revised upward accordingly. Because of the expanded scope of the project, the
   split rating methodology is not applicable.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Strengthening “School-based” Practice of Pre-service Teacher Education Programs -
   PRESET (Appraisal: US$ 2.5 million; AF: US$ 1.2 million; Actual: US$ 3.6 million): This component aimed
   to improve the quality of graduates of teacher education programs by reforming and strengthening the
   school experience component of their studies, thus providing student teachers with effective professional
   learning experiences. The program was to be implemented in two phases, initially targeting a few higher
   education institutions to test the approach, then scaling up to all teacher education providers. Activities
   included: technical assistance to design and implement school-based practice programs using international
   good practices; training to staff at higher education institutions to implement the programs; upgrading
   teaching materials; and data collection/analysis for evaluation.

   2. Upgrading Academic and Professional Teaching Qualifications of Under-qualified Class Teachers -
   INSET (Appraisal: US$ 2.2 million; AF: US$ 1.4 million; Actual: US$ 3.5 million): This component aimed to
   upgrade the skills and competencies of approximately 3,500 underqualified teachers (out of a total of 4,400
   in West Bank and Gaza) in grades one through four, to meet new standards for teacher certification.
   Activities included: technical assistance in assessing competencies and skills of current teachers; delivery
   of training modules to upgrade skills; and communication campaigns to inform unqualified teachers about
   the program.

   3. Project Management and Implementation Support (Appraisal: US$ 350,000; AF: US$420,000; Actual:
   US$894,000): This component aimed to support operations of the project implementation unit in the
   Department of Supervision and Qualification, as well as the National Institute for Education Training.

   The AF added the development of accreditation processes through the Accreditation and Quality Assurance
   Commission (AQAC), in order to validate the PRESET programs as per international standards and ensure
   the sustainability of the quality and relevance. Activities included: development of new courses in subject
   pedagogy; expansion of the mentor training program; portfolio development for evidence-based evaluation
   and production of a handbook; and finalization of a professional development index to inform and regulate
   the entire teaching career.



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ:Teacher Education Improvement Project (P111394)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

         The project cost at appraisal was US$ 5.0 million. AF revised the appraised cost to US$8.0 million,
           which disbursed in its entirety.



   Financing

         The project was financed entirely by Trust Fund grants in the amounts of US$5.0 million and US$
           3.0 million.



   Borrower contribution

         There was no planned borrower contribution.



   Dates

         November 2015: AF was approved, in response to events of 2014 (insecurity and blockade) that
           negatively impacted the fiscal situation for the education sector. The AF was also intended to scale
           up activities, due to promising progress thus far. Outcome targets were increased in accordance
           with the scale-up. Funds were also reallocated to increase financing for Component 2. The project
           closing date was extended from June 2015 to November 2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
As part of ongoing efforts to create a future Palestinian state, the governing Palestinian Authority (PA) has
put forth national goals to achieve economic independence, through developing domestic capacities and
resources. Thus, improved quality of the education system has been a focus area of the PA, which has
provided significant budget support and directed donor investment to the education sector. At the time of
project appraisal, despite the unstable political situation, enrollment in basic education was almost
universal, and the gross enrollment rate for secondary education was nearly 80%. Access to education was
mostly equitable, and the national curriculum had been developed. However, demographic shifts were
overcrowding the system, and attendance/non-completion of basic education were emerging problems.
Therefore, the Ministry of Education and Higher Education (MOEHE) prepared an education sector plan
(FY 2008-12) that shifted from a focus on access to a focus on quality, with reform of teacher education
as a critical element to improving quality. Teacher education programs at the time had an "outdated and


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GZ:Teacher Education Improvement Project (P111394)



               over-theoretical insufficient focus on the practicalities of actual teaching and inadequate teaching practice
               arrangements" (PAD, page 3).

               The Bank Interim Strategy in effect at the time of project appraisal/approval (FY08-10) included Support to
               Human Development in Education as one of two key pillars (as quoted in the PAD, original document could
               not be located in the system). The Bank's subsequent Assistance Strategies in effect during the middle of
               the project period (FY 12-14 and FY15-16) had limited references to basic education quality, instead
               shifting focus to higher education with linkages to the labor market. The Bank's Assistance Strategy at
               project closing (FY2018-21) identified building skills for the private sector's labor market needs, via the
               education system, as a key upstream activity for outcomes in increased private sector investment and job
               creation. However, there were no explicit indicators or outcomes directly linked to basic education quality.

               Relevance of the objectives is rated Substantial based on strong alignment with country
               conditions, although the Bank strategies had less explicit focus on basic education quality.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the competencies and skills of class teachers teaching grades one to four in West Bank and Gaza

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was overall sound, with the two main project components (strengthening school-based
                             training practicums for new teachers and upgrading qualifications of unqualified teachers) addressing both
                             new cohorts and current inadequately trained cohorts of teachers, likely to contribute to the intermediate
                             outcome of improved teacher competencies. This outcome, in turn, was likely to lead to the broader goal to
                             improve student learning.

                             Improved competencies and skills - "readiness to teach" - were defined as having professional values and
                             practices (i.e. consistent treatment and respect for students, positive attitudes, responsibility for performance),
                             professional knowledge and understanding of academic content, and professional skills and application (i.e.
                             setting learning objectives, managing time, planning lessons).

                             Outputs

                                        Development of the Readiness to Teach Index (RTTI), which was later expanded and refined into the
                                         Palestinian Teacher Professional Development Index (PTPDI). The PTPDI is a multipurpose-

                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ:Teacher Education Improvement Project (P111394)



         competency framework and policy tool linking pre-service and in-service professional development
         programs under one harmonized and comprehensive competency-based performance framework.
         The PTPDI included a clear description of the skills involved at each stage of planning for teaching
         and learning, teaching to facilitate learning, and assessing and reporting learning progress and
         outcomes. The PTPDI represented the first teacher competency-based index in the Middle East
         region aimed at promoting a new culture of teacher performance and performance evaluation.
        Redesign of pre-service training programs, including development of handbooks and extension of the
         teaching practicum from four weeks to 14 weeks.
        Development of a student teacher mentorship scheme, which was implemented in 110 schools with
         439 mentors. 33% of classroom teachers were engaged in mentoring student teachers (target: 33%).
        Development of a portfolio for evidence-based evaluation of student teachers.
        Development of an accreditation framework, including tools/procedures for application to teacher
         education programs. Although there were some initial delays in implementing the accreditation
         process, due to lack of leadership at the AQAC, by project closing all six participating institutions had
         received accreditation. Of these, five received unconditional accreditation, while the sixth program is
         working on implementing the panel’s recommendations in order to secure full accreditation.
        Development of nine new modules for core curriculum areas, which integrated content knowledge and
         pedagogical knowledge in accordance with international good practices. New modules included
         special education/inclusion and cross-curricular learning.
        Training of 167 INSET trainers.
        Formation of communities of practice and networks of participating teachers.
        Evaluative studies, including a series of classroom observations to assess teacher competencies and
         an end-of-project report that used qualitative evaluation techniques to assess project impact.

Outcomes

      In the pre-service training program (PRESET), the percent of class teachers graduating from teacher
       education and licensing programs in participating higher education institutions with readiness-to-teach
       scores above 70% was 96%. This surpassed the original target of 70% and the revised target of 80%.
       2,352 teachers participated in PRESET during the project period, of whom 1,313 completed the
       training and graduated with the required qualifications, while the remaining 1,039 were still undergoing
       training at the time of ICR preparation.
      In the in-service training program (INSET), the percent of class teachers graduating with readiness-to-
       teach scores above 70% was 91.6%. This surpassed the original target of 70% and the revised target
       of 80%. 1,976 teachers participated in INSET (target: 1,800).
      The proportion of qualified class teachers/total number of class teachers increased from 39% in 2010
       to 91.6% in 2019. This surpassed the target of 80%.
      79% of beneficiaries (PRESET and INSET participants) felt project investments reflected their needs
       (i.e. satisfaction with impact, satisfaction with mentors). This fell short of the target of 88%.

In addition,

      In the PRESET program, according to two representative samples of student teachers observed, new
         teachers having finished practicum 5 showed improved scores in all competences included in the
         observation form except in two areas. In six of those areas of improved competences, there was a


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ:Teacher Education Improvement Project (P111394)



         statistically significant difference (to .05) between pre-/post- intervention observation results. In
         INSET, there were nine areas of competencies where improvements were statistically significant.
        The project was awarded the prestigious Times Higher Education Award for International Impact in
         2018 in recognition of the "groundbreaking work undertaken in the project and the potential to
         replicate its strategic approach in other countries." Also, according to the ICR (page 18), the impact of
         the project "has been noted by other countries and has been referenced in other teacher reform
         programs. Vietnam presented [the project] as a model of effective reform in a major policy document
         while an OECD (2014) review of education in Egypt also cited it as a model of good practice."

Achievement is rated High based on surpassing of targets for indicators on improved teacher competencies.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To contribute to enhancing student learning in primary schools

Rationale
Outputs

See outputs reported above under Objective 1.



Outcomes

        According to the end-of-project evaluation report conducted by an international consulting firm,
         teachers could identify key differences in their pupils as a result of changes that they had made in
         their teaching. This included: i) pupils cooperating and collaborating more; ii) pupils expressing their
         ideas and asking more questions; iii) an increase in pupils’ confidence; iv) pupils being more creative;
         v) pupils being more interested and engaged; and vi) improved performance of students. The ICR did
         not describe or provide specific data that supported these findings. (The ICR did list the end-of-project
         evaluation report in a footnote and in the references, but no link or other means of access to the report
         was provided.)
        The ICR (page 23) noted that the country has not participated in international testing since 2014 and
         that the Early Grade Reading Assessment was conducted in 2013, but only in the West Bank with a
         non-representative sample of students. A national assessment system for Grade 5 was implemented
         only starting in 2017. Therefore, data on student learning outcomes is not available.

Achievement is rated Modest based on insufficient evidence on improved student learning.



Rating
                                                                                                     Page 6 of 13
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GZ:Teacher Education Improvement Project (P111394)



                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial based on High achievement of the first objective to improve
                            competencies and skills of class teachers, with a Modest rating of achievement of the second objective -- to
                            contribute to enhancing student learning -- based on insufficient data.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The economic analysis at appraisal of the original project did not include quantitative analysis, but instead
   discussed potential efficiency gains for the education sector as a whole, due to investments in the quality of
   primary education (leading to reduced repetition and drop-out rates) and also increased earning potential for
   graduating students.

   The economic analysis at completion (Annex 4) did include a rate of return analysis as well as a unit cost
   comparison. The rate of return analysis compared private monetary returns to students (who benefited from
   improved teacher instruction) to direct project costs. An estimated 91,400 primary school students benefited
   from instruction by a project-trained teacher. The "effect size" is based on assumptions related to improved
   student learning and estimated increase in future earnings. The estimated net present value was US$81.9
   million and the internal rate of return was 17 percent. For the latter, even with conservative assumptions of
   "effect size" on student performance/learning at 0.1 standard deviations and the number of beneficiaries at a
   quarter of students who were taught by project-trained teachers for two or more years, the project still yielded an
   IRR of 10 percent. The ICR suggested that, as extra benefits were not captured in this quantitative analysis
   (such as increased employability of graduates from the school system, increased demand for Palestinian-trained
   teachers in other countries, enhanced teacher well-being, reduction in teacher turnover, and even improved
   health outcomes and reductions in crime), the impact may likely be even higher.

   The unit costs of implementing the INSET program compared favorably to similar interventions in other
   countries. The unit cost per teacher per day of face-to-face training, for the original project, was US$ 23, while
   the unit cost for the AF period was US$22. This compared favorably to similar interventions implemented by the
   Bank and an international NGO: Ghana: US$101/day; Lebanon: US$57/day; Pakistan: US$62/day; Iraq:
   US$186/day.

   With regard to implementation efficiency, the project outputs and outcomes exceeded targets, including the
   expanded targets in the AF. The project closing date extension from 2015 was due to the AF only; both original

                                                                                                                             Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GZ:Teacher Education Improvement Project (P111394)



project activities and AF project activities were completed within their respective time periods. There were no
fiduciary problems that could have led to implementation inefficiencies. According to the ICR, costs of project
preparation and implementation support remained low ($125,000 for preparation and an average $75,000 for
supervision per year). There were some minor implementation efficiencies, such as delays in signing contract
approvals, disruptions caused by transfer of mentors, transition in the consultancy providing technical assistance
for Component 2, and delays in the start of the accreditation program; however, these were mostly resolved
during the AF period.

Based on the favorable economic analyses and implementation efficiencies, Efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              17.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objectives is rated Substantial based on strong alignment with country conditions, although the
Bank strategies had less explicit focus on basic education quality. Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial based on
High achievement of the first objective to improve competencies and skills of class teachers, but Modest
achievement of the second objective (to contribute to enhancing student learning) due to lack of specific data on
achievements. Efficiency is rated Substantial based on the favorable economic analyses and implementation
efficiencies.

Overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory based on insufficient evidence of outcomes achieved for the
objective to contribute to enhancing student learning, as the modest achievement of that objective is indicative
of moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GZ:Teacher Education Improvement Project (P111394)




The project support the institutionalization of key programs - PRESET, INSET, accreditation, and teacher
professional development through PTPDI - all of which appear strongly likely to be sustained as policy
reforms/institutional frameworks. However, there remains some uncertainty with regards to financial
sustainability. PRESET activities are likely to be sustained, as they are financed by traditional sources such
as student tuition and revenues from teacher institutions. However, INSET and AQAC rely on MOEHE
budget support, which in turn is heavily dependent on donor support. The ICR also noted some reluctance
on the part of the MOEHE to put in place policies and measures regarding the career promotion of teachers,
due to the politically sensitive nature of such interventions.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank has played an active role in the education sector, through the donor Education Sector Working
  Group, and has helped to draw attention to issues of quality. Through policy dialogue, the Bank has
  helped to cultivate strong ownership by the MOEHE and higher education institutions over the policy
  goals of the project. The lengthy preparation period, almost two years, resulted in a solid consensus
  among most stakeholders, a detailed plan of action, continuous dialogue, and transparency, all of which
  helped to ensure project effectiveness. The risk assessment rated overall risk as High, due to
  the unstable political and security situation, and to potential deterioration of operational conditions in
  Gaza (compared to the West Bank). The mitigation measures adequately focused on flexibility in project
  design and supervision arrangements to respond to the risks. The ICR noted one minor shortcoming in
  the pilot phase, the lack of an awareness campaign (among school principals, district supervisors, and
  targeted unqualified teachers), which could have helped to develop a common understanding of the
  sector reforms and prevent some initial implementation delays for INSET activities.

  The results framework was simple and straightforward, with a strong M&E plan to track implementation
  progress and evaluate various aspects of the project to inform implementation and to measure impact;
  however, a key shortcoming was the lack of indicators to measure the project objective to
  enhance student learning.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The political and security situation in West Bank and Gaza posed ongoing challenges throughout the
 project period, including budget constraints, suspension of teacher pay, teacher strikes, and travel
 restrictions. In particular, the limitations on travel to and from Gaza led to relocation of project workshops,
 cancellation of travel permits for study tours, and limiting of contact with project personnel in Gaza to
 videoconferencing only. Also, there were five changes of Ministers of MOEHE in the period 2008-2019,
 which led to some delays in signing of contract approvals for goods and TA, although the long tenure of

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ:Teacher Education Improvement Project (P111394)



 the Deputy Minister of MOEHE helped to ensure that there was an effective champion and line manager for
 the duration of the project.

 The Bank team used the opportunity of project restructuring and AF to further cement achievements of
 original project, as well as to refine the project design based on lessons learned (lessons on the focus on
 class teachers vs. subject teachers, the subject-based vs. integrated approach to teaching and learning,
 logistical issues with mentors transferring to other schools and taking on additional workloads with
 mentoring responsibilities, lack of supervision time to observe practicum classes). However, the ICR
 reported (page 10) that the project was seen to be "a very influential project by MOEHE senior officials as it
 proved to be of great impact amongst the different players in the education sector. In fact, [the project] had
 led other donors to invest in the professional development of in-service teachers, chief among which was
 the USAID parallel project for lower secondary teachers (grades 5 to 10)." There was satisfactory fiduciary
 performance throughout the project period with no problems reported, as well as strong M&E
 implementation of both project monitoring and evaluative activities.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design included project monitoring to track progress as well as evaluative studies to assess
 impact. The results framework was simple and straightforward, with the indicators clearly linked to project
 outputs and intended outcomes. One important shortcoming was that despite the inclusion of "enhanced
 student learning" in the project objective statement, there were no indicators on student learning in the
 results framework.

 Several modifications were made to the results framework at the time of project restructuring, to further
 refine wording and measurement of indicators. Evaluative studies included two sets of internally
 administered evaluation studies of PRESET and INSET, the first one covering the pilot period (2010-2015),
 and the second covering the AF (2016-2019) (satisfaction questionnaires, focus groups, classroom
 observations, teacher performance evaluations); there was also an external impact evaluation study
 covering the entire project period.



b. M&E Implementation
  Implementation progress was regularly tracked through indicators that were updated using three sources
  of information: the student registries of the PRESET and INSET training institutions, data from
  satisfaction surveys administered by the MOEHE, and AQAC’s accreditation process. Evaluation studies
  were conducted as planned. Implementation capacity was supported through the addition of a part-time

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ:Teacher Education Improvement Project (P111394)



  M&E Officer responsible for updating project monitoring information, and also TA to help MOEHE carry
  out the internally-managed impact studies.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (page 24), the following were examples of use of M&E: project monitoring data and
  initial impact studies informed preparation of the AF; and the project introduced the concept of evidence
  portfolios as effective instruments for self-assessment.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "C" project, and therefore no environmental
   assessment was required. No other safeguard policies were triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: Financial management (FM) performance was rated as satisfactory by all
   supervision missions. The ICR (page 25) stated that the project coordination unit maintained a sound FM
   system that was able to generate accurate and timely financial information including on budgeting, internal
   controls, accounting, fund flows, external auditing, and financial reporting. Interim financial reports were
   prepared and submitted regularly, and eight audit reports were undertaken during the project period,
   all unqualified. One minor issue noted by the ICR was the delay in some payments caused by occasional
   requirement changes from the Ministry of Finance.

   Procurement: Procurement performance was rated satisfactory by all supervision missions. The project
   procurement unit adhered to Bank procurement procedures, and no major issues were identified during the
   implementation support missions. Eight annual ex-post procurement reviews were carried out, concluding
   that procurement was generally carried out in compliance with Bank Procurement Guidelines and Grant
   Agreements with no incidence of corruption.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GZ:Teacher Education Improvement Project (P111394)




d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   Overall outcome is rated
                                                                                   Moderately Satisfactory based
                                                                                   on insufficient evidence of
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   outcomes achieved for the
                                                                                   objective to contribute to
                                                                                   enhancing student learning.
                                                                                   Quality at Entry is rated
                                                                                   Moderately Satisfactory due to
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   shortcomings in the results
                                                                                   framework.
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 28-29) and adapted by IEG:

        The presence of a committed leader at the Deputy Minister level can counter any negative
         impact from multiple changes in Ministers of Education due to geo-political transitions. In the
         case of this project, the Deputy Minister served a long tenure during the lengthy project
         period, despite five changes of Minister of Education, championed the project concept, and
         governed over the various implementing entities, supported by an effective project
         coordination unit.

        A teacher accreditation framework/process can serve to harmonize the work of different
         stakeholders in the teacher education sector. In the case of this project, the accreditation
         process included establishing formal relationships among teacher education
         institutions, mentor schools, and mentee schools, as well as coordinating the work of
         different units within the Ministry of Education.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No



                                                                                                        Page 12 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ:Teacher Education Improvement Project (P111394)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The theory of change and sound, with the results framework simple and straightforward given the fragile
environment. The ICR was strongly results-oriented, notable for the high quality of evidence that went beyond
the original results framework (i.e. reporting data on actual improved scores on teaching performance). One
shortcoming was the minimal discussion of the lack of indicators to measure the project objective to "contribute
to enhancing student learning." Reporting on M&E implementation and utilization was strong, despite the lack
of data on student learning outcomes. The analysis of efficiency was of good quality, offering both quantitative
analyses and discussion of project implementation efficiencies. Lessons were specific and clearly derived from
project experience.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 13
