     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Access with Quality to Higher Educa. (P145782)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0021883

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P145782                                    CO Access with Quality to Higher Educa.

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Colombia                                   Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83540                                 30-Jun-2019                                       200,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 01-Apr-2014                                15-Mar-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           200,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                            200,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                        200,000,000.00                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Salim J. Habayeb             Joy Behrens                   IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (page 5), the objective of the Project was “to increase student enrollment,
   graduation and equity in higher education, by: (a) increasing the number of ACCES Student Loans and the
   ACCES Program's focus on students from disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds and in quality higher
   education institutions and programs; and (b) enhancing the Borrower's institutional capacity.




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Access with Quality to Higher Educa. (P145782)



   The Borrower’s institutional capacity refers to Colombia’s student loan agency, Instituto Colombiano de
   Credito Educativo y Estudios Tecnicos en el Exterior (ICETEX).

   Achievement of project objectives will be assessed separately by “increasing the number of ACCES Student
   Loans and the ACCES Program's focus on students from disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds and in
   quality higher education institutions and programs” applied separately to student enrollment, graduation, and
   equity in higher education. “Enhancing the Borrower’s institutional capacity” will be assessed as an output
   supporting each of the three objectives of enrollment, graduation, and equity.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had two components:

   Component 1: Student Loans (estimated cost at appraisal and actual cost: total cost – US$424
   million; IBRD - US$200 million; ICETEX – US$135 million; Government – US$89 million). The
   component was to increase student enrollment and graduation and improve equity in higher
   education by focusing ACCES loans on students from socioeconomically disadvantaged
   backgrounds and quality higher education institutions and programs. It would finance provision of
   ACCES student loans to eligible students to finance their tuition and/or subsistence in eligible
   Higher Education Institutions to pursue undergraduate degrees through both new loans and/or
   loan renewals for continuing students.

   Component 2: Institutional Strengthening (estimated cost at appraisal and actual cost: total
   cost US$12 million; ICETEX – US$12 million. IBRD did not participate in the financing of this
   component). The component was to strengthen ICETEX's management practices, explore further
   diversification of financing sources and carry out an impact evaluation in order to enhance
   ICETEX's ability to increase student enrollment and graduation and improve equity in higher
   education. It had four sub-components:

   Subcomponent 2.1: Strengthening ICETEX's loan administration and portfolio management by (i)
   developing differentiated collection strategies based on portfolio risks, and (ii) upgrading of
   information systems (hardware and software).

   Subcomponent 2.2: Strengthening ICETEX's capacity to manage its ACCES program through
   using scorecards and supervising the implementation of contracts with higher education institution.

   Subcomponent 2.3: Provision of support for ICETEX's diversification of financial resources
   through, inter alia, the carrying out of: (i) studies, including on alternatives to expand its funding
   sources and to develop an endowment fund, and on partnerships with the private sector; and (ii)
   fundraising activities.



                                                                                                        Page 2 of 13
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         CO Access with Quality to Higher Educa. (P145782)



                       Subcomponent 2.4: (i) The carrying out of: (i) impact evaluations of ICETEX's student loans; (ii)
                       tracer studies to track employment of graduates of higher education institutions that had received
                       student loans provided by the Borrower, including ACCES student loans; and (ii) the provision of
                       support for ICETEX's overall Project coordination, implementation, and monitoring including, inter
                       alia, the carrying out of audits.

e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
                       Project cost: The original and actual total project costs were US$436 million.

                       Financing: The project was financed by a US$200 million IBRD Loan; and by ICETEX with a contribution of
                       US$147 million, as originally planned.

                       Borrower contribution: The Borrower provided US$89 million.

                       Dates: The project was approved on April 1, 2014, with a Closing Date of June 30, 2019. It became
                       effective on January 28, 2015. With the Bank loan fully disbursed and project-related activities completed
                       ahead of schedule (the last disbursement on the IBRD Loan was made in January 2017, and the
                       completion and delivery of the project’s impact evaluation was made in May 2018), the project was closed
                       on March 15, 2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Project objectives are relevant to the country situation, government policy and Bank strategy. The
emphasis on closing access and quality gaps addresses existing inequalities in a higher education system
with high enrollment and graduation rates but strong distinctions between regions and among ethnic
groups; and that emphasis is aligned with Colombia’s national development strategy. The project also
continues a long engagement in higher education by the Bank with ICETEX and the government: starting in
2002 with an Access to Higher Education Loan, and continuing in 2008 with phase one of an Adaptable
Program Loan and now the project under review. The project objectives are aligned with the Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) FY16-FY21, where it contributes to the second out of three pillars -
Enhancing Social Inclusion and Mobility through Improved Service Delivery. Specifically, project objectives
remained generally consistent with CPF Objective 4 "Improved Access and Quality of Education". In terms
of improved quality, the CPS noted that the Bank will shift its support towards education quality and
integration into labor markets, and emphasized education quality from early childhood through tertiary
levels. The project did not explicitly include a quality improvement objective, but it had reasonably assumed
that favoring enrollment in accredited Higher Education Institutions (HEI) would lead to improved education
for enrollees, although the stipulation linking student loans to accredited HEIs was abolished in July,
2018. The ICR itself stated that future projects should explicitly include quality as a key development
objective (ICR, p. 25). It also noted (ICR, p.11) that the additional financing (P166177) which was effective
since 2019 under PACES Project provided US$320 million to improve the quality of tertiary education.


Rating Relevance TBL




                                                                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   CO Access with Quality to Higher Educa. (P145782)



               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To increase STUDENT ENROLLMENT in higher education, by (a) increasing the number of ACCES Student
                Loans and the ACCES Program's focus on students from disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds and in
                quality higher education institutions and programs; and (b) enhancing ICETEX's institutional capacity.

                Rationale
                This objective was to be achieved by expanding tertiary education for vulnerable students and reducing their
                financial barriers to entry by increasing the number of ACCES student loans and lowering the cost of
                attending and remaining in higher education institution.

                Supporting achievement of this objective (as well as achievement of Objectives 2 and 3 below) were
                measures to improve ICETEX’s institutional knowledge base, modernize information technologies, and
                improve its financial management and administration of loans. The ICR reported the following achievements
                regarding the institutional capacity of ICETEX:

                Financial sustainability. ICETEX’s assets under management increased, achieving all targets; and a AAA
                credit rating was maintained.

                Financial innovation. ICETEX pursued legislation and regulatory changes to introduce new financial
                products: (i) successfully introducing policy for investing resources in dormant accounts; (ii) successfully
                pursued the approval of the regulatory framework for income-contingent loans for financing higher education;
                (iii) advanced regulations for opening of tax-incentivized savings accounts for children’s university studies;
                and (iv) advanced the setting up a fund to collect private sector donations to facilitate access to higher
                education.

                Loan administration. With adjustments to billing and collection procedures, the non-performing loan ratio
                went from 16.1 percent in 2012 to 8.17 percent in 2017.

                Information systems upgrade. The implementation of a strategy to improve information technologies in
                ICETEX, which should allow for more agile internal operations, better information management, and more
                responsive service to students.

                Corporate governance. In collaboration with the International Finance Corporation, a diagnosis and an action
                plan was developed to improve ICETEX’s corporate governance structure, and is currently being
                implemented.




                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CO Access with Quality to Higher Educa. (P145782)



Higher education institutions’ support. ICETEX undertakes regular visits to 178 universities to support
students in managing their loans, compared to a target of 90 universities.



Drawing on an improved ICETEX, Objective 1 was to be achieved by increasing the number of ACCESS
student loans and decreasing the financial burden of attending and remaining in higher education.



Outcome:

The number of students enrolled in undergraduate degree programs and professional technical ones rose
from a baseline of 1.84 million students in 2012 to 2.24 million students in 2017, almost achieving the target
of 2.28 million students.

The ICR reports the following intermediate results related to this outcome:

      Achievements regarding ICETEX institutional capacity (listed above).
      The ACCES program improved the likelihood that a beneficiary student would enroll in college by 20
       percent (exceeding more modest performance in other Latin America countries).
      The overall number of ACCES loans increase by less than targeted: the number of new loans
       decreased from an average of 40,000 at project preparation to about 20,300 in 2018, compared to an
       expected 44,000; while the number of ACCES student loan renewals rose from 158,000 to 186,000,
       compared to a target of 218,000, i.e. reaching only 47 percent of the target. The ICR suggests this
       was related to an increase in the average cost of loans. The cost of loans per student rose both
       because a higher proportion of loans was going to students accepted to expensive, high-quality
       institutions, as well as because of increases in tuition costs in Colombia across educational
       institutions.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase STUDENT GRADUATION from higher education, by (a) increasing the number of ACCES
Student Loans and the ACCES Program's focus on students from disadvantaged socioeconomic
backgrounds and in quality higher education institutions and programs; and (b) enhancing ICETEX's
institutional capacity.

Rationale
This objective was to be achieved by lowering the cost of attending and remaining in higher education;
increasing enrollment in accredited Higher Education Institutions and programs, and increasing the proportion

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CO Access with Quality to Higher Educa. (P145782)



of high-ability students. Supporting achievement of this objective were the measures to improve ICETEX’s
institutional knowledge base, modernize information technologies, and improve its financial management and
administration of loans listed under Objective 1 above.



Outcome: Graduation numbers grew from 241,000 in 2012 to 365,000 in 2017, almost achieving the target of
375,000.

The ICR reports the following intermediate results related to this outcome:

      Achievements regarding institutional capacity of ICETEX, listed under Objective 1 above.
      The average graduation rate rose from 4.7 percent during the decade preceding the project to 6.7
       percent during the life of the project, from 2012 to 2017.
      Dropout rates, a key factor in influencing graduation, decreased by about 7 percent.
      Improvement in student performance reflected in an increased share of college subjects passed or
       approved (by 3 to 4 percent) compared to non-ACCES students, and maintenance subsidies reducing
       drop-out rates from 39 percent to 16.5 percent for students who receive them.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To increase EQUITY in higher education, by (a) increasing the number of ACCES Student Loans and the
ACCES Program's focus on students from disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds and in quality higher
education institutions and programs; and (b) enhancing ICETEX's institutional capacity.

Rationale
This objective was to be achieved by increasing access to higher education (i) regionally, by increasing the
number of students from disadvantaged zones; (ii) socioeconomically, by increasing the number of students
from socioeconomically vulnerable households; and (iii) ethnically, by increasing the number of students from
vulnerable minorities. Supporting achievement of this objective were the measures to improve ICETEX’s
institutional knowledge base, modernize information technologies, and improve its financial management and
administration of loans, listed under Objective 1 above.



Outcomes: The proportion of new higher education students from families earning less than two minimum
salaries rose from a baseline of 58 percent in 2012 to 64 percent in 2017, achieving the target. Other poverty
measures also indicated improvements related to equity: using Colombia’s multivariate poverty index,
enrollments from households at the lowest level increased from 23 percent in 2012 to 31 percent in 2016;




                                                                                                 Page 6 of 13
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               CO Access with Quality to Higher Educa. (P145782)



                            using quintiles, enrollments from households in the bottom two quintiles rose from 21 percent in 2013 to 27
                            percent in 2017.

                            The project’s impact evaluation indicated that ACCES loans had a larger positive impact on enrollment and
                            academic performance for students from the lowest socio-economic strata. Targeted only at the poorest, they
                            reduced drop-out rates by 23 percentage points and increased graduation rates by 13 percentage points.

                            In its support for vulnerable minorities, 50 percent of ACCES loans were allocated to vulnerable minorities
                            compared to 9 percent in 2012.

                            Improvements in equity between regions were more modest. While favoring remote areas, the proportion of
                            students from remote areas fell from a baseline of 4 percentage points in 2012 to 2.9 percentage points in
                            2018, compared to a target of 6.5 percentage points. This reflects a small universe of candidates, few
                            institutions of higher education, and low academic achievement.

                            As in the case with Objectives 1 and 2, achievements regarding institutional capacity in ICETEX also
                            contributed to the outcomes noted under this Objective 3.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The undergraduate degree programs and professional technical programs covered by this student-loan
                            project saw increases in enrollment numbers and graduation rates increased over the project period (almost
                            meeting targets), and the proportion of poor students increased, suggesting improved equity. These
                            achievements were (arguably) also supported by improvements in the institutional capacity of ICETEX
                            (Colombia's student loan agency).



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis was performed on project components 1 (student loans) and 2 (institutional strengthening) at
   appraisal and for the ICR. Both analyses used the same assumptions, albeit in the case of the ICR the analysis
   was updated with the latest data. The assumptions are judged reasonable – a working life of 40 years, wage
   increases adjusted for graduate degree as the main source of benefits, effects of unemployment, etc. At
   appraisal, the project was expected to yield an overall Internal Rate of Return (IERR) ranging from 16 percent to

                                                                                                                             Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CO Access with Quality to Higher Educa. (P145782)



29 percent, depending on degree levels and subsidies received. The internal rate of return for the investment
was also positive for Higher Education Institutions (15-24 percent, depending on the degree and stratum) and
ICETEX (0.2 percent as a whole. The rate of return to society estimated at the appraisal cost-benefit analysis
was 18 percent. The ICR calculates that the project yielded an overall IERR of 13 percent. The rate of return for
students was estimated at 5.3 percent to 14.5 percent, depending on degree level and subsidies received. The
rate of return for ICETEX was estimated at 7 percent to 14 percent, depending on the type of student. Sensitivity
analysis indicated these results held under various scenarios. The IERRs overall and for students were
marginally lower than at appraisal due to cost increases, while the IERR for ICETEX improved substantially from
the appraisal estimate of 0.2 percent, due to the way interest on subsidies was calculated and the decrease in
drop-out rates.

Other factors also suggested strong efficiency – a dynamic project execution with on-time signing, as well as
accelerated disbursements and implementation.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    100.00
 Appraisal                                                18.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
 ICR Estimate                                             13.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated substantial, as the PDO was relevant to the country situation, government
policy and Bank strategy. Objectives were all rated substantial, having moderate shortfalls, and efficiency was
rated substantial.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CO Access with Quality to Higher Educa. (P145782)



7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project’s objectives were strongly anchored in the government’s higher education improvement policy. It
was preceded by two Bank projects, one focused on improving access, and the other a first phase of the
current project. The Bank’s relationship with the education sector in Colombia is continuing through the
Access and Quality in Higher Education Project that was approved by the Board in January 2017, and an
additional financing of another US$160 million for this operation became effective on January 2019. This new
operation, also in partnership with the government and ICETEX for the higher education sector, seems likely
to ensure that key outcomes and priorities of this project will continue to be monitored far beyond the original
closing date.

At the same time, changes in political leadership -- and, possibly, in priorities -- introduce a degree of
uncertainty into a program that has its budget renegotiated annually. Already, ICETEX itself has introduced
a change in emphasis of lending towards students in (more expensive) accredited HEIs, which is
progressively increasing program costs and may in the future strain budgets and ICETEX’s lending capacity
if not carefully monitored. Continued Bank involvement does bring some stability into this environment.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project preparation benefited from the long-term engagement (since 2002) of the Bank with ICETEX in
  providing student loans (see also Section 3),and built on the experience of several operations that
  preceded this one, including the first phase of this project (see Section 7). The project was successful in
  increasing equity, albeit less so in remote areas (where structural factors – a weak student base and few
  accredited HEIs – rather than project design would constrain success). The project had a well-structured
  theory of change that mapped the logical chain of how inputs would achieve changes in outcomes
  through activities and outputs. M&E design allowed monitoring of project progress and outcomes; risk
  mitigation measures were appropriate, as were procurement and financial arrangements. Consequently,
  the project was successfully implemented (timely effectiveness, successful implementation, and early
  disbursement. Key indicators displayed moderate issues, discussed in Section 10a.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Project implementation was monitored through regular supervision missions twice a year for a total of eight
 supervision missions. Effectiveness was timely, and the project was implemented and funds disbursed
 ahead of schedule. Implementation also included a smooth task team leader transition. Progress reports
 were produced on time and provided feedback to the counterparts.



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Access with Quality to Higher Educa. (P145782)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was coherent, with key indicators linked to outcomes. However, indicators provided
 national-level enrollment and graduation figures, while ICETEX’s influence extended to only a tenth of the
 population. This issue was addressed through impact evaluations that confirmed the results of other
 indicators.



b. M&E Implementation
  ICETEX provided regular monitoring of project progress, implementation support missions did data
  reporting, and the Education Ministry provided bi-annual reports. Beneficiary feedback was provided
  through ICETEX field offices.



c. M&E Utilization
  The information flows described under Section 9b were used by ICETEX as learning experiences – in
  particular, they generated remedial activities to improve results among vulnerable minorities and
  students from remote areas.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Social safeguards. The implementation of the Operational Policy (OP 4.10) of indigenous peoples for the
   ACCES Project was triggered with a focus on inclusiveness across gender, culture, and on an
   intergenerational dimension. The supervision carried out for social safeguards aspects of the project
   showed a progressive effort to improve user-assistance mechanisms, dissemination of information, and
   targeting of potential beneficiary populations, especially in remote areas of the country where indicators
   remain below target. The project supported improvements to enrollment and permanence strategies for
   vulnerable populations and pertinent evaluation instruments such as the development of Affirmative Action


                                                                                                 Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Access with Quality to Higher Educa. (P145782)



   Plans with HEIs, focus groups with beneficiaries, and verification of the grievances and customer service
   system.

   Environmental safeguards. The project is classified as category C. Therefore, the OP/BP 4.01 on
   Environmental Assessment is not triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The project had adequate FM arrangements, which provided reasonable
   assurance that loan proceeds were used for the intended purposes and FM requirements were complied
   with throughout the implementation period. ICETEX, as the implementing entity, was in charge of all FM
   aspects. There was an adequate control framework for the project, which included internal reviews
   performed by the Office of Internal Control; also, the entity was audited by the Office of the Comptroller
   General of Colombia. Interim Financial Reports, on a biannual basis, were reported to the Bank in a
   satisfactory manner. The auditors issued unmodified opinions, and these were acceptable to the Bank. FM
   performance was consistently Satisfactory and financial management requirements were complied with
   throughout the implementation period.

   Procurement. The project had no Bank-financed procurement, as Bank financing of Component 1
   (Student Loans) was not subject to the World Bank’s procurement guidelines, and all contracts for
   procurement of goods and services were completely financed by ICETEX.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.



d. Other
   None noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                      Substantial

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CO Access with Quality to Higher Educa. (P145782)




12. Lessons

The following lessons are drawn from the ICR.

Demand-driven higher-education financing mechanisms such as the ACCES student loan
program in Colombia can lead to positive development outcomes. Emphasizing information
outreach (presence on the ground) can reduce the knowledge gap and encourage participation by
economically and geographically disadvantaged students.

Enhancing financial literacy among loan recipients can help students manage their financial
obligations under student-loan programs such as ACCES. The majority of individuals receiving
student loans lack financial literacy and may face critical debt burdens over time, indicating that
remedial courses in personal finance can be crucial for the success of a program such as ACCES.

The very poorest and students from remote areas may need more specific or more intensive
attention. While ICETEX has meaningfully helped improve education opportunities for vulnerable
students, the very poorest ones or those from remote areas have made relatively few gains. These
students need more robust and strategic interventions, such as remedial academic programs and
coaching, incentives towards graduation, targeted financial products, and support to regional
institutions for accreditation.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is evidence-based, drawing on field discussions and available documentation (essentially ISRs) with
reasonable sourcing. The logic of the ICR builds on the logic in the theory of change and in the results
framework, and the narrative is generally clear in explaining achievements. In some instances, especially in the
efficacy analysis, the analysis could have been more systematic and could have paid greater attention to
questions of attribution. The document is consistent with the guidelines.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 13
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CO Access with Quality to Higher Educa. (P145782)




                                                                                 Page 13 of 13
