     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RAMP (P130202)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021935

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P130202                                    RAMP

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Romania                                    Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82610                                 31-Mar-2019                                            19,275,788.78

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Apr-2013                                31-Mar-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            91,800,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                             23,734,071.67                                                 0.00

 Actual                                         19,275,788.78                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Igor Pejovic                Clay Wescott                 Malathi S. Jayawickrama          IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objectives (PDOs) were: (i) to increase effectiveness and efficiency in collection of
   taxes and social contributions; (ii) to increase tax compliance; and (iii) to reduce the burden on taxpayers to
   comply. The PDOs in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 7) are the same as in the Loan Agreement
   (Loan Agreement, 8261-RO, May 8, 2013, p. 5).




                                                                                                     Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RAMP (P130202)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Institutional Development

   (Appraised cost: US$M 9.00. Actual cost: US$M 2.77).

   The component supported the development of a modern organization and management structure of
   Romania’s Revenue Administration, the National Agency for Fiscal Administration (NAFA), instilled a
   strategic focus, emphasized the importance of integrity, rationalized the organization’s structure to increase
   NAFA’s effectiveness, and strengthened the management of human resources through specific professional
   training and technical assistance. This component also aimed to improve the analytical capacity required to
   support the strategic management of NAFA and improve the legal framework and process of appealing, as
   well as reviewing all business procedures in these areas, and reengineering the operational business
   processes in order to create a modern revenue administration modeled after best practice in the European
   Union (EU).

   Increasing Operational Effectiveness and Efficiency

   (Appraised cost: US$M 75.69. Actual cost: US$M 11.52).

   The component aimed to streamline business process and workflows and invest in the modernization of
   core Information Technology (IT) systems in order to take advantage of automation in NAFA’s back-office
   operations, as well as in the interactions with taxpayers. The component also aimed to strengthen the
   effectiveness of audit and enforcement functions, including the collection of tax arrears. This was to be
   achieved by: (i) modernizing the tax audit function, tax intelligence, and preventive functions, (ii) upgrading
   IT management functions in NAFA to manage all NAFA IT resources, including staff, (iii) implementing
   electronic document management and archiving, (iv) developing and implementing an Integrated Revenue
   Management System (RMS), and (v) upgrading NAFA’s information and communication technology
   infrastructure, including developing a centralized data processing center, data warehouse, and a business
   center capable of sustaining all NAFA operations with no data loss in case of a disaster.

   Taxpayer Services and Corporate Communications

   (Appraised cost: US$M 3.83. Actual cost: US$M 1.89).

   This component financed activities aimed at modernizing taxpayer services, implementing mechanisms for
   transparency and accountability, such as a adopting consultative technical panel and community surveys to
   ensure fair community input, modernizing service delivery channels in order to provide advanced services to
   taxpayers, promoting communities’ understanding of revenue laws, procedures, rights and obligations of
   taxpayers, as well as promoting taxpayer efficiency by simplifying and providing electronic services, and by
   strengthening external and internal communication.




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RAMP (P130202)



   Project Coordination and Management

   (Appraised cost: US$M 3.31. Actual cost: US$M 1.16.

   The project aimed for a Project Management Unit (PMU) well integrated into NAFA’s headquarters
   management structure, and responsible for the daily implementation of the project. The PMU included a
   project administration team responsible for the administrative and fiduciary processes related to project
   management, procurement, financial management, and project reporting. The PMU also included a change
   management team to assist management during the process of change, providing substantive guidance
   and leadership. The team was responsible for supporting the management in the change process
   necessary for the implementation of each component and its related activities, as well as coordinating
   institutional change promoted by the project components and sub-components.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The US$ 91.8 million project was approved on April 26, 2013. It became effective on August 9, 2013. The
   project closed on March 31, 2019. Borrower financing was US$ 220,000. The project was restructured
   twice. First on November 1, 2016, to change the closing date to March 31, 2021. On request from the
   Ministry of Public Finance (MoPF), on behalf of NAFA, the project was extended by two years to ensure
   sufficient time to implement the RMS. On November 19, 2018, the Bank received another official request
   from the MoPF, on behalf of NAFA, to cancel € 51,902,124 (US$ 68,065,928.33) of the loan amount. As a
   result, the project was restructured a second time on January 25,2019 to change the closing date back to
   March 31, 2019, to cancel financing, and to reallocate among disbursement categories. The World Bank
   financed just over 74 percent of total actual project costs. The rest was financed by the borrower.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
    1. Alignment with the Bank’s country strategy. The project was closely aligned with the first pillar of
       the Bank’s strategy, on “Creating the 21st Century Government” (Country Partnership Framework
       for Romania 2019-23, p. 51), to build institutions fit for a prosperous and inclusive Romania, and to
       support public administration reform.
    2. Country context. The project’s focus on efficiency in the collection of taxes and social contributions
       remained relevant for country conditions at closing. Before and during the period of accession to the
       to the EU (2007-2013), Romania’s tax collection capacity was weak. In 2013 Romania’s revenue
       envelope had shrunk, dropping to 27.3 percent of GDP from 28.1 percent of GDP in 2007, when
       Romania became an EU Member State. The government program was part of a broader program of
       EU support to institutional strengthening in the EU member states, emphasizing more efficient use
       of public resources as well as reducing multiple institutional weaknesses in tax administration.
       Romania committed to deepening structural reforms and strengthening public administration in order
       to reap the benefits of the EU membership. The objectives were broadly outcome-oriented with
       focus on efficiency, accountability and transparency in the tax administration and they were



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      RAMP (P130202)



                                        appropriate for the country conditions and the status of a new EU member state and its capacity at
                                        the time.

               However, a major shortcoming was that the objectives and associated targets were too ambitious in light of
               the political and technical constraints. In 2013 the country was still recovering from the macroeconomic
               challenges and uncertainties that had slowed down hoped for convergence with other EU countries. While
               deepening structural reforms including measures to increase revenues were viewed as key to fully
               benefiting from EU membership, NAFA's capacity constraints were assessed as a high risk at appraisal. A
               detailed strategy for IT investments was being prepared to address the capacity constraint but was not
               completed before approval. The strategy eventually concluded that NAFA needed additional technical staff
               to manage a complex IT procurement, but these were never put in place.

               The same types of difficult reforms had limited traction in the past and failed to take off under the previous
               Revenue Administration Reform Project supported by the Bank. The quality enhancement review for the
               RAMP had suggested a simpler approach to modernize business processes before investing in an RMS
               that, in hindsight, would have been more appropriate.

               Then, in 2019, the government adopted a new National Reform Program. While by then the
               macroeconomic situation had improved, there was still the need to improve tax collection through
               modernization. However, the government now believed that this might be achieved without implementation
               of an integrated RMS, thus questioning an essential part of the logic underlying the RAMP’s objectives.
               (PAD p. 20 and Annex 4; ICR p. 1, 11, 21; see also Section 8a below)


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Increased Effectiveness and Efficiency in the Collection of Taxes and Social Contributions

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change of the project was not explicit in the PAD. However, implicitly, it could be reconstructed
                             as in the ICR (p. 6-7). Institutional development (restructuring, business process engineering and training),
                             increased operational effectiveness and efficiency enabled by an RMS, and improved taxpayer services and
                             corporate communications would lead to increased effectiveness and efficiency in collection of taxes and
                             social contributions, increased tax compliance, and reduced burden on taxpayers to comply. This would in
                             turn lead to a modernized revenue administration with business processes and workflows befitting an EU
                             member state. In the long run, this would help to improve the business environment and make Romania more
                             attractive for investors.


                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RAMP (P130202)



Efficiency and effectiveness in the collection of taxes and social contribution was to be increased through
modernization and improvement of business processes and workflow. This sub-objective was measured in
two areas, as follow:

    1. Improving effectiveness in revenue collection.

Effectiveness was measured by three indicators:

      Tax arrears recovered /stock of tax arrears. The indicator was tax arrears collected. The 2013
       baseline was 40% on 31-Jan-2012 while the target was 50% by 30-Mar-2018. Actual recovery was
       36.7% at the midpoint of the project in 2015, dropping further to 33.2% in 2018. The problem was that
       in order to improve collection of tax arrears, legislative changes were required which did not occur
       during project implementation. One example was the absence of clear criteria for the write-off of
       “irrecoverable” tax arrears. These arrears remained in the accounting records and tax officers were
       held personally liable for any write-off decisions by the Romanian Court of Accounts. As a result,
       these arrears continued to accumulate and had a negative impact on the effectiveness of revenue
       collections. Indicator target; not achieved.
      Value-added tax (VAT) productivity, VAT productivity is the ratio of VAT revenue collected to
       expected VAT revenue. The 2013 baseline for VAT productivity was 35.8% and the target was 46.0%.
       The actual productivity rate in 2018, 34.9%, was below the baseline. Romania registered the lowest
       VAT productivity among the EU Member States. Indicator target: not achieved.
      Corporate income tax (CIT) productivity. CIT productivity is the ratio of CIT revenue collected to
       expected CIT revenue. The 2013 baseline was 11.9% and the target was 21%. The actual outcome,
       10.3%, was also below the baseline. This poor outcome resulted in part from legislative changes
       related to corporate income tax from 2015 to 2018 that significantly reduced the number of firms liable
       for tax. The ICR finds that without these changes, CIT productivity would have likely
       improved. Indicator target: not achieved.

2. Improving Efficiency in Revenue Collection.

Efficiency was measured as revenue collected per NAFA staff. Revenue collected per NAFA staff at the
baseline of 2013 was Romanian Leu (RON) 6.31 million. With support from the project, NAFA reorganized,
streamlined business processes and workflows and achieved high volume processing of revenue collections.
As a result, revenue collected per staff increased to RON 9.147 million, exceeding the target for 2018 of RON
8.715 million. The cost of revenue collection is now close to that of peer countries in Central, Eastern, and
South-Eastern Europe, but higher than in advanced EU countries (International Monetary Fund (IMF) May
2018. Romania - Selected Issues: 7). Indicator target: exceeded.

The PAD does not contain and the ICR doesn’t measure any indicator connected with social contributions.
Aside from the specific factors indicated under each of the above targets, the overall factor explaining weaker
than expected performance was the lack of RMS implementation. According to the theory of change, it would
have a key role in addressing the weaknesses in tax administration, thus improving tax efficiency and
narrowing compliance gaps. While the theory of change seems correct, the ambition of the performance
targets was too great.




                                                                                                  Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RAMP (P130202)




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Increased Tax Compliance

Rationale
Increased Tax Compliance is measured by: (i) VAT gap, (ii) CIT gap, (iii) Personal income tax (PIT) gap.

Activities intended to increase tax compliance included the modernization and enhancement of business
processes and workflows, including an RMS and IT infrastructure, the improvement of the system for internal
alerts, installing and using risk compliance and VAT fraud software, establishing a taxpayer assistance
center, a monitoring unit and call-centers, delivering educational campaigns and raising tax
awareness, implementing electronic garnishment of debtors bank account and electronic communication for
all administrative acts of enforcement, and switching from face to face to electronic payments. Results were
measured in three areas of tax compliance, as follows:

      VAT gap. The VAT gap measures the difference between expected VAT revenues and VAT actually
       collected. The gap can be caused by tax fraud, evasion and avoidance, along with bankruptcies,
       financial insolvencies or miscalculations. The 2013 baseline was 36.2% less than expected VAT
       revenues, and the target was 26.2%, while the actual 2018 gap was 36.0%. Romania had the largest
       VAT gap in the EU. Romania reduced its standard VAT rate from 24% to 20% in January 2016, yet
       despite this, the level of VAT non-compliance increased, and the gap widened. Romania was one of
       the rare EU countries which went through a widening of the tax gap in 2016. This target was not
       achieved
      CIT gap. The CIT Gap measures the difference between expected CIT revenues and CIT actually
       collected. The differences can be caused by unintended errors due to unclear instructions
       and differences in interpretation, fraud, evasion, and avoidance. The 2013 baseline was 45.5% less
       than expected CIT revenues, and the target was 40.6%, while the actual 2018 gap was 29.9%. The
       Bank's project team told IEG that the improvement in the CIT gap was due in part to NAFA making
       electronic filing mandatory (by the end of the project the electronic filing rate by large- and medium-
       size RMS was 99%). This was supported by the project, and helped to reduce the compliance
       burden, encouraging RMS to comply. This target was exceeded.
      PIT gap, The PIT Gap measures the difference between expected PIT revenues and PIT actually
       collected, and stems from the same types of reasons causing the CIT gap. The 2013 baseline was
       41.5% less than expected PIT revenues, and the target was 36.5%, while the actual 2018 gap
       increased to 43.4%. One reason why the measures taken didn’t lead to a decrease in the PIT gap is
       personal tax evasion, characteristic for Romania and East-European countries. This target was not
       achieved.

While the project supported modernization and enhancement of business processes and workflows to support
this objective, a key part of the program - implementation of an RMS - did not occur and helps to explain the
non-achievement of the targets.




                                                                                                 Page 6 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               RAMP (P130202)




                            Rating
                            Modest


                            OBJECTIVE 3
                            Objective
                            Reduced Burden on taxpayers to comply

                            Rationale
                            Reduced burden on taxpayers to comply is measured by:

                            (i) compliance cost, as measured by the average time for preparation of tax returns for corporate taxpayers as
                            well as

                            (ii) intermediate results indicators: (i)Taxpayers' satisfaction with NAFA's integrity (corporate taxpayers and
                            those who are self-employed), (ii) Taxpayers' satisfaction with NAFA's quality of taxpayers’ services
                            (corporate taxpayers and those who are self-employed), (iii) Taxpayer perception of the time required to
                            comply with tax procedures (corporate taxpayers and those who are self-employed) and (iiii) Ratio of NAFA
                            staff in taxpayer services.

                            The target for measuring this objective was average time for businesses to prepare tax returns. The 2013
                            baseline was 224 hours, and the target was 176 hours, while the actual was 163 hours. Simplifying the tax
                            system and reducing bureaucracy has taken place gradually. NAFA made the electronic filing of declarations
                            by taxpayers mandatory. By project closing, the electronic filing rate by large- and medium-size RMS was
                            99%. Taxpayer services were also improved through a multi-channel approach which included face-to-face
                            interaction, post, email, and phone, providing taxpayers with various options to engage and seek assistance.
                            Eight call centers were established at the regional level and a total of 400 taxpayer services staff were trained
                            on improving taxpayer services. In 2018, over 24,000 taxpayers were served using the various platforms for
                            assistance developed under the RAMP.

                            There was a mainly positive result on achieving intermediate result targets concerning reducing the burden of
                            compliance. The payment compliance rate for VAT and CIT, and the electronic filing rate by large and
                            medium size firms, all exceeded the set targets, while the compliance rate for social contributions met the
                            target. Corporate taxpayers' perception of the time required to comply with tax procedures had decreased
                            from 180 hours in 2014 to 168 in 2016, close to the target of 163 hours. However, there was a small decrease
                            in taxpayer satisfaction as measured by a 2016 survey, rather than the targeted increase, and no
                            surveys were carried out after that year. Aside from this minor shortcoming, the strong achievement of the
                            PDO target and of most intermediate targets are major accomplishments.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RAMP (P130202)




  OVERALL EFFICACY
  Rationale
  While some of the planned results were achieved based on staff reorganization, expansion of electronic filing
  and other improved business processes, achievement on most objectives was held back because RMS was
  not procured and implemented which prevented a comprehensive reform of NAFA’s systems to reduce the
  compliance burden on taxpayers.




  Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
  Modest                                                      Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
Administrative efficiency was low due to the long delay in the implementation and disbursements, and the
eventual cancellation of the RMS.

Economic and financial analysis focused on compliance costs reduction for corporations in order to:

(i) simplify filing and payment of taxes and social contribution; and

(ii) decrease the number of tax inspections and reduce the time spent dealing with tax officials.

The economic and financial analysis looks at 2 aspects. First, as measured by compliance cost for corporate
customers, the estimated annual economic effect of reduced compliance cost, due to electronic filing and other
measures adopted, was € 137m, which was greater than the expected € 95m. Second, looking at increases in
tax revenues as a result of measures supported by the project, the ratio of tax revenues to GDP was expected
to increase from 29.0% of GDP in 2013 to 29.8% in 2017, leading to an expected IRR of 90%. In fact, the
ratio of tax revenues to GDP declined to 26.7% in 2018. The ICR does not estimate an IRR for the actual result
(PAD p. 80-1; ICR Annex 4).


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   90.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RAMP (P130202)



                                                                                       0
ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The objectives were modestly relevant. While aligned to the Bank-supported strategy and government policy at
appraisal, the alignment was weaker at project completion. Objectives were broadly relevant to the country
context, but targets were too ambitious in light of the political and technical constraints. These constraints made
it difficult for Romania to achieve their targets due to global financial crisis, lack of unity in the government when
it came to decisions which needed to be adopted, as well as the institutional capacity. The theory of change was
that effectiveness, efficiency, and compliance in revenue administration would be enhanced by changes in
business processes enabled by adoption of an RMS, while reducing the burden on taxpayers to comply. The
theory of change is plausible, but in this case many of the targets were too ambitious to be achieved in the time
period during a politically volatile period as it is discussed in PAD (page 2). IEG rated achievement of the
objectives on revenue effectiveness, efficiency and compliance as modest, while achievement of the objective
on reducing taxpayer burden is rated substantial. Efficiency is rated modest due to implementation delays and
lack of evidence of financial and economic benefits.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Key project activities and associated achievements are at risk of not having a lasting impact. Implementation
of intermediate targets deteriorated significantly and by the end of the project only 5 of the 18 targets were
met, indicating serious capacity weaknesses still needing to be addressed, such as the large number of
revenue offices in the country that enhance the risk of corruption. Structural reforms, such as streamlining of
processes, reorganizing key functions and establishing a performance framework for NAFA have resulted in
significant improvements; however, more work is needed. The training provided under the project
strengthened the capacities of some key personnel, but their skills needed to be continuously updated to
keep pace with new technologies and changed business processes. Serious capacity constraints remained
in IT and change management (ICR, page 32).

The state’s own budget financing continues, and the RMS could be completed by the government and with
support of EU funds that Romania, as a member state, now has at its disposal but didn’t before. A
computerized system for payments and checking taxpayer’s obligations in order to improve fiscal
administration services and combat tax evasion is being developed, as well as the virtual private space, an
IT system that facilitates communication with taxpayers and helps to simplify procedures.




                                                                                                        Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RAMP (P130202)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  On the positive side, the project included a clear statement of objectives targeting economic efficiency of
  taxation and reducing the compliance burden. The project was strategically relevant to Bank and
  government strategies at design as it supported the efforts of increasing effectiveness and efficiency in
  the collection of taxes and social contributions, increasing tax compliance and reducing the burden on
  taxpayers to comply. The Bank had extensive experience in Europe and in Romania with tax
  administration reforms and activities. It also gained considerable diagnostic knowledge during the
  previous cooperation with the Romanian government that underpinned the preparation and design of the
  project. The project built on extensive diagnostic work by the Bank, the EU and the IMF. For example, a
  2011 IMF tax policy diagnostic found that ongoing cuts to taxes and social security contributions were
  making the tax structure more supportive of economic growth (ICR, p. 5). Reform efforts were also
  intended to be supported by continuing technical assistance from the IMF and EU on institutional
  developments in NAFA, and from complementary operations supporting revenue administration reforms,
  including the precautionary financial assistance agreements with the IMF and EU and the Deferred Draw-
  down Option Development Policy from the Bank. Unlike the case with past efforts to reform revenue
  administration, this time there was broad based support from different political parties. (PAD, pp. 1, 2,
  66) The project was of high importance as it was needed to accelerate Romania’s convergence with
  other EU member states.

  Yet despite these positive factors, the reforms were too ambitious, as pointed out in Section 3. At the
  Quality Enhancement Review, the team was advised to adopt a simpler, more focused operation but they
  didn’t follow the advice. In addition, the decision to support a customized off the shelf (COTS) RMS rather
  than bespoke system could have been better handled as the option to implement an in-house solution
  lingered in the background and was raised periodically during implementation and even just before the
  project was cancelled. The PAD (p. 41) outlines a sound justification for adopting COTS, Yet, the ICR (p.
  18) points out that the preparation phase should have been longer to better monitor the fast-changing
  political economy, and to build acceptance by key stakeholders for the type of IT system that would be
  pursued.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The implementation support plan called for two formal supervision and implementation support missions
 per year, and there was a total of 11 supervision missions carried out over six years which is close to the
 plan. However, the quality of supervision weakened over time because the implementation support
 missions became infrequent resulting in missed opportunities to address the encountered difficulties in a
 timely manner and there were constant changes in task team leadership (4 TTLs in five years). The
 frequent changes in task team leaders (four TTLs over the project term) didn’t help, although IEG was
 informed that there was a good handover process between the third and fourth TTL



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RAMP (P130202)



 The Bank’s performance deteriorated as the project progressed, resulting in a lack of dialogue with NAFA
 and other key stakeholders during which several issues and problems related to implementation were not
 adequately addressed. Problems with the client’s lack of acceptance of the COTS continued to
 fester. There was fear of scrutiny of a large COTS procurement by the Romanian Court of Accounts with
 its rigorous audits and prosecutorial approach. In addition, complex IT procurement requires sufficient
 technical staff to ensure technical readiness. While the Bank kept urging government to take on a highly
 skilled team to do this work, the government didn't appoint the team, even though local organizations like
 Serviciul de Telecommunicatii Speciale had vast experience in the area. Another problem raised by NAFA
 was the cost of adapting the IT system under procurement to changes in tax legislation, even though Bank
 staff pointed out that in other countries such as Russia, RMS managers adapted to several changes each
 year. The Bank was never able to persuade NAFA that COTS was the best solution, and the lack of
 ownership by the client helped to derail the procurement.

 The long list of issues that eventually led to the canceling of the RMS may have been due to vested
 interests that opposed enhanced transparency and accountability and the reduced individual discretion that
 would come from a well-functioning tax administration enabled by a world class RMS. This was not flagged
 as a risk in the PAD (Annex 6).

 A related issue was the task of reducing the number of revenue offices throughout the country to improve
 efficiency and reduce opportunities for corruption. Reducing the number of offices was also needed to
 adopt the enhanced business process that would underpin the RMS. Initially, the government agreed and
 closed offices, reducing the total from 400 to 205. However, a new government that came to power was
 less committed. The Bank team continued to reiterate the importance of reducing the number of offices to
 50. as the previous government had agreed, but the new government did not do so (ICR, p.57).

 Additionally, the mid-term review occurred in March 2016 before major problems related to procurement
 and implementation of the RMS were visible, which meant that a needed restructuring of the project was
 not proposed at that time. This was important as the project needed to move from the analytical phase into
 the implementation phase. The Bank could have done more to push for political support by trying to
 activate the private sector, for example through the proposed consultative technical panel. The ICR does
 not indicate whether the panel was established, and if so, how effective it was in sharing views and building
 coalitions supporting the reforms.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The initial M&E design had the shortcoming that some indicators were qualitative and lacked baselines.
 Many of the PDO level indicators were influenced by factors outside the scope of the project and their

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RAMP (P130202)



 achievement, or lack thereof, cannot be solely attributed to the RAMP. For example, recovery of tax arrears
 required legislative changes that were not adopted during the project.



b. M&E Implementation
  Surveys were carried out of taxpayer satisfaction, but these were discontinued after 2017. The PAD (p.
  16) stated that surveys would assess NAFA’s taxpayer services and provide gender-disaggregated data
  where feasible. However, the ICR (p. 20) states that NAFA postponed such surveys in anticipation of the
  implementation of the RMS.



c. M&E Utilization
  In March 2016 changes were made to M&E and indicators updated. However, M&E implementation was
  limited to reporting on the progress, or lack thereof, towards achieving targets. M&E data were reported
  regularly to the Project Steering Committee and the Bank, but there is no evidence that there was a
  feedback loop activated using this data to inform project implementation, policy or stakeholder outreach.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project triggered no environmental or social safeguards policies. The project did not comprise activities
   that could cause social risk or negatively affect the population and cause any physical or economic
   displacement. Project activities were gender neutral. If the project achieved its development objective, in
   the long term, it could contribute to sustainable income growth, but project activities did not have any overt
   social development ramifications or effects on poverty (Project Appraisal Document, p.25).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Based on the ICR there are no obvious fiduciary issues. There were some issues with overly detailed
   specifications related to the bidding process. There were also delays in bidding on several contracts,
   resulting in re-bidding (ICR, p.23). Despite these minor shortcomings the operation was consistent with the
   Bank’s fiduciary requirements. Procurement and fiduciary arrangements were adequate.

   The Bank team provided support and training as required to strengthen implementation capacity. The Bank
   procurement were noted as an important factor of successful implementation.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 14
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        RAMP (P130202)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   --



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                   IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                            Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                   Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                                   Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                     Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                     ---                   High


12. Lessons

Lessons in the ICR are deemed appropriate. IEG adds these additional, closely related lessons:

        a. A risk-based approach to supervision is needed when there are difficulties in sustaining the
           dialogue in a changing macroeconomic and political context. In this case, the team should
           have increased the quality of supervision to maintain more continuous dialogue with
           government counterparts and keep better abreast of a dynamic situation.
        b. Complex IT procurement requires sufficient technical staff to ensure technical readiness, full
           understanding on trade-offs of basic design parameters such as COTS vs bespoke, and
           agreement on the reasons for selecting one or the other before project effectiveness. In this
           case, the project was rushed to approval before improved business processes were in place,
           and before there was full agreement on technical staff requirements. The Bank kept urging
           government during implementation to add to the IT department’s capacity in order to support
           this work, but NAFA didn't appoint the needed specialists. In addition, NAFA’s IT department
           never supported the justification for COTS.

Task teams should fully articulate key political economy issues in the risks section of the PAD and/or
in a standalone annex. In this case, such an assessment might have flagged the frequent changes
in government and pointed towards a longer and more cautious approach to design, with less
ambitious targets. It might also have found that vested interests were worried about the disruption to
legacy rents caused by IT systems and would take actions to slow down or halt reforms. This could
only be addressed by decisive action by the country's leadership in favor of reform.



                                                                                                       Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       RAMP (P130202)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clearly written and concise. It is candid and critical. It provides sufficient and convincing evidence,
based on the county visit, which was welcome and necessary for a project of this complexity. The ICR also
provides a balanced narrative of the positive and negative sides of preparation as well as implementation,
intervening factors, and context. The ICR uses project specific as well as other evidence as relevant to support
conclusions. The ICR points out that some of the pitfalls that RAMP encountered were highlighted as risks in
the PAD, yet when these risks materialized, they were not adequately addressed. ICR also points out progress
on the doing business insolvency indicators; this is a strength of the ICR, that it goes beyond indicators that
were formally monitored. The only area where more detail would have been preferable was on fiduciary
matters, but it is clear from the write up that this was not an area of concern in this project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 14
