     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ- PFM for Results Program (P124615)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0021993

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Program Name
 P124615                                     MZ- PFM for Results Program

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Mozambique                                  Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)              Total Program Cost (USD)
 IDA-H9680                                   31-Mar-2018                                          46,574,090.07

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Jun-2014                                 31-Mar-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            50,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         46,574,090.07                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Clay Wescott                  Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (p. 4), the Program Development Objective (PDO) was to improve the
   transparency and efficiency of expenditures for the storage, distribution and availability of medicines, and for
   more transparent and accountable management of Complete Primary Schools. The Program Appraisal
   Document (PAD, p. 20) had the same PDO. “Complete Primary Schools” are schools that include school
   years one to seven.



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ- PFM for Results Program (P124615)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was to be achieved by a Program for Results (PforR) operation supporting the government’s
   ongoing public financial management (PFM) reform program, and in particular the piloting of its “PFM for
   results” program focused on the introduction of performance-based allocations and capacity development in
   the provision of health and education services. It included the following activities:



        1. Paying operational costs for the medicines supply chain and the management of Complete Primary
           Schools;
        2. Implementing mechanisms for enhanced cooperation between the Ministries of Finance, Education,
           and Health (MoF, MoE and MoH);
        3. Using performance-based allocations to motivate improved performance of targeted health and
           education sector institutions to achieve the objective of the Program; and
        4. Carrying out capacity building activities for sector and PFM institutions to improve their ability to
           identify and resolve problems that hinder the achievement of results.



   Nine disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) were defined, against which the Bank was to disburse funds
   (Section 3b).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Program Cost. The appraisal estimate for the Program was US$130.6 million. Actual expenditures at
   closing were US$81.37 million. Expenditures included operating costs and performance-based allocations;
   they did not include expenditures relating to teaching staff, nor did they include procurement of medicines.



   Financing. The Program was financed by an IDA grant of US$50.00 million, of which US$46.57 million was
   disbursed. The difference reflects exchange rate fluctuations. The undisbursed balance was cancelled
   when the Program closed.



   Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution estimated at appraisal was US$80.60 million. The actual
   borrower contribution was US$34.80 million due to economic and financial difficulties that arose
   immediately after effectiveness.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         MZ- PFM for Results Program (P124615)




                       Dates. The Program was approved on June 24, 2014 and became effective on September 19, 2014. The
                       original closing date March 31, 2018 was extended once, to March 31, 2019. The extension allowed the
                       completion of Program activities.




3. Relevance                     TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives                      New




                Rationale
                Despite successful central PFM reforms, gaps remained between laws, policies and systems, and their
                implementation in sectors, provinces and districts. The “PFM for Results” program supported by this
                operation was the government's response to bridging the gaps in PFM implementation and resulting service
                delivery underperformance. The operation supported cross-cutting pillars, fostered good governance and
                macroeconomic stability, and built on the government’s National Supply Chain Logistics Plan of Action 2013
                and the Pharmaceutical Logistic Strategic Plan 2013–2017, and the Bank's approach to cross-sectoral
                reforms in its Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2017-2021. It piloted the PFM for results program
                combining the use of performance-based allocations with capacity development to achieve defined PFM
                service delivery results in two key programs – the storage and distribution of essential medicines, and
                school-based management in education. The experience gained under the pilot is to be gradually extended
                to other sectors.

                The objectives were clear and realistic, limited in scope to outcomes that the project could reasonably be
                held accountable for. They were management outcomes that would be expected to contribute to improved
                quality of health and education services. The DLIs, the government's action plan for supply chain logistics,
                and legal covenants all created a plausible causal chain between actions supported by the project and
                achievement of the objective. However, by keeping outcomes at the management level, there was no
                guarantee that desired outcomes of improved health and educational service quality would be achieved.




                .




Rating Relevance TBL




                Rating
                Substantial




                                                                                                                  Page 3 of 15
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      MZ- PFM for Results Program (P124615)



b. Relevance of DLIs                   New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                Average availability of a tracer set of essential maternal and reproductive health medicines at health facility
                level [on the day of verification during a calendar year].



                Rationale
                Outcomes in maternal and reproductive health were weak, and introducing a mechanism for regular
                monitoring of the availability of relevant medicines through an annual survey of health facilities to assess
                stocks was likely to promote better health outcomes. DLI 1 was designed to encourage better availability of
                necessary medicines at health facilities with baselines and measurable target values permitting monitoring of
                progress and triggering the release of funds when targets were met. Over the project period, targets were not
                fully met (see Section 4), but still showed sustained progress.




                Rating
                Substantial

                DLI 2
                DLI
                Number of provinces achieving the minimum acceptable score of compliance with standards for stock
                management, warehousing, and distribution of medicines as assessed by the Central Medicines Warehouse
                (CMAM) internal audit unit.

                Rationale
                The DLI was designed to contribute to better inventory management throughout the system by strengthening
                coordination between the central drug agency, CMAM, and provincial health authorities. This was to improve
                management of stock in hand, and also ensure timely distribution and availability of medicines. Progress (the
                increase in the number of provinces complying with standards for stock management) was clearly defined
                and measurable, and targets were surpassed (Section 4).




                Rating
                Substantial

                DLI 3

                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ- PFM for Results Program (P124615)




DLI
Proportion of treatment sites with a stock-out of key anti-retrovirals (ARVs) at the end of each month.

Rationale
The DLI was designed to contributed to the government’s aim of achieving universal coverage in HIV
treatment. It set a diminishing annual target for stock-outs over the project period, contributing to improved
drug availability at health centers and triggering disbursements. Progress was clearly defined and
measurable, using a standard protocol and methodology. Targets were exceeded (Section 4).




Rating
Substantial

DLI 4
DLI
Proportion of districts for which CMAM receives logistics information through the country’s management
information system for medicines.

Rationale
SIMAM is the electronic logistics and management information system (MIS) used in managing the supply
chain. At project startup it was installed in all provinces but was not yet functional in all districts. The DLI was
designed to encourage better data flows from more districts and consequently broaden the scope for
improved distribution to and availability of drugs at health centers. Progress under the DLI was clearly
defined and measurable, triggering disbursements, and by the end of the project, targets had been surpassed
(Section 4)




Rating
Substantial

DLI 5
DLI
Fill rate of approved requisitions from CMAM clients for tracer medicines.

Rationale
DLI 5 was designed to support improved quality and timeliness of information flows between CMAM and sub-
national levels, based on fill rates for an approved list of medicines. This provided information on how


                                                                                                      Page 5 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ- PFM for Results Program (P124615)



effectively supply and demand for medicines was managed by CMAM and, like DLI 1, it served as an
indicator of management of inventory at hand. Measurable target values permitted annual monitoring of
progress, triggering disbursements. Target values were exceeded (Section 4).



Rating
Substantial

DLI 6
DLI
Proportion of complete primary schools that comply with defined standards for transparency and accountability.

Rationale
The DLI was designed to support more transparent and accountable school-based management, including
standards for complete primary school councils. Results were defined by gender balance in school councils;
parental involvement; and parental participation in school development planning. Measurable target values
permitted annual monitoring of progress, and triggered disbursements. Target values were exceeded
(Section 4).



Rating
Substantial

DLI 7
DLI
Proportion of complete primary schools receiving funds on or before February 28 of each year.

Rationale
The DLI facilitated the timely disbursement of funds as an important enabling condition that, in combination
with DLI 6 ensured that there were resources to manage at the school council level. For monitoring, it drew
on a defined protocol and methodology, using district services’ school supervision reports for verification. The
DLI indicator was clearly defined and measurable, permitting monitoring of progress and triggering
disbursements. Target values were exceeded (Section 4).



Rating
Substantial

DLI 8
DLI
Revised district level budget classification by sub-sector, configured and applied.

Rationale


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
                            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                            MZ- PFM for Results Program (P124615)



            The DLI was designed to support improvements in the budget classification system for better reporting of
            education expenditures. An improved budget classification system was to strengthen the transparency in the
            flow of financial information by sub-sectors (primary, secondary, adult and vocational education, youth and
            technology) that, when applied, would facilitate the monitoring of spending and reduce the risk of education
            funds being diverted to other functions.



            Rating
            Substantial

            DLI 9
            DLI
            Proportion of complete primary schools visited for supervision by district services.

            Rationale
            The DLI strengthened the vertical accountability process through supervision by promoting the introduction of
            guidelines for school supervision, supporting DLI 8.



            Overall, the DLIs were clearly defined and measurable, timed in line with the government’s budget cycle, and
            each one had a clear protocol for monitoring and verification. The indicative timeline for achievement and
            verification was reasonable – overall, nearly all DLI targets were achieved or exceeded. DLIs incentivized
            critical actions, were scalable in proportion to the level of achievement, and provided necessary flow of funds
            for achieving the PDOs, and the results framework, as the former were drawn from the set of PDO outcome
            and intermediate outcome indicators and delivered incentives that were likely to generate a more transparent
            and efficient medicines delivery system, and a more transparent and accountable management of complete
            primary schools (PAD, p.52-55; ICR, p. 19). Additional evidence on DLIs is in Section 4.



            Rating
            Substantial


OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




            OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
            Rationale
            The PforR was used as a lending instrument, with disbursements linked to the delivery of results as a means
            of incentivizing the efficient use of resources for the provision of health and education services. The
            approach was likely to (i) improve the reliability of the medical supply chain, with a particular focus on
            gradually improving maternal and reproductive health and HIV/AIDS outcomes, two areas where the health
            system indicators for Mozambique were poor; and (ii) encourage better management of resources for
            complete primary schools. The DLIs that were selected from the results framework in both cases (health and
            education) supported a cohesive set of interventions that were likely to promote sustainable PFM results.
            They were clearly defined, measurable and included monitoring and verification methodologies. All DLIs

                                                                                                               Page 7 of 15
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   MZ- PFM for Results Program (P124615)



               contributed towards achieving the PDO.



               Furthermore, the PforR added value because it provided a platform to engage and align the Ministry of
               Finance and sector ministries through joint identification of DLIs. Also, the flexibility of the PforR instrument
               has allowed the government to adapt a mix of performance-based allocations and capacity development as
               implementation experience evolves, but this also means a shift in risks from the Bank to the client.




               Rating
               Substantial



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve the transparency and efficiency of expenditures for the storage, distribution and availability of
               medicines

               Rationale
               The objective was to be achieved by avoiding stock-outs of essential medicines by applying performance-
               based allocations (DLIs) and capacity development to improve the quality and timeliness of information flows
               and the flow of medicines through the public drug delivery system. Outcomes were to be determined by (i)
               improved communications between CMAM and sub-national levels (province, district, health facility) to allow
               accurate forecasting of medicines needs; (ii) better inventory management at provincial levels, including
               reporting of stock-outs and fill rates at facility levels; and (iii) such reporting increasingly channeled through
               the supply chain management information system.



               Outputs




                                                                                                                     Page 8 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ- PFM for Results Program (P124615)




      The proportion of treatment sites with stock-outs of a tracer set of ARVs at the end of each semester
       fell from 27 percent in 2013 to 7 percent in 2019, compared to a target of 10 percent (DLI 4)
      The percentage of districts that report logistics information to CMAM using the supply chain
       management information system increased from 77 percent to 93 percent between mid-2012 and mid-
       2019, compared to a target of 87 percent (DLI 5)
      The fill rate of approved requisitions from CMAM’s clients for tracer medicines increased from 71
       percent in 2013 to 86.7 percent in 2019 compared to a target of 84 percent (DLI 6)
      With a baseline of zero in 2013, by 2019, 10 out of 11 provinces achieved an acceptable score from
       internal audits of warehouse standards for medicine



Outcomes



      The average availability of a tracer set of essential maternal and reproductive health medicines at
       health facility levels increased from 78.6 percent in 2013 to 87.4 percent in 2018, almost reaching the
       target of 88 percent. (DLI 1)
      The number of provinces achieving the minimum acceptable score of compliance with standards for
       stock management, warehousing and distribution of medicines increase from a baseline of zero in
       2013 to 10 in 2018, compared to a target of 8 provinces. (DLI 2)



The ICR (pages 22 and 23) noted the following additional impacts of the project: (i) a satisfaction survey
undertaken by MoF notes that 189 respondents were satisfied and 133 moderately satisfied with the
availability of essential reference medicines from a total sample of 353 respondents; (ii) monitoring of the
supply chain has improved, strengthening the DLI verification process; (iii) performance-based allocations are
motivating change, as was the case with capacity building using coaches and facilitators.



All these outcomes and impacts point to a stronger, more effective and efficient supply chain, as well as to the
creation of incentives for better management, the latter an underlying feature in the longer-term objective of
improving PFM.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To create a more transparent and accountable management of complete primary schools


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ- PFM for Results Program (P124615)




Rationale
The objective was to be achieved by applying performance-based allocations (DLIs) and capacity
development to increase the proportion of complete primary schools that comply with standards for
transparency and accountability that emphasize (i) community involvement in school councils; (ii) timely
disbursement of school funds to strengthen school-based management; and include (iii) a revised budget
classification and reporting system that allows greater transparency in budget allocations and stronger
expenditure monitoring; and (iv) enhanced school supervision.



Outputs



      The proportion of complete primary schools that received direct school grant funds on or before
       February 28 each year (the end of the previous fiscal year) rose from a baseline of zero in 2013 to 100
       percent in 2019 against a target of 90 percent (DLI 3)
      The budget classification of schools by sub-sector was configured and first applied in 2017 (DLI 8)
      Proportion of complete primary schools visited for supervision by district services increased from zero
       in 2013 to 85 percent in 2018, against a target of 50 percent (DLI 9)



       Outcomes



      The proportion of complete primary schools that comply with defined standards for transparency and
       accountability set in 2014 was 76 percent in 2018 against a target of 60 percent

      From 2014 to 2018, teacher and student attendance improved due to increased supervision activities
       and the accountability culture they helped to create
      Student learning outcomes improved, and improved teacher attendance resulted in an increase in the
       amount of time available for instruction from an average of 1 hour and 43 minutes in 2014 to 2 hours
       and 38 minutes in 2018
      Audit reports and a 2018 survey concluded that 76 percent of complete primary schools visited have
       functional school councils, including parents and the wider local community



Rating
Substantial




OVERALL EFFICACY
                                                                                               Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ- PFM for Results Program (P124615)




 Rationale
 The results framework included DLIs that logically contributed to the Program Development Objective, which
 was to improve the transparency and efficiency of expenditures for the storage, distribution and availability of
 medicines and for the management of complete primary schools. In the medium to longer term, the
 Government of Mozambique expects that performance-driven approaches will be a central component in
 supporting efficient, transparent and accountable use of public resources to deliver results. Better translation
 of resources into outcomes will be crucial to a development trajectory of inclusive and durable growth in
 Mozambique, as natural resource revenues increase dramatically in coming years.



 Rating
 Substantial


5. Outcome

Relevance of objectives was rated high, as they aligned with both government and Bank priorities for the
country. Relevance of DLIs was substantial, reflecting their consistency with the PforR objectives and outcome
indicators, although in some cases aiming at ambitious outcomes that were not always achieved. Reflecting
that, efficacy was also rated substantial.


    Outcome Rating
    Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

The PFM for Results Program was an innovative design in an environment of political volatility and
substantial fiduciary risk. While these risks are likely to remain, they are counterweighed by a strong and
continued government commitment to PFM reform and the relatively successful implementation of this
Program for Results pilot. Sector risks – in education and health – appear to be modest as the reforms are
largely institutionalized – in large part because of the broad engagement of actors – ministries, government
levels and communities.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Program was strategically relevant. Its piloting of a “PFM for Results” approach helped build a
  platform for an expansion of the approach to other sectors of the reform. The Bank invested
  considerable time and resources between concept and approval to create understanding and acceptance
  of the innovative concept and modalities, with a number of workshops bringing key stakeholders together

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ- PFM for Results Program (P124615)



  to build ownership. This was helped by a proactive Bank team with co-TTLs stationed in the country,
  along with interest and support from the Country Management Unit.



  Program design drew on Bank projects in health and education, and it complemented capacity
  development under the Bank-financed National Decentralized Planning and Finance Program. A Health
  Commodities Security Project financed commodity procurement, analytical studies and supply chain-
  related equipment purchases, as well as computers for the country's logistics MIS. Design largely used
  country financial management systems which had progressively been strengthened through government
  efforts. It was coordinated with the activities of other donors supporting the PFM reform. The results
  framework was internally consistent, with DLIs and other indicators measurable and linked to
  outcomes.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Project implementation benefited from a diverse team of experts, including field-based Bank staff, which
 was able to respond adequately to government implementation concerns and collaborate with other
 donors. The team focused on ensuring maximum impact, reflected in the extension of the program closing
 date to allow strengthening inter-sectoral collaboration. Still, implementation did not proceed without
 challenges, as both the Bank team and the Borrower were experiencing a learning curve, reflected in
 delays in communications of information, in the disbursement of funds and the recruitment of teams for
 some activities. These challenges were addressed with innovative approaches not foreseen in the PAD,
 including the use of rapid results initiatives, supported by internationally certified coaches and national
 facilitators.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework for the operation provided a logical sequence of activities that was consistent with
 key outcomes and the PDO. For M&E it used existing systems in the health and education sectors. For
 health, this included CMAM's pharmaceutical logistics performance framework; and for education, existing


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ- PFM for Results Program (P124615)



 data collection and monitoring systems. An independent evaluation of the PFM for Results Program was
 commissioned to review Program data during implementation.



b. M&E Implementation
  Monitoring information was collected by the Program coordinating team, drawing on a variety of
  monitoring information, including implementation and performance of PFM management capacity
  development, and performance-based allocations by sector.



c. M&E Utilization
  Collected data was used to inform decision-makers on various activities, adjust the approach (for
  instance extend the project by a year to maximize both learning and impact). More importantly, the
  information was to be used to make plausible assessments about whether the use of performance-
  based allocations and capacity development were being successfully adopted in developing processes.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Program was assessed as a category C project. As the PFM for Results Program mainly supported
   changing incentives and providing technical assistance to strengthen PFM systems for results in target
   sectors, direct environmental and/or social impacts were not anticipated for the most part. The
   environmental risks associated with program were assessed as moderate and mainly related with the
   inadequate disposal of pharmaceutical waste. Still, the Bank prepared a comprehensive Environmental and
   Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) for the Program and identified unintended generation and
   inappropriate disposal of pharmaceutical waste resulting from expired or damaged medicines as the main
   environmental risks. The ESSA recommended two safeguards activities: (i) satisfactory completion of norms
   for disposal of pharmaceutical products and plans for implementation at main warehouses; and (ii)
   satisfactory implementation of the norms through review of routine reporting on volumes and methods of
   pharmaceutical waste disposal.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


   Financial Management: The financial management guidelines in the Operational Manual incorporated the
   necessary internal control guidelines using the country financial management arrangements. The internal


                                                                                              Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ- PFM for Results Program (P124615)



   controls of the Program worked as intended. All key Program staff attended training workshops to fully
   understand the approved Manual. The quarterly interim unaudited financial reports were submitted to the
   Bank on time. The final audit for the Program was carried out by an internationally affiliated firm in full
   compliance with the international standards. The auditors expressed an unqualified audit opinion on the
   financial statements.



   Procurement: Given the nature of the Program, the Bank did not review procurement packages but
   assessed that all the prerequisites for procurement planning and implementation were in place to help
   ensure successful implementation. The Program fully utilized the country procurement system. Besides
   small value purchases of an operational nature, medicines and capacity development activities were the
   two main procurable items which were managed at the central level. The Program’s procurement
   specialist played an important liaison role between working teams at different levels of the Program,
   adhering to the government’s procurement regulations and to Program requirements as was set out in the
   Program’s Operations Manual.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None were noted in the ICR.



d. Other
   Externalities. The following positive externalities related to the project’s design as a PFM for Results
   Program were recorded in the ICR: (i) appreciation of the results-based approach as a means of raising
   efficiency in public finances; and (ii) adoption of the approach by other donors.



   Gender. The Program included features of gender mainstreaming: school councils were to be established
   based on gender equity; access to medicines for reducing maternal death rates and improving reproductive
   health; capacity building for teachers and nurses, many of whom were women.



10. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MZ- PFM for Results Program (P124615)




11. Lessons

The following Lessons are drawn from the ICR:



All stakeholders should be involved in a program from the beginning to minimize
misunderstandings during implementation. The Program had multiple stakeholders at different
levels of the political structure in Mozambique, and with different functions. A common platform for
fulfillment – in this case PFM for Results – served as a uniting reference point for the Bank,
government entities, and donors.



Understanding priorities in a complex environment is essential. The Program had a strong
results framework that set out the logic of the intervention, defined priorities and facilitated dialogue
when implementation issues arose.



Information and logistics are key elements in a results-based operation that operates at
several levels. Timely availability of financial resources was key to ensuring a well-functioning
education system and timely availability of necessary drugs for addressing major health issues. One
factor of success was the timely intra-governmental and inter-sectoral information flows



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well argued, but at just over 39 pages is much longer than the normal length of 15 pages. That said,
it provides a solid description of the PFM for Results instrument and its challenges. This allows a fair
assessment of the results and ratings of the operation.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 15 of 15
