     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Infrastructure Resilience Emergency (P150929)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022023

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P150929                                     BI-Infrastructure Resilience Emergency

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Burundi                                     Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D0460                                  30-Jun-2019                                          24,433,596.83

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Mar-2015                                30-Jun-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             25,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              25,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                          24,433,596.83                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Katharina Ferl              Ebru Karamete                Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. iii) and the Financing Agreement of April 7, 2016 (p. 5)
   the objective of the project was “to enhance the climate resilience of key transport and drainage infrastructure
   in Greater Bujumbura while strengthening the country’s capacity to manage and prevent natural disasters.”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Infrastructure Resilience Emergency (P150929)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included three components:

   Component A. Rehabilitation of Roads and Urban Infrastructure (appraisal estimate US$21.6 million,
   actual cost US$21.8 million): This component consisted of two sub-components:

   Sub-component A.1: Transport Infrastructure Rehabilitation (appraisal estimate US$12.6 million,
   actual cost US$10.6 million): This component was to finance the reconstruction or rehabilitation of
   structures on the Recipient’s NR-1 route, including, installation of slope protection mechanisms, stabilization
   of embankments, rehabilitation of drainage systems, redirection of groundwater and rehabilitation and
   stabilization of related road pavements.

   Sub-component A.2. Urban Infrastructure Rehabilitation (appraisal estimate US$9.0 million, actual
   cost US$11.2 million): This component was to finance the construction or rehabilitation of urban
   infrastructure in the PIA including: (a) reinforcement of channels of approximately 7.5km along the
   Recipient’s Nyabagere and Kinyankonge rivers; (b) construction of a channel on the Recipient’s Gasenyi
   river; (c) resizing of water outlets underneath the Recipient’s NR-9 route; (d) construction of a lined canal in
   the Recipient’s district of Carama; and (e) dredging of the canal, upstream of the Recipient’s Buterere waste
   water treatment plant to improve downstream flow and fortification of the retention walls of said treatment
   plant.

   Component B. Capacity Strengthening in Disaster Risk Management (appraisal estimate US$2.0
   million, actual cost US$1.2 million): This component existed of two sub-components:

   Sub-component B.1. Capacity Strengthening in Disaster Risk Management (appraisal estimate
   US$0.5 million, actual cost US$0.7 million): This component was to finance: (a) an evaluation and
   mapping of risks and underlying factors in the project area including their potential impacts on infrastructure;
   (b) a strategic information system to prioritize structural and non-structural risk mitigation activities, and take
   action regarding the location, orientation and design of infrastructure under the project; (c) the
   establishment of a prevention, early warning and response system in areas at risk of flooding and landslides
   to reduce losses to infrastructures and protect lives and livelihoods; and (d) the development of risk
   evaluation and extreme event monitoring tools to be owned by the communities and supported by the Red
   Cross volunteers, the local Committees for Civil Protection and the hydro-meteorological service (IGEBU).

   Sub-component B.2. Disaster Risk Recovery Contingency Funds (appraisal estimate US$1.5 million,
   actual US$0.5 million): This component was to support emergency measures to reduce damage to
   infrastructure, ensure business continuity, and enable early rehabilitation. An Immediate Response
   Mechanism (IRM) coordinating unit and expenditure management procedures was to be defined during
   project implementation and reflected in an ‘Immediate Response Mechanism Operational Manual’, to be
   prepared separately and approved by IDA, in line with the flexibility provided under paragraph 12 of OP
   10.00.




                                                                                                        Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Infrastructure Resilience Emergency (P150929)



   Component C. Institutional Support, Project Management and Coordination (appraisal estimate
   US$1.4 million, actual US$1.5 million): This component was to finance consultancy services, technical
   advisory services such as technical studies and assessments, training, media Information, Education and
   Communication (IEC), and financial audits This component was also to finance project management and
   coordination costs, including the Project Management Unit (PMU) operating costs.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$25.0 million. Actual cost was US$24.43 million.

   Financing: The project was financed by a US$25.0 million IDA grant of which US$24.43 million disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution: No contributions by the Borrower were planned.

   Dates: The project was not restructured and closed on its original closing date on June 30, 2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 1) at the time of project appraisal, Burundi was among the ten poorest countries in
the world, with a Human Development Index of 0.389 in 2013, which was well below Sub-Saharan Africa’s
(SSA) average, estimated at 0.502 for the same period. In 2015, more than 75 percent of Burundi’s urban
population lived in Greater Bujumbura, which had an estimated population of about 800,000. The area
covered by the city had expanded rapidly over the last three decades, from about 37 square kilometers in
1983 to over 100 square kilometers in 2015. However, this rapid expansion was not accompanied by proper
land use planning and watershed management, leading to uncontrolled urbanization and informal
settlements and creating a complex hydrological situation. Also, insufficient public investments, especially
in the peripheral districts of the capital, Bujumbura’s, which concentrated more than 75 percent of the urban
population, resulted in shortcomings in the provision of basic infrastructure and services. The under-served
informal settlements were vulnerable to flooding due to the poor drainage infrastructure and the city’s
geographical location.

In February 2014, catastrophic rains caused extensive flooding and landslides in Greater Bujumbura
resulting in casualties and damage of critical public infrastructure due to the rupture of an artificial dam on
the Gasenyi River. On the request of the Government of Burundi, the Bank and other development
partners conducted in joint rapid assessment in March 2014. The assessment identified the root cause of
the disaster as: i) land degradation, related to inappropriate agricultural practices on steep slopes and
deforestation upstream of rivers; ii) lack of expansion of water management services in coordination with
urbanization; iii) inadequate sizing of the storm water collection system, particularly in the district of
Carama; iv) building of houses and social infrastructure in flood-prone areas; and v) absence of a
monitoring and early warning system. The project objective

The project’s development objective was aligned with the country and the World Bank strategies. the
objective of the project supported the government’s Infrastructure Action Plan (2010-2015) with Road

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BI-Infrastructure Resilience Emergency (P150929)



               Network Improvement Program to support the productive sectors of the economy. Also, the project’s
               objective was in line with the country’s National Policy on Climate Change and Nationally Determined
               Contributions adopted in 2013. Furthermore, the project’s objective was in line with the Bank’s most recent
               Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY19-FY23) which stresses under Focus Area 2 “strengthening
               foundations for economic and social resilience” the importance of resilient transportation infrastructure for
               economic and social resilience.

               Based on the above discussion, the project development objective was relevant to the emergency
               infrastructure rehabilitation needs as well as developing longer-term capacity for managing climate
               resilience of infrastructure.

               The relevance of the project’s development objective is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enhance the climate resilience of key transport and drainage infrastructure in Greater Bujumbura

                             Rationale
                             The project’s theory of change linked outputs such as key transport and drainage structure, increasing
                             drainage capacity in Carama and Buterere districts, discharging of storm water channeled to Lake
                             Tanganyika would lead to reducing climate vulnerability to flooding, landslides, and rockslides on RN1, and
                             thereby enhancing resilience of key transport and drainage infrastructure in the target area. According to the
                             ICR (p. 11), the project assumed that emergency civil work activities were to prevent more damage on RN1
                             and mitigate future impacts of floods in neighborhoods located along the Gasenyi and Nyabagere rivers.

                             Outputs:

                                        40 drainage structures/spots on RNI1 were rehabilitated and reconstructed, surpassing the target of
                                           17 drainage structures/spots.
                                          10.37 kilometers of drainage network were newly constructed/rehabilitated, not achieving the target of
                                           12.6 kilometers.
                                          30 crossing structures over key transport infrastructures (RN1 or RN9) were rehabilitated, surpassing
                                           the target of three crossing structures.
                                          The transport strategy and road investment plans were completed, achieving the target.
                                          The Road Database was completed and tested for paved and unpaved roads, achieving the target.
                                          The Gasenyi upstream riverbanks along the RN1 were stabilized.

                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BI-Infrastructure Resilience Emergency (P150929)




      The share of the road maintenance budget versus the annual maintenance budget increased from 68
       percent in 2015 to 91.30 percent in 2019, surpassing the target of 85 percent. According to the Bank
       team (January 31, 2020) this indicator measured the delivery capacity (disbursement capacity) of the
       road maintenance fund.

Outcomes:

      66,151 people had access to improved drainage in the areas served by the project, not achieving the
       target of 77,000 people.
      46 percent of the beneficiaries was female, close to the target of 50 percent.
      Unit transport costs along NR1 in project impact area were reduced by 4.81 percent, achieving the
       target of a 4 percent reduction. This indicator was to reflect the benefits of the road restoration and
       improvement on the passenger and goods transport price. The methodology of the calculation was
       based on road user recollection of the prices at three periods (before the 2014 flooding, during the
       RN1 detoured, and after the project).

While, some drainage works could not be completed and thus the target for the number of beneficiaries of
improved drainage was slightly under-achieved, the project completed most of its planned works. Although,
the ICR did not include a "quality" related indicator to measure climate resilience aspect of the PDO (e.g.
more durable infrastructure, higher technical specifications to address climate change needs, etc.), the ICR
mentioned that (page 16) climate-resilient standards were rolled out to ensure all-weather/ season
accessibility with an adequate service for RN1. Thus, the achievement of this objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen the country’s capacity to manage and prevent natural disasters:

Rationale
The project’s theory of change linked outputs such as enhancing government capacity in disaster risks
knowledge, management and reduction, increasing communities’ awareness and preparedness, and setting
up an emergency contingency recover fund with strengthening foundations for economic and social resilience
with strengthening the country’s capacity to manage and prevent natural disasters. According to the ICR (p.
11), the project assumed that technical assistance and awareness raising activities on DRM would improve
the government’s response to future floods. This assumption was reasonable.

Outputs:

      A contingency funding mechanism was established and is ready to provide access to financial
       resources in case of an eligible crisis or emergency, achieving the target.
      Eight municipalities were supported for emergency information response and contingency planning,
       achieving the target of eight municipalities.

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BI-Infrastructure Resilience Emergency (P150929)




                                  Several workshops were held in April-June 2017 for the members of the National Platform for Disaster
                                   Risks Prevention and Reduction (NPDRPR) at the national and communal levels to build capacity in
                                   the following areas: risk assessment and mapping of potential impacts through the use of Geographic
                                   Information System (GIS) Global Positioning System; operational procedures for prevention, early
                                   warning, and emergency response to reduce losses; protection of people and their livelihoods; and
                                   updating of contingency plans and monitoring/warning tools for extreme events in vulnerable
                                   communities.
                                  A three-day workshop was organized to raise awareness to about 20 members of Parliament on
                                   Disaster Risk Management (DRM).
                                  Several key technical assistance activities were not completed due to the lack of consultants to
                                   perform the following activities: i) revision of Burundi’s national emergency response plan; ii) study for
                                   an information system in the watershed of the project area (some of the equipment initially planned
                                   under the project to improve local capacity to respond to natural disasters were not procured before
                                   project closing); iii) provision of minimum equipment such as hydraulic pumps for five communes of
                                   the project was delayed to challenge with technical specifications; iv) procurement of equipment for
                                   setting up an early warning system at the national level.

                            Outcomes:

                                  38,385 people were supported by participatory evaluation of disaster risks and operational early
                                    warning and response systems, almost achieving the target of 39,000 people. 46 percent of the
                                    beneficiaries were female, close to the target of 50 percent.

                            This objective was ambitious given the large number of activities. Some key activities were not completed.
                            The outcome indicators were not adequate to measure this objective and thus, due to lack of achievement
                            and evidence, the achievement of the objective is rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of the first objective was Substantial but the second objective was Modest due to lack of
                            achievement on the key capacity building activities, resulting in an overall Substantial rating with moderate
                            shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BI-Infrastructure Resilience Emergency (P150929)




5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis:

The PAD (p. 15) stated that a comprehensive economic assessment for the proposed project could not be
carried out due to the emergency nature of the operation and the limited availability of data needed to prepare a
formal cost-benefit analysis. However, the PAD identified the broader benefits of the project such as improved
access to markets, and facilitating transport services through reopening NR1 to heavy traffic and reducing the
time travel and distance between the capital city and border points with Rwanda and Tanzania. Other benefits –
such as reduction in externality costs from trans-boarding activities or traffic interruptions and reduction in fatality
and/or serious injuries that would otherwise have resulted from damaged structures – were also identified.

The ICR did not include a traditional economic analysis either and stated (p. 26) that the road rehabilitation
works were limited to spots improvements and restoration and not a complete rehabilitation of NR1 which
indicated that classical benefits from reduction of travel time and vehicle operation costs could not have been
significant. The ICR (p. 36) itself states that given the difficulty of a proper economic assessment to capture the
climate resiliency valuation, a survey would have been useful to capture beneficiary satisfaction of the civil
works implementation and DRM activities. Further, the ICR would have benefited from including a unit cost
analysis for the infrastructure works (e.g. cost of activity; cost per km rehabilitated, drainage built, etc.) in
comparison with similar emergency projects.

Operational Efficiency. The ICR (p. 26) states that technical design studies for road and urban infrastructure
were expedited through two projects that were underway before IREP, which helped to speed up the bidding
and contract approval process and complete it one month after the Financing Agreement became effective.
Also, the project closed on its original closing date of June 30, 2019.

During implementation, the original scope of addressing road vulnerabilities on the 30 km Bujumbura–
Bugarama road segment had to be expanded to spots located beyond Bugarama, about 110 km toward the
border with Rwanda. New flooding in April 2018 caused fresh damages to the newly built drainage channels
and existing drainage channels in the project area. Further, additional critical spots appeared on RN1 and
required immediate attention to protect nearby residents from landslides. The activities related to damaged
infrastructure encountered an overrun of 24 percent. The ICR (p. 26) states that while these events expanded
the scope of civil works, it was financed without restructuring or additional financing, but with support from
Recovery Contingency Funds that were activated by the Bank in July 2018.

The ICR (p. 27) states that the original design studies carried out by an international consultant of two lots
including the retention basin of lot eight in Carama were of poor quality. The studies had to be redone by a
local consultant with an overall increase in quantities and costs.

Considering all the above factors, on balance, efficiency is rated modest.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


                                                                                                          Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BI-Infrastructure Resilience Emergency (P150929)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
ICR Estimate                                                  0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objective was high given its alignment with the country's emergency needs, country priorities, and
the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework (FY19-23). Efficacy was substantial for the first
objective, and modest for the second, leading to an overall substantial rating with moderate
shortcomings. Efficiency is rated modest. Based on these ratings, the project’s outcome rating is rated
moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main risks to development outcome can be categorized under two broad categories as listed below.
While the technical and institutional risks are likely to be mitigated through the activities of two other projects,
economic risks will prevail in the medium run due to budget limitations for maintenance.

Technical and Institutional Risks: According to the ICR (p. 40) the project’s improvements of the drainage
system are being continued by the Bank’s Landscape Restoration project (P160613) which supports the
restoration of the catchment area upstream of the project’s interventions. The new project is constructing
terraces on degraded hillsides and augmenting vegetation cover at critical points in the landscape to prevent
soil erosion, increase soil moisture, and reduce surface runoff. Also, a new Bank project in the transport
sector that will focus on safe and resilient road investments on key corridors and improve institutional
capacity to manage the road sector is currently being developed.

Economic Risks: However, project investments will face the challenge of lacking resources for maintenance.
The ICR (p. 40) stated that even though the government recently established the Burundi Office of Housing
and Construction (BOHC), which will receive its funding from a tax levied on real estate transactions, to
provide technical and financial support to municipalities in the maintenance of urban infrastructure, financing
is very limited. Furthermore, the National Road Fund (NRF) might face a similar financial issue for
maintaining road investments. The NRF is being financed through fuel levy which the government capped in
2016. Therefore, only 50 percent of the collected revenues are being transferred to the NRF. While the

                                                                                                         Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Infrastructure Resilience Emergency (P150929)



NRF’s budget was US$5.6 million in 2017, the maintenance funding needs for the classified road network
were calculated at US$18 million in 2019. Finally, Burundi might in the future face similar challenges as
during project implementation including shortage of hard currency and the volatility of exchange rates on
works, poor quality of technical studies and difficulties to mobilize experts in DRM for capacity building
activities, and political crises resulting in suspension of activities by development partners.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (p.31) the project took the recommendations for resilient rehabilitation and
  reconstruction which were identified during the 2014 Rapid Assessment, conducted by the Bank and
  other donors, into account. The assessment recommended activities grouped into three categories: i)
  emergency: activities to stop the progression of damage; ii) medium-term: activities that allow the
  rehabilitation of infrastructure; and iii) long-term: activities that allow to envisage resilient reconstruction.
  The project design was simple and centralized all decision making within the NRA to avoid conflict of
  interest and diverge views from different stakeholders.

  The Bank team identified the following risks as Substantial: i) likelihood that political and governance
  factors could significantly impact the PDO, due to possible political tensions related to the June 2015
  general elections; ii) investments on infrastructure may be negatively affected by spending pressure due
  to macroeconomic volatility; iii) adverse impact on the PDO stemming from inadequate sector strategies
  and policies; iv) negative impact on the PDO due to lack of institutional capacity; v) weak fiduciary
  oversight and control; v) heavy rains. The Bank mitigated these risks by conducting two full
  implementation review missions per annum and two limited implementation review missions. However,
  according to the ICR (p. 32) the project’s implementation was negatively affected by the low capacity of
  the line ministry under which the Project Management Unit (PMU) was based. Also, the ICR (p. 33)
  stated that the shortage of hard currency and the volatility of exchange rates had a negative impact on
  the prices of material for construction with an impact on costs. Furthermore, the implementation of the
  Disaster Risk Management (DRM) component was negatively affected by the challenge to find experts
  for key capacity-building activities. Finally, the ICR (p. 27) stated that the initial poor quality of design
  studies of two lots including the retention basin of lot eight in Carama conducted by an international
  consultant resulted in the underestimation of the capacity of the basin. The design studies had to be
  conducted again by a local consultant resulting in a cost overrun of the drainage infrastructure costs.
  These were risks not identified during project preparation.

  The ICR (p. 32) stated that the project was able to initiate or complete the procurement for most of the
  project’s budget by the time of project approval.

  However, the second objective was overly ambitious for an emergency project and resulted in the
  cancellation of some activities such as the development of long-term strategies such as the national
  emergency plan and establishing early warning systems. The project’s Results Framework lacked PDO
  indicators to better measure the PDO, particularly for the second objective. (see section 4 and section 9a
  for more details).



                                                                                                           Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Infrastructure Resilience Emergency (P150929)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 39) the Bank conducted six field missions during project implementation. Also, the
 Bank provided timely “no objection” and proactively resolved implementation issues such as the delays in
 the implementation of the RAP. According to the Bank team (January 31, 2020) the Bank addressed the
 initial delay in the compensation of project affected people which in turn delayed project implementation by
 following closely up with all government stakeholders involved in the compensation (mainly Ministry of
 Finance and Ministry of Transport). Also, the Bank addressed the management of the severe accidents
 resulting in fatalities for workers and/or road users taken place (see section 10a for more details) by
 applying the Environmental and Social Incident Response Toolkit six-step approach which allowed the
 works to continue after clarifying responsibilities, deficiencies, and compensating the families of the
 victims.

 The ICR (p. 39) stated that the Bank coordinated with other donors, especially during field missions. Also,
 according to the ICR (p. 38) the Bank provided several recommendations to improve construction and
 environmental and social compliance during the April 2018 mission.

 However, the Bank team did not modify the Results Framework to include PDO indicators that would have
 allowed to better measure the PDO.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change and how key activities and outputs were to lead to the intended outcomes was
 sound. However, it is not clear how some of the indicators included in the Results Framework were to
 measure the achievement of the first aspect of the PDO (“enhance the climate resilience of key transport
 and drainage infrastructure”) such as the PDO indicators “reduction in unit transport costs along RN1 in
 project impact area” and “number of direct project beneficiaries”. The project could have attempted to
 develop appropriate quality related indicators to measure relevant aspects of climate resilience. The
 second aspect of the PDO (“strengthen the country’s capacity to prevent and respond to natural disasters”)
 was also not measured adequately by any outcome indicator. All specified indicators included a target, but
 several indicators lacked a baseline.


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Infrastructure Resilience Emergency (P150929)



 According to the PAD (p. 11) for the project’s Transport component, implementation, monitoring and
 evaluation was to be the responsibility of NRA. For the Urban and DRM components, implementation and
 monitoring and evaluation was to be the responsibility of BAPW in coordination with the central
 government.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 36) the project would have benefited from a beneficiary survey to assess the
  beneficiary satisfaction of the civil works and DRM activities. The Bank team stated (January 31, 2020)
  that some indicators were measured on a regular basis as the civil works were progressing and recorded
  in ISRs. Upon completion of all civil works, the final value of each indicator was included in the client’s
  completion report. Other indicators (indicators measuring outputs such as the completion of the road
  investment plan) were measured just once either upon completion of the activity or at project closing. The
  PCU, which was responsible for M&E, ensured coordination with each executing agency to collect data
  and communicate it to the bank team at least during each supervision mission as shown by the ISRs.
  According to the Bank team (January 31, 2020) the data related to civil works was found to be of reliable
  and of good quality. The works done by the contractors were subjected to technical audits by an
  independent auditor throughout the duration of the project (four times during the project lifetime including
  at project closure) and the quality found to be satisfactory to all parties. The Transport strategy and road
  database have been reviewed by the Bank Team which testify completion and quality of these outputs
  that sustain the project outcomes. The study of Transport cost reduction along RN1 was performed by a
  consultant and based on road user interviews.

  The project’s Results Framework was not revised during project implementation to allow for a better
  alignment of the first two PDO indicators with the infrastructure resilience aspect of the PDO.

  The Bank team stated (January 31, 2020) that the M&E functions and processes are likely to be
  sustained through the capacity developed n the PCU, which is embedded as a permanent unit in the
  National Road Agency.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 36) given the short time frame of project implementation, M&E data was only
  available during the last year of the project. Therefore, it did not significantly feed into decision making.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BI-Infrastructure Resilience Emergency (P150929)



  Resettlement). According to the ICR (p. 37) the project prepared Environmental and Social Management
  Plans and Resettlement Action Plans for the RN1 works and urban development works. In May 2015 a
  major conflict between the contenders of the presidential election broke out which resulted in the stalling of
  project effectiveness by delaying the preparation, approval and disclosure of safeguard documents such as
  the resettlement plans for the road works. Throughout the first Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) the
  environmental and social risks remained Substantial, however, in the sixth ISR the risk was increased to
  High due to two road incidents. The ICR (p. 37) stated that in 2017 and in 2018 two accidents, one on the
  RN1 and one on the river downstream canal, resulted in the death of eight people. The first accident was
  reported to the Bank five months late, resulting in the breach of the contractor and PMU’s requirements.
  After the second accident, the Bank suspended the project for several months until investigations took place
  and the affected families were compensated.

  According to the ICR (p. 38) the Bank provided several recommendations to improve construction and
  environmental and social compliance during the April 2018 mission. These recommendations included the
  installation of a safety retention tank, storage tank of fuel for the company’s life base, improvement of ports
  and equipment for personnel protection, and strengthening of traffic signaling in the work areas. The project
  implemented these recommendations, hired a full-time environmental and social
  specialist. The environmental and social risk was decreased from High to Substantial in the seventh ISR
  and remained Substantial until project closing.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement:

  The ICR (p. 32) stated that procurement for most of the project was being implemented or completed by
  the time of project approval. According to the ICR (p. 36) when the project closed, an external auditor
  assessed the entire procurement process and concluded that the project’s procurement complied with the
  Bank’s procedures and provisions of the Financing Agreement.

  Financial Management:

  According to the ICR (p. 37) none of the audits identified any accountability issues in the project’s financial
  management. The Bank team stated (January 31, 2020) that the external auditor's opinion was unqualified
  and submitted in a timely manner.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  NA



d. Other
   ---


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BI-Infrastructure Resilience Emergency (P150929)



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately
Outcome                                                   Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
                                                                                    Shortcomings in M&E which
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory   were not addressed during
                                                                                    implementation
Quality of M&E                    Modest                  Modest

Quality of ICR                    ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 41-42) provided useful lessons learned which were adapted by IEG:

        Embedding a maintenance program in the design of a climate-resilient infrastructure
         project is critical for ensuring the sustainability of past and future investments. This
         project did not include a maintenance program and among the risks to its development
         outcomes are the lack of financing for the maintenance of urban infrastructure and roads.
        Building capacity for climate-resilient road asset management at the national and local
         level allows to move away from a reactive decision-making process to a risk-based
         approach. In this project, an investment program was combined with road asset and DRM
         activities to build local capacity.
        Using the local market for labor-intensive works ensures to build local capacity and
         community ownership. This project procured certain activities such as spots improvement
         and drainage structure construction from the local market which allowed for the hiring of local
         women and youth.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The project provided a good overview of project preparation and implementation. The ICR was internally
consistent and sufficiently candid. The identified lessons learned were useful. The ICR did not provide
sufficient evidence to conclude the outcomes. In addition, the ICR did not provide any detailed information on
the project’s Financial Management, procurement and M&E implementation. Finally, the ICR would have
benefited from including a unit cost analysis for the infrastructure works and compare it with similar emergency
projects.


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BI-Infrastructure Resilience Emergency (P150929)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
