          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          Inclusive Growth DPO(P149991)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0021666

   1. Project Data



    Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
    Georgia                                   Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


    Programmatic DPL
    Planned Operations:         3             Approved Operations:         2

    Operation ID                              Operation Name
    P149991                                   Inclusive Growth DPO


     L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
     IBRD-85030                              31-Dec-2015                                         60,000,000.00

     Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
     28-Apr-2015                             31-Dec-2015

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                          60,000,000.00                                            0.00

     Revised Commitment                           60,000,000.00                                            0.00

     Actual                                       60,000,000.00                                            0.00




     Prepared by                Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator         Group
     Paul Holden                Judyth L. Twigg            Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)


PHPROJECTDATATBL




     Operation ID                             Operation Name
     P156444                                  Georgia Inclusive Growth DPO2 ( P156444 )



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Inclusive Growth DPO(P149991)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                     Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-85030,IBRD-87420                    31-Mar-2018                                             53,612,190.80

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Apr-2017                              31-Mar-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         53,612,190.80                                               0.00




2. Program Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The Loan Agreement under the first Inclusive Growth Development Policy Operation (DPO-1) did not include
   a Project Development Objective (PDO) but instead identified two pillars, under each of which appears a list
   of actions taken by the borrower. Under DPO-2 there appears, similarly, a list of actions taken under the
   pillars, which were identical in both operations.

   The Program Documents (PDs) for both operations stated that the development objectives were:

   1. Strengthen fiscal oversight of public institutions and improve budgeting and the framework for civil service
   reform.
   2. Improve coverage and quality of social services and strengthen monitoring of outcomes.

   IEG will assess the project against the stated PDOs.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   Pillar 1 focused on:

   i) Supporting actions to improve budgeting: extending the public financial management (PFM) information
   system to include revenues and expenditures of all municipalities, public legal entities, and nonprofit legal
   entities into a consolidated financial management system;
   ii) Supporting the adoption and implementation of a framework for identifying, preparing, appraising, and
   selecting capital investment projects at both the central and local government levels;
   iii) Strengthening the oversight of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) through providing to Parliament financial


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Inclusive Growth DPO(P149991)



   and operational information of SOEs and by attaching their financial information and risk assessments as
   annexes to budget documents; and
   iv) Supporting the development and implementation of new legislation governing the civil service in order to
   improve its efficiency.

   Pillar 2 focused on:

   i) Extending coverage of social services by supporting a new methodology for Targeted Social Assistance in
   order to extend the coverage of the poor;
   ii) Promoting a new pharmaceutical policy that would reduce the consumption of medications without a
   medical practitioner’s prescription;
   iii) Supporting measures to improve the quality of obstetric and neonatal care;
   iv) Supporting measures to improve the quality of teaching and the quality of preschool education;
   v) Addressing weaknesses in the management and delivery of preschool education; and
   vi) Improving the quality, reliability, and frequency of data collection that could be used in monitoring
   outcomes and effectiveness of government spending.




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   The first operation was approved on April 28, 2015 in the amount of US$ 60 million. It closed on schedule on
   December 31, 2015, and the actual amount disbursed was US$ 60 million.

   The second operation was approved on April 28, 2017 in the amount of US$ 50 million. It closed on schedule
   on March 31, 2018, and the actual amount disbursed was US$ 53.6 million. The ICR (p. 10) points out that
   the actual dispersed amount for DPO-2 was greater than the original allocation because the loan was
   denominated in euros, and the exchange rate changed between the signing of the loan agreement and the
   disbursement of the funds.

   Originally, a three-operation DPO series had been planned, with the second DPO planned for 2016 and a
   third DPO planned for 2017. However, in 2015 and 2016 the fiscal deficit rose to more than the equivalent of
   four percent of GDP. In 2015, this was mainly because of higher than planned spending, primarily due to an
   expansion of lending to SOEs. In 2016, the larger than planned budget deficit was more broadly based due to
   both higher current expenditure and higher capital expenditure. As a result, the IMF suspended its program
   for Georgia, and the DPO operations were also delayed. Furthermore, the 2018 World Bank Systematic
   Country Diagnostic identified an alternative set of priorities for promoting inclusive growth. This, together with
   a change in national priorities (explained below), led to the truncation of the operation to a two-DPO series.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Inclusive Growth DPO(P149991)



a. Relevance of Objectives
  The DPO series, according to PD-1 (p. 21), is central to the World Bank Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
  for Georgia for 2014-2017. The CPS focuses on: (i) strengthening public service delivery to promote inclusive
  growth, and (ii) enabling private sector-led job creation through improved competitiveness. The DPO series
  supported the first pillar of the CPS.

  Under the Georgia 2020 strategy, which delineates the country’s development vision, macroeconomic stability
  and stronger public administration were important priorities, along with human capital development. The
  World Bank FY 2019 – 22 Country Partnership Framework (CPF) has the same priorities as embodied in the
  Inclusive Growth DPO series, particularly with respect to improving the quality of education and the efficiency
  of the healthcare system as well as a focus on PFM.



  Rating
  Substantial

b. Relevance of Design
  The CPF FY19-FY22 states (p. 17) that its reform priorities incorporate the conclusions of IEG evaluations in
  terms of the importance of ensuring strong government ownership and setting priorities for reform. PD-1 (p. 2)
  states, “while private sector development, which is being supported by another DPO series in Georgia, will
  help create more jobs, this DPO series will help build human capital and support macroeconomic stability and
  effective policy making. The policy matrix reflects reforms on multiple fronts and at various stages.” PD-2
  states (p. 29), ”the current DPO series is an essential part of the CPS for 2014-17. The CPS focuses on: (i)
  strengthening public service delivery to promote inclusive growth, and (ii) enabling private sector-led job
  creation through improved competitiveness. The current DPO series supports the first pillar of the CPS on
  strengthening public service delivery.”

  The causal links between reforms in health and education and more inclusive growth, was not clearly
  delineated beyond stating that it would enhance human capital. There were also two DPO operations
  (P149998 and P155553) promoting private sector development through improvements to the business
  environment, access to finance, and on exports and innovation. Presumably these also related to inclusive
  growth, but the connection between the series was not clear.

  The ICR did not include a convincing explanation of how the prior actions would achieve the PDOs.

  The PDOs and what the series aimed to achieve were conflated with and were identical to the pillars (which
  are not the same as objectives but instead should represent the channels through which the PDOs would be
  achieved), the measures that were to achieve the development objectives. Furthermore, many prior actions
  focused on issuing decrees and passing legislation. While this might improve the framework for achieving the
  development objectives, the impact depends crucially on actual implementation of the legislative framework.



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Inclusive Growth DPO(P149991)



       Under Pillar 1, reforms aimed to improve fiscal oversight at all levels of government and improve the
       efficiency of the civil service This was to be achieved by consolidating financial management information at all
       levels of government as well as for public entities. Fiscal oversight would also be achieved by strengthening
       the preparation and oversight of capital investment projects and improving the oversight of SOEs. Civil
       service reform was to be achieved through passing and implementing new legislation regarding the
       functioning of the civil service. While the causal chain for achieving the outcomes was plausible in principle,
       the prior actions were less than adequate; merely creating an SOE financial database and beginning
       consultations on a proposed new civil service law were weak instruments.

       Under Pillar II, reforms were directed at better targeting of social expenditures, strengthening education and
       health outcomes, and improved monitoring of programs. The ICR (p. 17) notes that there were substantial
       changes in national priorities that were not reflected in program design in either DPO-1 or DPO-2. This was
       partly the result of the analysis undertaken in the 2018 World Bank Systematic Country Diagnostic, which
       reoriented priorities to external connectivity, skills, internal productivity, access to opportunities, fiscal
       management, environmental protection, and natural resources management as the priorities for inclusive
       growth. At the same time, government priorities also changed towards these goals. Along with the
       deterioration in the macroeconomic situation, these constituted the primary reason behind the truncation of
       the program to a two-operation series.

       The ICR (p. 17) points out that one of the shortcomings in the original program design became evident as the
       series progressed. Specifically, a threshold had been introduced that applied the methodology of public
       investment management only to projects that involved the expenditure of more than Georgian Lari 5 million
       (approximately US$1.9 million). This was far too high a threshold for local municipal (and other) investment
       projects, so that the methodology that had been designed was not used for the vast majority of investments.
       This shortcoming also rendered the results framework unrealistic. Thus, the causal chain for this DPO was
       severely weakened.

       As a result of these shortcomings, the relevance of program design is rated modest.



       Rating
       Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     Strengthen fiscal oversight of public institutions and improve budgeting and the framework for civil service
     reform

    Rationale

                                                                                                         Page 5 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Inclusive Growth DPO(P149991)



Objective 1 was composed of three distinct sub-objectives.

Strengthen fiscal oversight of public institutions: The fact that the public financial management (PFM)
information system excluded municipalities and other entities that received budget transfers reduced fiscal
oversight and weaken budgetary management. To address this issue, prior action one (DPO-1) required an
amendment to the budget code to incorporate into the budget the revenue and expenditure estimates for all
entities, including municipal governments, SOEs, and other legal entities of public law. While the amendment
to the budget code was necessary, it was essentially an input into improving PFM, and there is no
information in the ICR regarding whether PFM did actually improve.

SOEs were perceived as a significant weakness in the fiscal framework due to the fact that their losses had
to be covered by budgetary transfers, with a corresponding impact on the fiscal deficit. The goal of the sub-
objective was to greatly increase fiscal transparency for these entities. A prior action for SOE fiscal reform
under DPO-1 was that the Ministry of Finance register all state-owned enterprises in Georgia, and under
DPO-2 that a financial database be established that covered more than 95% of the total turnover of SOEs in
Georgia, covering four years of data. This target was achieved. By the end of 2015, five years of data were
available, covering 99% of all revenue of SOEs. World Bank technical assistance was a valuable input in
developing the SOE financial database (ICR, p. 27). However, the 2017 IMF Article IV report refers (p. 15) to
future efforts to improve the coverage and measurement of fiscal aggregates to reflect the activities of SOEs
by accounting for their losses, suggesting that there was still progress to be made. In addition, the report
contains a statement by the Georgian government regarding its intention to privatize loss-making SOEs.

An additional indicator related to the financial position of SOEs was that their quasi-fiscal relationship be
included in the Fiscal Risk Annex by the time of the 2019 budget. This target was achieved a year earlier
than expected, and the results of the annual analysis will be included in all future budgets.

Improve budgeting: Under DPO-2, the prior action for the sub-objective was the establishment, through
decree, of a framework that would include appraisal, selection, budgeting, implementation, and evaluation
for all public investments that exceeded a pre-established threshold. The associated target was the
availability of budget and actual data for these entities. This target was achieved, with all municipalities and
other entities covered by the law and decree providing real-time data by the end of 2015. However, the effect
on PFM is unknown.


The results indicator related to improved public investment management under DPO-1 was that the selection
criteria for capital projects would be strengthened for 70% (revised downwards from 100%) of all new
investment projects above an agreed threshold, and that all investment projects from six municipalities would
be included. These targets were not achieved, although the ICR states (p. v) that there was progress in
developing the necessary decision criteria for making investments. However, this was an input.

Improving the framework for civil service reform: The capacity of the Georgian civil service was
considered to be weak. The prior action for civil service reform under DPO-1 was that a new framework for
civil service personnel policy be adopted as evidenced by Decree 627 dated November 19, 2014. Under


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Inclusive Growth DPO(P149991)



    DPO-2, the prior action was that a new Law on Civil Service be adopted. The indicator for civil service reform
    was that all entrants to the public sector take a pre-qualification test. The target was that 100% of new
    entrants hired would have taken the test by the end of December 2017. This target was not achieved;
    according to the ICR, no new entrants took the test. However, the ICR emphasizes that substantial progress
    was made in improving the budgetary framework and setting the foundation for future improvements in civil
    service capacity, though it provides no evidence to support this claim, and in particular no information on the
    number passing the test.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     Improve coverage and quality of social services and strengthening monitoring of outcomes

    Rationale
    This objective had three sub-objectives, namely extending the coverage of social services; improving the
    quality of social services; and strengthening the monitoring of outcomes.

    Although Georgia had in place a program of targeted social assistance that provided cash transfers to the
    very poor, its benefits were limited because they covered only 60% of the lowest decile of the population.
    Furthermore, the ICR states (p. 2) that "the vulnerability to a fall into poverty is high in Georgia because of
    the large share of out-of-pocket spending by households on healthcare."

    To improve the coverage of targeted social assistance, a prior action under DPO-1 required that a new
    methodology be introduced to better target the poor. This was to be achieved through the passing of a
    resolution that was published in the Legislative Herald on December 31, 2014. The results indicator was that
    the share of the bottom decile receiving targeted social assistance would increase from the baseline of 60%
    to 75%. This was revised downwards in DPO-2 to 65% because of delays in the completion of policy actions.
    This target was achieved, with the proportion in the lowest decile receiving social assistance increasing to
    69% by end 2018. The prior action regarding legislation was achieved, but passing a resolution is an input
    into the process.

    To improve the coverage and quality of health services, prior action 5 established a requirement that
    specified that certain pharmaceutical products could only be purchased with a physician's prescription. This
    prior action was met through the publication of an Order in the Legislative Herald on July 18, 2014. There is
    no information on whether health care service improved or whether coverage increased.

    Prior action 6 of DPO-1 and prior action 4 of DPO-2 were aimed at improving obstetric and neo-natal care
    through an Order under DPO-1 and implementation of an Order under DPO-2. The indicator was that the

                                                                                                          Page 7 of 14
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Inclusive Growth DPO(P149991)



    share of perinatal facilities providing services increase from a base of zero to 100% by 2018. This was
    achieved. A further indicator was that the maternal mortality rate would decline from a base of 27.7% in 2013
    to 26% by 2018. This was significantly surpassed, with the mortality rate declining to 13.1% by late 2018.

    In education, under DPO-1, the prior action was an amendment to the Law on General Education to raise
    the qualification requirements for entry to the teaching profession and improve the regulation of teacher
    recruitment. This law was amended on November 18, 2014. A further requirement was a prior action under
    DPO-1 that called for the adoption of a “Framework for Teachers Entry into the Profession, Professional
    Development and Career Advancement Scheme” through a decree, which was achieved on February 20,
    2015. The results indicator was the proportion of teachers accumulating at least one credit as defined in the
    credit accumulation manual. The target was that this proportion would rise from 21% in 2015 to 65% in 2018.
    It was exceeded, with the actual number being 75%, although the indicator was an input, and its impact on
    the provision of quality education was not possible to discern.

    Under DPO-2, a prior action was the adoption of a new law on Early and Preschool Education, which was
    achieved on June 8, 2016. The indicator was the proportion of pre-school education institutions using the
    pre-school curriculum increasing from a baseline of zero to 50% in 2018, with the actual number achieved
    being 75%. This is also an input, and while it might be important to establish a framework, without data on its
    impact, no judgment on its effectiveness can be made.

    On monitoring and evaluation (M&E), the prior action under DPO-1 was the submission to Parliament of a
    bill to amend the Law on Statistics, that would require a three-year preparation time for the population
    census. Under DPO-2, the prior action was the adoption of the amendment. This was achieved in June
    2016. A further prior action under DPO-2 was a requirement to undertake a separate labor force survey with
    a larger sample size and a higher frequency of surveying. This was completed in March 2017. These prior
    actions are also inputs, and there is no way to assess their impacts.

    Some of the results indicators were inputs rather than measures of impact and provided little evidence on
    the ultimate impact. However, on the basis of the achievement of the labor force survey, the rating for this
    PDO is substantial.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome




                                                                                                        Page 8 of 14
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Inclusive Growth DPO(P149991)



The relevance of objectives was rated substantial, given consistency with the World Bank strategy for Georgia
and congruence with Georgia’s country priorities, although the dissonance between the loan title and the PDOs
would seem to warrant more explanation. Relevance of design was rated modest on the grounds that the causal
chain was less than robust, and that design focused on issuing decrees and passing legislation, the effects of
which would depend crucially on how the laws and decrees were implemented in the face of weak capacity of
the Georgian civil service. Efficacy of the first objective was rated modest; although the fiscal framework
improved and there was better tracking of SOE financial results, the ultimate impact on the fiscal position is
unclear. The efficacy of the second objective was rated modest even though many of the results indicators were
achieved, because many were primarily inputs. While laws and decrees were passed in accordance with the
prior actions, final data on achievement of the targets were not available in the ICR.

As a result of a modest relevance of design, modest efficacy of one objective and substantial for the other, the
outcome rating is moderately unsatisfactory.


a.     Outcome Rating
       Moderately Unsatisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

The ICR (p. 24) states that “the government has demonstrated full commitment to sustaining the gains from the
program.” There was no evidence that key elements of the reform program were reverting to previous practices.
While there were still issues related to civil service reform that needed further attention in order to resolve
outstanding issues, the government appeared committed to doing so. Risks from external factors appeared to
be low, according to World Bank assessments (ICR, p. 25). Further reduction in risks will accrue from the
follow-on operation (ICR, p.16), as well as institutional strengthening that took place as part of the operation
(ICR, p. 24).


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
       Negligible

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     The ICR (p. 25) states that the cooperation between the World Bank and the government of Georgia in
     preparing the program was strong and generally effective. Furthermore, the ICR (p. 13) points out that the
     program had extensive analytical underpinnings. The Bank also undertook extensive public outreach in
     preparing the program and worked well with development partners. A shortcoming of the program was the
     failure to ensure that appropriate thresholds were set for public investment management projects with
     respect to local governments. The results framework also had weaknesses in the choice of indicators (see



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Inclusive Growth DPO(P149991)



  Section 9). A result of this, for example, was that the effect of a number of processes, such as measuring
  the impact of the pre-qualification exam for the civil service, was not measured.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The ICR (p. 25) states that the Bank provided the government of Georgia with useful assistance during the
  implementation of the program, particularly with respect to the deterioration of the macro-economic
  framework which led to the decision to truncate the series from three DPOs to two. This demonstrated to a
  number of policymakers that excessive spending had clear consequences with respect to World Bank
  assistance. The ICR also states that, although DPO-2 was delayed, there was ongoing dialogue between
  the World Bank and the government. At least partly because of this, the government of Georgia committed
  to taking steps to restore macro-economic stability. The strong commitment also contributed to the
  perception that the risk to development outcomes was low.

  However, the ICR (p. 16) points out that there were no ISRs done under DPO–2 even though the period
  between DPO-1 and DPO-2 exceeded a year. This resulted in the failure to establish centralized reporting
  of the results indicators, necessitating the collection of these data at the ICR stage.

  Because of the failure to conduct ISRs during the implementation of DPO-2, quality of supervision is rated
  moderately satisfactory.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  The Ministry of Finance was responsible for the overall implementation of the program. According to the
  ICR, the government remained committed throughout the program to achieving its objectives and
  ensuring the passage of key legislation in order to provide a foundation for many of the reforms. This
  occurred, even though the macro-economic situation went off track for a period due to the need to
  finance SOE losses. Despite the deterioration in the fiscal deficit, the Ministry of Finance continued to
  engage in extensive dialogue with the World Bank team, which led to the completion of almost all of the
  required policy actions under an anticipated DPO-3, which in the event was canceled. Nevertheless, the
  lack of fiscal discipline that resulted in the second operation being delayed and the third cancelled leads
  to a rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory.

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Inclusive Growth DPO(P149991)




  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  The implementation of the program was spread over a significant number of implementing agencies,
  and the ICR (p. 26) reports that these agencies generally performed well in implementing the program.
  Even though there were shortcomings in some of the reforms such as public investment management,
  in a number of areas reforms exceeded expectations and many of the triggers for DPO-3 were fulfilled.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The design of the monitoring and evaluation framework was mixed. Although some indicators were adequate to
  measure the effect of prior actions, others were not; some indicators measured inputs while there were no
  indicators for some of the prior actions. For DPO–1, the fiscal portion was adequately measured with respect to
  budget coverage and public investments. Fiscal performance was badly affected by SOE losses, necessitating
  transfers from the budget. The monitoring and evaluation indicator was the availability of budgeted and actual
  data for 95% of the total turnover of SOEs in Georgia, which was achieved by the end of 2015. Furthermore, an
  additional indicator was their inclusion in the Fiscal Risk Annex to the state budget. Other indicators had
  weaknesses; a further problem was that the indicators measured inputs rather than outputs. This, for example,
  applied to the indicator related to how many new entrants to the civil service took a prequalification test rather
  than to the pass rate. In the event, no new entrants took this test, which raises questions regarding its
  usefulness. Indicators in the areas of health, particularly obstetric and perinatal care, were adequately
  measured, showing substantial improvements. In the area of education, the indicators all measured inputs.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (p. 16) indicates that the project results framework could have been more closely monitored. While
  implementing agencies tracked results indicators, the fact that there was no centralized reporting of program
  results indicators meant that it was not possible at the macro level to keep track of program results.
  Nevertheless, the ICR reported that “utilization was adequate because it informed the needed adjustments
  to the program during DPO-2 preparation” (ICR, p. 16).


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Inclusive Growth DPO(P149991)




c. M&E Utilization
  As the operation evolved, monitoring and evaluation was used to modify the indicators in DPO–2 as well as
  enable modifications to the program in the second operation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  There were no environmental effects. There were positive social effects arising from the improved social
  assistance coverage of the bottom decile of the population.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  No fiduciary compliance issues were reported.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
  N/A



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                      ICR                     IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Both design and efficacy were
                             Moderately             Moderately
Outcome                                                                          based on prior actions that
                             Satisfactory           Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 were essentially inputs.
Risk to Development
                             Negligible             Negligible                   ---
Outcome

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Inclusive Growth DPO(P149991)



                                                                                  Quality at Entry is modest,
                               Moderately                                         and, given the overall
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory                                       outcome of MU, this makes
                                                                                  Bank Performance MU
                               Moderately
Borrower Performance                                  Moderately Satisfactory     ---
                               Satisfactory
Quality of ICR                                        Modest                      ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

 IEG takes the following lessons from the ICR, with some modification of language:


   • Even if a program goes off track because of adverse fiscal developments, it is important to continue a
   dialogue with the government so that if the fiscal issue is solved, the program can continue. In the case of
   Georgia, the World Bank continued to have dialogue with the government, with the result that even though
   the third operation was canceled, most of the triggers were met.
   • Results indicators should be directed at outcomes rather than inputs. In the case of Georgia, a number of
   indicators measured inputs, which hampered assessment of the overall impact of the program.


 IEG offers the following additional lessons:


   • It is important to distinguish between development objectives – what the program is trying to achieve, and
   the pillars – how the objectives will be achieved. In the case of the Georgia DPO series these are conflated,
   which makes the impact of the program and the clarity of the results chain difficult to assess.
   • Political resistance can be overcome by extensive outreach and simplification of processes. In the case of
   Georgia, making budget processes easier to navigate overcame the resistance of local entities to the
   reforms, as did outreach.
   • Eliminating an operation in a series if prior firm undertakings the government with respect to fiscal
   discipline are broken sends a clear signal to countries that these commitments are important. In the case of
   Georgia, the delay in processing DPO-2 and the cancellation of DPO-3 were appropriate responses to the
   lack of fiscal discipline that led to the deterioration of the macroeconomic situation.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Inclusive Growth DPO(P149991)




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

While the ICR was comprehensive, it failed to highlight the conflation of development objectives with pillars,
thus confusing the overall objectives of the program with the means to achieve the objectives. Furthermore, it
failed to clarify the disconnect between the inclusive growth title of the two operations and the development
objectives. Following its arguments on the results chain was also difficult.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Modest




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
