     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0021843

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P127035                                  Shanghai low-carbon city

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                    Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82330                               31-Dec-2018                                       104,345,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Mar-2013                              31-Dec-2018

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                         100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                     100,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Chikako Miwa                Fernando Manibog           Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P127034_TBL
 Project ID                               Project Name
 P127034                                  CN GEF Shanghai Low-Carbon City ( P127034 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-14205                                                                                       4345000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Mar-2013

                                                                                               Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)




                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                     0.00                                    4,345,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                    4,345,000.00

 Actual                                                  0.00                                    4,345,000.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Project Development Objective (PDO): The PDO is to “pilot green-energy schemes and scale up low-
   carbon investments in buildings in Shanghai Municipality, with a focus on Changning District, and the higher-
   level global environment objective of the Project is to support Shanghai Municipality's low-carbon city
   development by promoting green-energy schemes, with a focus on Changning District.” (Loan Agreement
   dated June 14, 2013, Schedule 1, page 5).

   For the purposes of this ICR Review, the following sub-objectives will be assessed:

   Sub-objective 1: To pilot green energy schemes in Shanghai Municipality, with a focus on Changning District

   Sub-objective 2: To scale up low-carbon investments in buildings in Shanghai Municipality, with a focus on
   Changning District.

   Global Environment Objective (GEO): To support Shanghai Municipality’s low-carbon city development by
   promoting green-energy schemes, with a focus on Changning District.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Technical Assistance and Incremental Support for Near Zero-Emission Buildings (Appraisal cost:
   US$10 million, Actual cost: US$37.57 million)

   The actual cost for the technical assistance and incremental support for near zero-emission buildings
   increased from the appraisal cost, mainly due to an increase in activities on green energy building (from
   US$6.66 million at appraisal to US$30.73 million, 461 per cent of the original estimate) and on capacity
   building and project management support (from US$2.04 million to US$5.782 million, 283 per cent of the
   original estimate). The increased costs were financed by an increase in contribution from the Changning

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)



district government and project developers for green energy building (from US$4 million at appraisal to US$
28.595 million).

(a) Green-Energy Buildings

      Provision of technical assistance to and capacity building of Changning District for the green-energy
       retrofitting of buildings, that covered implementation of energy-efficiency and renewable-energy
       technologies in existing buildings.
      Demonstration of at least one (1) near zero-emission building in Changning District.

(b) Low-Carbon Energy Supply

      Provision of technical assistance to Changning District for the implementation of distributed
       generation from renewable energy and natural gas and a pilot carbon emissions cap and trade
       scheme.

(c) Green Mobility

      Provision of technical assistance to Changning District for the design and development of
       implementation plans for the improvement of local public transport systems to discourage the use of
       private vehicles.

(d) Capacity Building and Project Management Support

      Carrying out of due diligence reviews of Part 2 of the Project, and promotion of low-carbon
       investments.
      Capacity building of key stakeholders for the development and implementation of low-carbon
       initiatives.
      Project management, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation and donor coordination.

2. Low-Carbon Investments (Appraisal cost: US$246 million, Actual cost: US$332 million)

The actual cost for low-carbon investment increased from the appraisal cost, mainly due to an increase in
contributions from IBRD, Shanghai Pudong Development (SPD) Bank and the Bank of Shanghai (BOS),
and project developers for new green energy buildings (from US$ 15 million to US$ 240.67 million).

(a) Green-Energy Retrofitting of Buildings

      Implementation of low-carbon technologies in existing buildings.

(b) New Green-Energy Buildings

      Implementation of low-carbon technologies above municipal building code requirements in new
       buildings.




                                                                                                Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: At appraisal, the original cost estimate was US$256 million. The actual cost was US$369.89
   million (ICR, para. 20). There was an almost 50 percent increase in total cost due to a cost increase for
   constructing green energy buildings. The increase in project cost was covered by contributions from the
   Implementing Agencies, which were the Changning District Government, Shanghai Pudong Development
   (SPD) Bank, and the Bank of Shanghai (BOS), as well as project developers.

   Financing: At appraisal, the IBRD loan financing and the GEF grant were estimated at US$100 million and
   US$4.345 million, respectively. The actual IBRD disbursement and the GEF grant were the same as the
   estimates.

   Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, the Implementing Agencies and project developers were expected to
   contribute US$151.655 million. The actual contribution was US$222.255 million. The details of the
   contributions were presented in Annex 3, page 45 in the ICR.

   Dates: Upon the Government’s request, the Project underwent a Level Two restructuring on July 23, 2018.
   The allocation for the expenditure on goods, services, and training was increased while the allocations for
   green energy building sub-grants and operating costs were decreased (ICR, Table 2, page 13). The project
   closed on December 31, 2018, as originally planned.

   A split evaluation was deemed unnecessary, as the PDOs, the outcome targets, the PDO Indicators, and
   the components remained unchanged during implementation.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context. At the time of appraisal, the significant consumption of fossil fuels, especially coal, had
been posing threats to the country in terms of air pollution, climate change, and energy security. The coal
consumption was expected to intensify due to rapid urbanization. Cities accounted for 85 percent of China's
commercial energy use (PAD, para 3). The large cities (i.e., Shanghai, Beijing and Tianjin) generated CO2
emissions per capita that were three to four times higher than the national average (PAD, para 3). Over the
next 20 years, it was projected that urban areas would receive an additional 300 million migrants, which
would multiply the energy demand and the related CO2 emissions by 3 times for buildings and 4 times for
transport (PAD, para 2).

Recognizing these threats, the Government of China (GoC) set cities as the core of the action plan to
achieve its carbon intensity reduction target, which targeted to reduce the carbon intensity by 40-45 percent
from 2005 to 2020 (PAD, para 1).

Sector Context. The Shanghai Municipal Government and Changning District Government were committed
to adopt green-energy schemes. Shanghai was one of the pioneer cities to pilot carbon emissions trading
schemes (ETS). Changning established the online platform to monitor energy use for public buildings in
2017, which was the first one in Shanghai. The municipal and district governments had also dedicated
funds for energy conservation and emissions reduction activities to achieve various targets including in the


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)



building sector. Shanghai and Changning sought to benefit from international knowledge and best practice
to accelerate and enhance the quality of their low-carbon urban development initiatives.

The analysis at appraisal concluded that the highest emission reduction potential in Changning was in
building retrofits. Buildings were estimated to contribute as much as 90 percent of total final energy
consumption in Changning (ICR, para 3). Building retrofits, especially of commercial buildings, would
contribute more than half of the estimated potential reduction of emissions in Changning. Retrofitting
buildings would have wide replication potential in China, but the single largest barrier was that owners were
reluctant to invest in Energy Efficiency (EE) measures. The reluctance stemmed from several factors: (a)
energy costs were a small share of building operating costs; (b) building retrofit investments usually had
long payback periods; (c) building retrofits may disrupt building users and thus lead to foregone rent; and
(d) building managers and users faced conflicting incentives. This is because building managers bear costs
of EE investments but direct benefits from the EE investments would be felt only by building users who pay
energy bills.

Relevance to Government Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was relevant to the GoC’s 12th Five-Year Plan
(FYP) (2011-2015), which was targeted to: cut the energy intensity of the economy by 16 percent by 2015,
increase the share of non-fossil fuels in primary energy from 8 to 15 percent from 2011 to 2020, increase
the implementation rate of new green building standards by 14 percent by 2015, and reduce the per capita
energy consumption of public buildings by 15 percent by 2015. Moreover, the PDO was aligned with the
priorities under Shanghai's 12th FYP for Energy Conservation and Climate Change (issued in March 2012),
which aimed to: strengthen energy-saving monitoring and management systems, accelerate the
development of energy saving and low carbon transportation, and promote low-carbon buildings.

In 2007, Changning had established the first online platform to monitor energy use for public buildings in
Shanghai. This became a model for replication in all other districts as mandated by the Shanghai Municipal
Government in 2012. Expanded coverage was expected to address performance risk by allowing the
monitoring and verification of consumer behavior and management of building energy systems. The
municipal and district governments had also dedicated funds for energy conservation and emissions
reduction activities to achieve various targets including in the building sector. In January 2013, Changning
District Government issued “Low-Carbon Development Special Funds Management Measures” to provide
subsidy incentives for building retrofits.

At project closure, the PDO was relevant to the 13th FYP (2016-2020). However, the PDO’s relevance to
the Government strategies was weakened regarding: (1) the ETS for buildings and (2) the subsidies for
building retrofits. due to the anticipated shift in focus of the emerging national ETS to the energy sector,
oversupply of offsets under the China Certified Emissions Reduction program relative to demand, and the
central government’s indication that renewable energy purchase would be required. In addition, the
relevance of the subsidies to incentivize the retrofits were weakened due to the lack of the policy that
makes building retrofits mandatory.

Relevance to Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was relevant to the World Bank Group Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) (FY2013-2016). At present, the PDO remains relevant to the same CPS. There
was no subsequent CPS available at project closure.

Institutional Capacity and Realism. The first component of the Project was implemented by the Project
Management Office (PMO) in the Changning District Government, while the second component was



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)



               implemented by Shanghai Pudong Development (SPD) Bank and the Bank of Shanghai (BOS), the
               participating financial intermediaries (PFIs) responsible for channeling the Bank loan.

               At appraisal, SPD Bank and BOS were selected as the implementing agencies because those commercial
               banks: (a) were committed to green credit businesses, had previous experience with building Energy
               Efficiency (EE) and Energy Service Companies (ESCO) investments, and focused strongly on SME
               finance; and (b) had the Shanghai municipal government as the largest shareholder (PAD, para. 57, page
               13).

               The PAD (para. 13, page 34) stated that the implementing agencies (PMO, SPD Bank, and BOS) have
               limited experience in managing Bank projects, although SPD Bank is a partner under the IFC’s China
               Utility-Based Energy Efficiency (CHUEE) program. Therefore, the implementing agencies needed to hire
               qualified experts and strengthen their capacity through training in Bank procurement, financial
               management, and safeguard policies and procedures, as well as technical due diligence skills. The capacity
               development of the implementing agencies was conducted under Component 1 of the Project.

               Previous Sector Experience. The design of the project has benefitted substantially from the successful
               financial intermediary (Fl) experience of the China Energy Efficiency Financing (CHEEF) program, under
               which three participating banks on-lent IBRD loans to sub-borrowers for industrial and building EE
               projects. The Second Phase of China Renewable Energy Scale-Up Program (CRESP) intended to support
               RE policies and pilot RE applications in cities, particularly tackling the issue of grid connection for roof-top
               solar PVs. Establishing Measurement and Verification System for Energy Efficiency in China aims to
               establish an energy savings measurement & verification (M&V) methodology and system. The Shanghai
               project could be an M&V pilot in the building sector using its on-line energy monitoring platform. The
               Partnership for Market Readiness is assisting China in designing, piloting, and eventually implementing a
               carbon cap and trade scheme, under which Shanghai is also a pilot city. Finally, the GEF Heat Reform and
               Building Energy Efficiency Project focused on new residential building codes in northern China (PAD, para.
               45, page 10).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Sub-objective 1: To pilot green energy schemes in Shanghai, with a focus on Changning District

                             As indicated in Section 2.a. above, the PDO will be assessed in terms of its underlying sub-objectives.

                             Rationale


                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)



Theory of Change (TOC) for Sub-objective 1: There were three paths to achieve Sub-objective 1.

      Green energy buildings: The activities of developing of green-energy building policies, making
       financing mechanism recommendations, expanding online energy monitoring platform, and conducting
       diagnosis and feasibility studies of buildings would be expected to lead to an increase in investments
       in building retrofits, while construction and demonstration of a Near Zero Emissions (NZE) building
       would lead to attract new investments in NZE buildings. Retrofitted green-energy buildings and NZE
       buildings would lead to energy savings and greenhouse gas emissions reductions. Key assumptions
       include: the green-energy building policies would come into effect early during the project duration,
       financing mechanism would be developed as recommended, and the retrofitted green-energy
       buildings and demonstrated NZE building would attract sufficient investments.
      Low-carbon energy supply: Constructing and demonstrating distributed generation centers, as well
       as supporting participation of buildings in the carbon emission cap and trade scheme (ETS) in
       Changning, would lead to an increase in low-carbon energy supply.
      Green Mobility: Bus and Non-Motorized Transport (NMT) areas were adopted after the development
       of plans to connect the “last mile” between metro/train stations and office buildings. During
       implementation, the activities on buses were dropped due to the private sector’s entry in the business
       of renting bicycles. The key assumption was that, after the bus and NMT system was adopted,
       people would increase their use of NMTs.



Outputs:

      Green-energy building policies, business models, and financing mechanism recommendations were
       completed.
      Online energy monitoring platform for all large buildings in Changning was established.
      Audits, diagnoses, and feasibility studies of building retrofits were completed.
      New NZE building was constructed.
      Technical design of a pilot distributed generation center in Changning District, which was designed to
       use renewable energy and/or natural gas, was completed.
      TA to design and implement pilot participation of buildings under the city’s cap-and-trade scheme
       including through purchase of ‘green electricity’ was completed.
      Three non-motorized transport areas were designed to be implemented as part of an overall plan for
       Changning district.
      Of the 67 subprojects under the Project, 26 subprojects on NZE buildings leveraged the co-financing
       of US$19.39 million from the project developers.



Intermediate Results:

The achievements of the relevant Intermediate Results (IR) indicators were as follows.

      Innovative policies were piloted in relation to green-energy retrofitting of buildings by October 2018,
         achieving the target after the original target date of “by fiscal year (FY) 2016”. The issuance of


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)



       Changning District “Public Buildings Energy Efficiency Management Measures” was delayed. IEG
       concurs with the ICR team that “[i]f adopted, implemented, and scaled-up sufficiently early before
       project completion, the pilot schemes could contribute indirectly to the outcome at completion as
       measured by GEO Indicator, and to PDO Indicators 2 and 3 on energy savings and emissions
       reductions from investments in low-carbon buildings (ICR, para 74, page 24). Nevertheless,
       considering that the city pioneered in setting up policies for green-energy retrofitting in China, the
       policy’s impact on energy saving and carbon emission reduction in the long term would be promising
       (The ICR team’s written response dated March 23, 2020 to the draft ICR Review; hereafter, comments
       from the ICR team).
      There were 187 online energy monitoring platforms established, achieving the target of 160 against
       the baseline of 100; however, according to the ICR (page 34), the achievement was only modestly
       attributable to the Project. The coverage was expanded in alignment with the government policy that
       had been established; the Project’s main contribution against this IR indicator’s target was to improve
       the platforms’ capabilities and functions. The energy monitoring platforms in Changning district were
       widely replicated in other districts as well as Shanghai Municipal Government to administer building
       energy efficiency. Approximately 1,600 large commercial buildings to gain access to the municipal
       platform of Shanghai by 2018 (The PMO’s written response dated March 13, 2020 to the draft ICR
       Review; hereafter, comments from the PMO).
      One NZE building was piloted by December 2018, achieving the target (100 percent of the original
       target). It was replicated and awarded by both central government and international agencies.
      No innovative financing mechanisms were developed for green-energy retrofitting of buildings, thus
       not achieving the target. This was due to the District Government’s unwillingness to develop a
       guarantee mechanism to mitigate risks of lending to Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). As
       alternative measures to the guarantee mechanism, the Changning government conducted a
       disclosure of energy consumption, energy audits, and an adaptable government subsidy program,
       aiming to promote the retrofit of existing buildings (Comments from the ICR team).
      Seven distributed generation centers (i.e., distributed combined heat and power generation systems in
       two subprojects and distributed PV in five subprojects) were built by December 2018, exceeding the
       target (700 percent of the original target).
      NMT system was piloted by December 2018. The Project cancelled the activities on buses to avoid an
       overlap of activities with the private sector, as shared bicycle businesses were emerged to address
       the last-mile issue. During the project implementation, the project activities on green mobility shifted its
       focus to support NMT system through piloting roads and passages for pedestrians and cyclists and
       conducting a study on NMTs to be included as a part of the government plan (Comments from the ICR
       team).
      Project experience and knowledge were shared through publications and international forums.



Outcomes:

    Annual energy savings in the amount of 78,083 tons of coal equivalent (tce) per year were supported
       by the investments under the Project (11,752 tce and 66,331 tce per year under Component 1 and 2,
       respectively). The achievement exceeded the target of 76,000 tons of coal equivalent per year (103
       percent of the original target). The pilots of green-energy schemes indirectly contributed to the energy
       savings under the Project as a whole, by providing a foundation to scale-up the low-carbon investment
       under Component 2.

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)




      Use of renewable energy increased by 25,901 MWh/year (The ICR team’s written responses dated
       February 24, 2020 to IEG’s questionnaire; hereafter, the ICR team’s responses).
      Energy costs for building users decreased. Annual energy savings of 78,083 tce came from reduced
       consumption of grid electricity, diesel and natural gas which are priced per Table 6-1 of the ICR
       (Comments from the ICR team). Specifically, the retrofits allowed the tenants of Yuandong
       International Mansion and Wenguang Mansion to reduce their energy costs associated with the
       retrofitted systems by more than 50% and 70%, respectively.
      Share of trips with public transport, cycling, and walking increased. In parallel to the Project, there was
       a private company that provided cycling options for commuting. While quantified data on a change in
       the share of NMT was not available, the ICR team confirmed that the infrastructure improvements
       were conducted in line with the design studies for the NMT activities. (Photos of the improved
       structure for pedestrians and cyclists were provided in the ICR team’s written response.)



As the ICR (page 31 and 38) indicated, there was no specific overall indicator for Sub-objective 1 in the
Results Framework. To measure the achievement of outcome of Sub-objective 1, the ICR referred to the set
of indicators listed in Table 3, namely: IR Indicators 1, 3, 4, 5, and 6; supplemented by evidence of two other
schemes piloted under the project (advanced functioning of online monitoring platform, and low-carbon
community designs).

Key outputs, intermediate results, and outcomes among those listed above were highlighted in terms of three
pillars to pilot green energy schemes in Shanghai with a focus on Changning District, namely,
operationalizing green energy buildings, developing of low-carbon energy supply, and constructing green
mobility. Operationalizing green energy buildings was the core of the activities to achieve the Sub-objective 1,
considering its relevance to carbon dioxide emissions reduction and the fact that 81 percent of total
component cost was allocated to it after scaling down activities in the other two pillars during project
implementation. Under this component, green-energy building policies, business models, and financing
mechanism recommendations supported implementation of building retrofits and construction and
demonstration of NZE building. Online energy monitoring platform’s capabilities and functions were improved
to accumulate data and information on energy savings and carbon dioxide emissions reductions. Seven
distributed generation centers, of which two centers used renewable energy, were established and started
operations. Though the issuance of measures to enhance green-energy retrofits was delayed and the
guarantee mechanism for lending to SMEs by the District Government was not developed, the technical
assistance provided under Component 1 supported capacity development of the stakeholders to pilot green-
energy building schemes, thus contributing to achievements of outcomes in Sub-objective 2. The pilot
schemes led to energy savings of 11,752 tce per year under Component 1.

On one hand, the policies on retrofitting of buildings, the NZE demonstration building, and the distributed
generation centers, were successfully established to pilot the green energy schemes. On the other hand, the
delay in development of policies and the cancellation of development of a guarantee mechanism for lending
to SMEs negatively affected the pilot. The planned financing mechanism was not developed for retrofitting of
buildings. On balance, the achievement of the Project’s efficacy in achieving Sub-objective 1 was assessed
as substantial.




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Sub-objective 2: To scale up low-carbon investments in buildings in Shanghai, with a focus on Changning
District

Rationale
TOC for Sub-objective 2: The increased availability of financing sources, greater access by developers, and
a faster pace of investments, would lead to the scaling-up of investments in low-carbon buildings. An
additional low-carbon investment in the amount of US$ 246,000,000 was expected by the project closure,
compared to a baseline of US$ 0 in 2013.



Outputs:

      Of the 67 subprojects under the Project, 41 subprojects on low-carbon investments leveraged the co-
       financing of US$116.93 million from the participating financial intermediaries (PFIs) and the equity of
       US$115.40 million from the project developers.



Intermediate Results:

The achievements of the relevant IR indicator were as follows.

      Low-carbon investments in the amount of US$332,190,136 had been supported by 2018, exceeding
       the target of US$ 246,000,000 (135 percent of the original target).
            o At appraisal, the Project planned to finance only the incremental costs for new building
               measures (PAD, para 51, Annex 3). During implementation, the Project financed not only the
               incremental costs but also the costs of high-efficiency technologies in new buildings, which
               costed US$68.8 million (ICR, para 43). When considering only the low-carbon investments in
               the incremental costs, the achievement was as follows: Low-carbon investments in the amount
               of US$263.5 million were supported under the Project by 2018, exceeding the target of US$
               246 million (107 percent of the original target).



Outcomes:

The achievements of the PDO indicators were as follows.

      Annual energy savings in the amount of 78,083 tons of coal equivalent (tce) per year achieved
       (11,752 tce and 66,331 tce per year under Component 1 and 2, respectively). The achievement
       exceeded the target of 76,000 tons of coal equivalent per year (103 percent of the original target).

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)




      Annual carbon dioxide emissions reduction in the amount of 189,946 tons of coal equivalent per year
       was achieved, exceeding the target of 165,000 tons of coal equivalent per year (115 percent of the
       original target).



Key outputs, intermediate results, and outcomes among those listed above are highlighted below. Low-
carbon investments in buildings were scaled up from the US$0 baseline to US$332.19 million in actual
achievement, overachieving its original target by 135 percent. The low-carbon investment included the co-
financing of US$116.93 million from the participating financial intermediaries (PFIs) and the equity of
US$115.40 million from the project developers. The Project’s low-carbon investments in buildings increased
the energy savings and reduced carbon dioxide emissions. The low-carbon investments in buildings led to
energy savings of 66,331 tce per year under Component 2 (84 percent of the total energy saved). Through
the activities conducted under Component 1 and Component 2, the Project achieved carbon dioxide
emissions reductions of 189,946 tce per year.

There were four sub-categories of buildings: Commercial, Residential, Existing, and New.

Commercial v. Residential: At appraisal, it was expected that the market would favor investing in commercial
buildings than residential buildings. A study conducted during the project preparation pointed out the larger
energy saving potential of commercial buildings as well as the higher implementation resistance for the
residential buildings. To address it, the Bank team and the PMO agreed to put more emphasis on commercial
buildings than residential buildings with arrangements, while allowing the FIs to finance residential buildings
under the Bank’s agreement (Comments from the ICR Team).

Existing v. New: In light of key expected outcome at appraisal, the ICR (para.16, page 9) stated that “[t]he
focus on Changning implies a focus on building retrofits as the leading measure identified for reducing
emissions in Changning.” During the project implementation, constructing the new energy efficient buildings
attracted larger demand from the market (ICR, para. 71, page 23). The amount of investments in retrofitting
remained less than anticipated at appraisal; because, (i) there was no policy to make retrofit of existing
buildings mandatory and (ii) the retrofit projects required the project developers to access special type of
financing (ICR, para.70-71, page 23). The retrofit subprojects demonstrated financial viability in terms of
government subsidy. At appraisal, the government subsidy was assumed at Chinese Yuan (CNY) 8,260 per
tce. At project closure, the actual subsidies for 46 retrofit subprojects ranged from CNY791 per tce to
CNY17,639 per tce with the average of CNY2,721 per tce (Comments from the ICR team; detailed data
shown in ICR Annex 5). In light of attracting investments to retrofits, however, the amounts of subsidies could
not have been expected to compensate for the lack of a mandatory policy (ICR, para.70, page 23).

Regarding (i), as discussed under the efficacy section for Sub-objective 1 above, retrofitting did not become
mandatory during the project implementation due to a delay in setting benchmarks (ICR, para. 70, page 23).
The first public reports on benchmarking in Changning would be released in 2020, which was expected to
increase incentives to retrofit.

Regarding achievements, the Project scaled-up low-carbon investments in buildings which contributed to
saving energy and reducing carbon dioxide emissions. On the other hand, the investment for EE building
retrofit did not grow as expected at appraisal due to the delay in setting benchmarks and thus the mandatory



                                                                                                 Page 11 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)



policy for retrofitting and the limited access of the project developers to access special type of financing. On
balance, the achievement of the Project’s efficacy in achieving Sub-objective 2 was assessed as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Global Environment Objective (GEO): To support Shanghai Municipality’s low-carbon city development by
promoting green energy schemes, with a focus on Changning District.

The GEO was part of the PDO statement in the Loan Agreement but will not be rated in line with the
guidelines.

Rationale
TOC for GEO: Improved green-energy investment policies and measures, improved capacity of the
stakeholders, and increased ease of access to finance would lead to increased amounts of green-energy
investments. The investments would build more energy-efficiency into retrofitted buildings, NZE buildings, DG
centers, and NMT areas, which would contribute to energy savings and greenhouse gas emission
reductions.



Outputs:

      The total of 67 subprojects were implemented to improve building lighting, heating, ventilation, and air
       conditioning (HVAC) systems, insulation, and energy management systems of the target buildings,
       covering 5.87 million m2 of floor area (around 45 percent of floor area) in Changning District.



Outcomes:

PDO Indicator 1 (GEO Indicator): The target of reducing accumulated carbon intensity per unit of GDP in
Changning District from the baseline of 100 percent to 77.4 percent was more than achieved; at the project’s
closing, that figure was 69 percent, or 112 percent of the original target. IEG concurred with the ICR team that
the achievement of GEO was modestly attributable to the Project (ICR, page 31). The delays in piloting could
be the one of the reasons that the replication of the green energy schemes did not happen within the project
period, limiting the attribution of the reduction of accumulated carbon intensity per unit of GDP to the project.
Nevertheless, the Project implemented and scaled up the investments in building energy efficiency and
engaged the key stakeholders by promoting the green energy schemes in eight events held in Shanghai,
supporting the municipality and the district to replicate the schemes in the future.




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 20
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)




                            Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of Sub-objective 1 was substantial. The green energy schemes were successfully piloted;
                            however, the replicability of the schemes across Shanghai was weakened by the shortcomings on the
                            development of the financing mechanisms for green-energy retrofitting of buildings. The achievement of Sub-
                            objective 2 was substantial, as it achieved energy savings and carbon dioxide emission reduction.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis: At appraisal, Economic Internal Rates of Return (EIRR) were calculated for five typical
   types of subprojects that were planned to be financed under the Project in Changning district (i.e., a hotel; an
   office building; a hospital; a mixed use commercial building with offices, apartments, and conference halls; and a
   mixed-use building with a hotel, restaurants and offices). The coverage/scope was 2.4 percent of total project
   cost. The EIRRs ranged from 12.4 to 33.9 percent, thus exceeding the 10 percent EIRR benchmark that was
   normally applied to Bank projects in China (PAD, para 69; Table A6.1., page 54; The ICR team's responses).

   At project closure, for the 63 building subprojects besides the four demonstration buildings, the overall weighted
   average EIRR was 17.6 percent with coverage/scope at 85.1 percent of total project cost (ICR, Table 4, page
   20). The weighted average EIRR of the four demonstration buildings was 5.1 percent. Of the 63 building
   subprojects, the weighted average EIRR for 46 EE retrofit, 13 EE new buildings, and 4 large Distributed
   Generation (DG) were 23.1 percent, 12.9 percent (22.5 percent when the incremental costs were considered),
   and 17.0 percent, respectively (ICR, Table 6-2, page 58). The weighted average EIRR of 63 projects at project
   closure was within the range of EIRRs estimated at appraisal.

   According to those EIRRs, the retrofit subprojects had higher economic value, including the benefits from the
   reduction of CO2 and local pollutants, than the new building and large DG subprojects (ICR, Table 6-2, page
   58). Notwithstanding the greater returns on retrofitting subprojects, the amount of investments at project closure
   in retrofitting was less than anticipated at appraisal because: (1) retrofitting of buildings was not mandatory
   under policies of the Changning District, (2) the Government subsidies were not sufficient to cover the lack of a
   mandatory policy, (3) financing for retrofitting was harder to secure than for constructing new EE buildings, and
   (4) guarantees for retrofitting were not established (ICR, para.70-71, page 23).




                                                                                                                          Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)



Financial Analysis: At appraisal, excluding government subsidies, the five types of subprojects was estimated
to have Financial Internal Rates of Return (FIRR) ranging from 10.1 to 31.9 percent with payback periods from
2.6 to 6.7 years (PAD, page 56). Including government subsidies, the FIRR was estimated to range from 14.4 to
38.3 percent with payback periods from 2.1 to 4.8 years (ICR, Table 4, page 20), which were within the five-year
period attractive for investors.

At project closure, the weighted average FIRR (with subsidies) for the 63 building subprojects was 13.9 percent
(ICR, Table 4, page 20), which was lower than the range of FIRRs at appraisal. In addition, the simple payback
period was 5.7 years (ICR, Table 4, page 20), which exceeded the payback period estimated at appraisal and
five-year period attractive for investors. The FIRRs of 63 subprojects ranged from 3.2 to 53.6 percent, with
payback periods ranged from 1.7 to 13.8 years. The ranges of FIRRs and payback periods of 63 subprojects at
project closure were broader than those at appraisal. Considering only the incremental costs of EE new building
subprojects, the weighted average FIRR was above 14 percent with the weighted average payback period of
below 5 years (Comments from the ICR team).

It was noted that, at project closure, the calculations on EIRR and FIRR were made based on a wider variety of
subprojects than the five typical types of subprojects anticipated at appraisal. It caused the ranges of EIRR and
FIRR to be widened at project closure than appraisal. For example, there was a subproject with an investment
cost as low as 1 million Chinese yuan. On the other hand, the Disney International Tourism and Resort Zone
Energy Station Distributed Generation subproject was added as a subproject during project implementation,
which had an investment cost of 580 million Chinese yuan and accounted for 33 percent of emissions reductions
of 63 subprojects (ICR, Annex 6, page 59-60). In addition, all of the five typical types of subprojects anticipated
at appraisal involved retrofitting, while subprojects to develop new EE buildings were conducted during project
implementation. Therefore, comparison of the EIRRs and the FIRRs at appraisal and project closure would
require granular analysis for each type of subprojects.



Aspects of Design and Implementation that Influenced Efficiency: There was a delay in piloting innovative
policies on green-energy retrofitting of buildings. The issuance of Changning District “Public Buildings Energy
Efficiency Management Measures” was delayed for two years, negatively affecting investments for retrofit of
buildings. The policy on energy consumption benchmarking and disclosure issued by Changning government
was the first one in China and only available in several cities globally (Comments from the ICR team). This
implied that there could be an oversight at project design to schedule sufficient time for supporting development
of such innovative policies. Moreover, the grant and lending implementation was delayed in the early years of
the Project. The delay in grant implementation was caused by insufficient capacity in the PMO (ICR, para. 68,
page 22). The delay in loan implementation could be attributed to the following: (1) the Project originally limited
its geographical scope to Changning District, (2) calculation of incremental costs of energy efficiency was time
consuming, and (3) environmental review of subprojects took a long time (ICR, para. 68, page 22).

In terms of achievements, the weighted average EIRR of 63 projects at project closure was within the range of
EIRRs expected at project appraisal. On the other hand, there was the implementation delay in establishing the
innovative policy on green-energy retrofitting of buildings and the grant and lending implementation in the early
years of the Project. On balance, the efficiency was rated as substantial.


Efficiency Rating


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   85.10
ICR Estimate                                              17.60
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives was substantial. The efficacy was substantial. The efficiency was substantial.
Overall, the outcome was rated as satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The anticipated risks and planned mitigation measures were as follows:

Risk 1: Buildings could end up being operated below their designed efficiency.

This risk has been mitigated by the building managers’ monitoring of building users’ energy consumption
patterns by utilizing advanced information and communication technology (ICT) (ICR, para. 91, page 28).

Risk 2: The general economic slowdown in China could decrease incentives for costly retrofits.

This is not a major risk in the long run because the PFIs continue to show incentives for low-carbon
investments, even though the repayments to the Project’s sub-loans would not be sufficient to cover the
future investments on low-carbon that were planned by them (ICR, para. 91, page 28). The SPDB also set
annual targets for low-carbon investments.

Risk 3: The PMO’s role needs to be assured as a continuing source of technical advice.

To mitigate the risk, the PMO receives general budget funding from the District Government, and remains a
unit to provide technical advice to projects financed by SPDB, BOS, and other local banks.



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Strategic relevance and approach were thoroughly considered, by focusing on gaps and opportunities for
  interventions in China’s energy sector to achieve Changning's energy-saving targets. Major relevant
  aspects such as technical, financial, economic, institutional, and procurement were adequately
  considered to develop the project design. The assessments on risks and mitigation measures were
  sufficiently conducted. The task team at entry had the appropriate mix of technical expertise. The task
  team was committed to resolve complex issues that needed to be addressed before implementing
  climate change mitigation interventions.

  On the other hand, M&E arrangements at project design were not sufficient. Indicators were not
  thoroughly prepared, as discussed in detail in section 9.a. In addition, the original schedule for the activity
  to support establishment of innovative policies turned out to be unrealistic. Moreover, the need for
  strengthening capacity of the PMO at project entry was not adequately addressed. The limited number
  and capacity of PMO staff delayed implementation of the GEF-financed component for the first few years
  (ICR, para. 68, page 22).

  On balance, most of the major relevant aspects of the project design were adequately considered, except
  for the M&E arrangements and the need for strengthening capacity of the PMO at entry. On this basis,
  the Bank's performance at entry was rated as satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank’s task team for lending and implementation had a good mixture of expertise and manpower, as
 shown in the ICR, Annex 2, page 46. The task team conducted supervision missions approximately every 6
 months. The ICR noted that the task team responded to all Government’s requests appropriately and on
 time. The project restructuring and funds reallocation were conducted in a timely manner.

 The actual disbursements were US$ 3.32 million (3 percent of the total IBRD loan) on December 17, 2015,
 which was 2 years and 9 months after the project approval. The ISR archived on June 30, 2016, right after
 the Mid-Term Review (MTR), rated as moderately unsatisfactory both the Development Outcome (DO) and
 the Implementation Progress (IP) (ICR, page 3). Based on lessons learned from the project implementation
 by the MTR, the Bank team adjusted the Project to open the market beyond retrofitting buildings the
 investments to other districts in Shanghai (Comments from the ICR team). These adjustments contributed
 to accelerate the pace of the actual disbursements and the ratings of the DO and the IP gradually
 improved.




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)



 In sum, the task team with a right balance of expertise provided appropriate support to the PMO and the IP
 on time. The disbursement was slow at the first half of the Project, but it improved after the MTR. There
 was, however, a significant increase in the actual project cost in Component 1. The quality of the Bank's
 supervision was rated as satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 No outcome indicator for PDO ‘A’ was set at appraisal. The relevant IR indicators for PDO ‘A’ had
 milestones until the middle of the Project duration, but no overall target for the whole Project duration.
 Therefore, the IR indicators provided evidence of achievements of results to a limited extent. For example,
 piloting innovative policies were set as an intermediate result to encourage setting up the relevant policies
 well in advance of the project closure. The delay in establishment of innovative policies negatively affected
 the Project, as discussed in Section 4, Objective 1 above. IEG concurs with the ICR (para. 83, page 26)
 that “M&E could thus have benefited from more definitive indicators of PDO ‘A’ of piloting green energy
 schemes.” According to the ICR team, an appropriate overall indicator for Sub-objective 1 could be
 “Number of green energy schemes piloted” with a baseline of zero, and a target value of 5 (Comments from
 the ICR team). Moreover, IEG concurs with the ICR team (para. 77, page 25) that an indicator in the
 Shanghai municipality level regarding the replication of the Project would have benefited measuring the
 performance of the Project.



b. M&E Implementation
  The PMO (with relevant inputs from the two PFIs) was responsible for the overall M&E system, including
  regular data collection to assess progress towards achieving results. The PMO managed the GEF grants,
  which supported activities for PDO ‘A,’ while the PFIs managed the low-carbon investments for PDO ‘B.’
  There were delays in submission of reports from the PFIs to the PMO especially at the beginning of the
  Project, causing challenges for the PMO to collect quality data on energy savings in buildings and to
  support the government in formulating benchmarking policies for setting up subsidies.



c. M&E Utilization
  The online monitoring platform data collected under the Project informed the Changning District
  Government to design the policies on subsidies and benchmarking that were issued in 2018.




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)




  The data on saved energy for the buildings with low-carbon technologies was utilized to design the
  relevant policies in Changning. However, the PDO outcome indicator for PDO 'A' was not set throughout
  the Project and the M&E reports from the PFIs were not provided on time. Overall, the M&E quality was
  rated as modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was assigned Category “Fl” under the Bank's environmental and social safeguards policies as it
   involved financial intermediaries. The Environmental Assessment (OP4.01) was triggered because of the
   nature of activities that included small-scale sub-projects though the social impacts were limited. Land use
   certificates were provided for all existing commercial buildings. For new commercial buildings, the District
   Government completed the land acquisition and resettlement before the lands were sold to potential
   developers. On this basis, developers of new commercial buildings received land use certificates or land
   lease sale contracts when they purchased clear lands (ICR, para. 84, page 27). An Environmental and
   Social Management Framework was prepared and implemented, under the supervision of the PMO and the
   PFIs with technical assistance from the environmental management consultant. There was no specific
   statement in the ICR regarding compliance issues under safeguards policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The ICR (para. 84, page 27) noted that the Project was fully compliant with fiduciary requirements as
   evidenced by the establishment of the internal control arrangements and the adequate maintenance of the
   financial management, procurement, and disbursement systems. All of the external audit reports were
   submitted on time, including the final audit carried out by an internationally affiliated firm in full compliance
   with the international standards. The auditors expressed ‘unqualified audit opinion’ on the financial
   statements of the recent years, which indicated that financial statements gave a true and fair view on the
   financial state of the Project.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were both positive and negative impacts for the grid company operating in Shanghai. On the positive
   side, the grid company was able to postpone making investments in distribution infrastructure upgrade
   thanks to the Project’s investments in low-carbon buildings. On the negative side, the energy sales could
   have been decreased due to the energy-saving technologies installed in the buildings under the Project.


                                                                                                       Page 18 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)



   On balance, IEG concurs with the ICR team (para. 62, page 21) that those impacts to the grid company
   would be considered as marginal, given the growing trend of energy demand in Shanghai.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                  IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory        Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory        Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Modest              Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

    1. The rehabilitation of existing buildings, especially residential buildings, could improve
       the efficiency of green energy interventions and contribute to carbon dioxide
       emissions reduction. As discussed in Efficiency section above, the retrofit subprojects had
       higher EIRRs than the new building and large distributed generation subprojects.
       Nevertheless, rehabilitation of existing buildings was not conducted as planned at appraisal,
       due to the inadequate government policies and subsidies, and the insufficient
       investments and guarantees. Moreover, the retrofitting of residential buildings faced
       additional challenges regarding multiple ownership and conflicting interests. Addressing
       these challenges would improve efficiency and efficacy of project interventions on low-carbon
       city development.
    2. Collection of good quality data in an efficient way is essential for enhancing the
       efficacy of achieving energy savings. At appraisal, the level of project financing was to be
       based on models calculating incremental costs of building investments. During
       implementation, modeling for all subprojects proved challenging given the available time and
       skillsets. Efficient methods to collect, aggregate, and analyze data on energy savings would
       be important to monitor implementation status and achievements of project activities on
       developing EE buildings. Moreover, producing data on energy savings was not readily
       available. Paying attention to these factors would support the governments to benchmark
       and establish subsidies related to the EE buildings.




13. Assessment Recommended?


                                                                                                Page 19 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Shanghai low-carbon city (P127035)




  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. The ICR was candid and generally aligned to the project
development objective. The Project’s Theory of Change in the ICR thoroughly explained the causal
relationships among inputs, outputs, outcomes, and impacts. The quality of evidence and analysis is aligned to
the messages outlined in the ICR, though there may be some minor misalignments of data and information with
the arguments. For example, regarding the investments in retrofits, the ICR could have done a more thorough
job of explaining how the Project considered its performance on retrofitting subprojects in comparison with new
EE building subprojects in Section 3.B. Key Factors During Implementation. The ICR stated that “the amount of
investments in retrofitting remained less than anticipated at appraisal (para.70-71, page 23)” and showed that
retrofitting projects had greater returns (Table 6-2). The ICR then explained one of the reasons was that the
government subsidies for retrofits were not sufficient to cover the lack of a policy that made retrofits mandatory
(para.70-71, page 23). Later, the ICR team interpreted the low level of subsidies positively and stated that “the
retrofit subprojects were financially viable with significantly less subsidy on average than was expected at
appraisal” (Comments from the ICR team). Notwithstanding the misalignments, the quality of the ICR was rated
as substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 20 of 20
