     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AF: ARTF - CB for Results Facility (P123845)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021854

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P123845                                     AF: ARTF - CB for Results Facility

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                                 Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-11447                                    31-Dec-2017                                          71,746,319.24

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Dec-2011                                 31-Dec-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                  100,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             100,000,000.00                                    71,746,319.24

 Actual                                             77,008,460.24                                 71,746,319.24




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Sengphet Lattanavong         Judyth L. Twigg               Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The original project development objective (PDO) was to "assist the government in improving the capacity
   and performance of select line ministries in carrying out their mandates and delivering services to the
   Afghan people.” This PDO was consistent with original Grant Agreement (dated January 21, 2012, Schedule
   1, p. 5). The first restructuring in 2016 amended the PDO to “improve the capacity and performance of
   priority line ministries and independent agencies in selected reform areas.” The new PDO was aligned
   with the new Grant Agreement (dated June 19, 2016, Schedule 1, p. 4). Like the original PDO, the new PDO
   was focused on strengthening capacity and improving performance of priority line ministries and independent

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AF: ARTF - CB for Results Facility (P123845)



   agencies in selected reform areas. “Selected reform areas” refers to capacity, such as recruitment and
   training, and “performance," such as development budget execution and business process. In addition, the
   narrowing of the results framework included revised indicators that were much more explicit in measuring both
   the capacity injection and service delivery components of the project. As the original and revised PDOs were
   not materially different, and the project did not achieve either the original or revised outcome targets, a split
   rating is not performed.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  25-Apr-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Originally, the project was supported by four components. After restructuring in 2016, component 3 – Civil
   Service Training – was dropped. The project scope narrowed and commitments for each component
   decreased. Listed below are the components with their specific changes:

   Component 1: Technical Assistance Facility in Support of Civil Service Reform (Appraisal costs:
   US$30 million. After restructuring: US$15 million. Actual costs: $6.2 million). Initially, this component
   aimed to establish a facility to provide technical assistance (TA) to line ministries for the preparation and
   implementation of Capacity Building for Results Programs (CBRPs). Through a demand-driven approach,
   applying to receive CBR support entailed various criteria for LMAs (Line Ministry Agencies) to fulfill. This
   activity was to use the “tier system," a mechanism through which a ministry is pre-classified to a specific tier
   (1 (highest), 2 and 3) based on a set of criteria related to the ministry’s previous reform implementation
   progress.

   Specific changes to this component: Restructuring of this component was needed due to overly complex
   criteria and procedures that limited ministries' access to CBR. Restructuring included simplifying
   LMA requirements for access to CBR and provided TA to LMAs for their CBRP development and
   implementation to be more structured and easily accessible.

   Component 2: Building Human Resources (Appraisal costs: US$280 million. After restructuring:
   US$123 million. Actual costs: US$53.4 million). This component was designed to support the broader
   implementation of civil service reform efforts and placement of critical managerial and professional staff
   resources in participating line ministries. Specifically, it was to provide the enabling environment for the
   implementation of a ministry’s CBRPs. Ministries were to be provided with skilled staffing groups on
   Tashkeel (civil services establishment) (EPP, p. 14), paid at market competitive rates to assist in reform
   implementation and service delivery results.


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AF: ARTF - CB for Results Facility (P123845)



  Specific changes to this component: This component was originally designed to be managed by the
  Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission (IARCSC) in direct coordination with
  MoF. After restructuring, responsibility for the recruitment of higher civil service grades (grades 1 and 2)
  was transferred to LMAs to promote ownership and improve capacity building.

  Component 3: Civil Service Training (Appraisal costs: US$20 million. Actual costs: US$0.6 million).
  This component was dropped. Instead, training activities planned under this component were mainstreamed
  into CBRPs under Components 1 and 2 to support stronger linkages to results. This activity was to be
  coordinated and sourced from among a variety of appropriate options by IARCSC’s training unit.

  Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Appraisal costs: US$20 million.
  After restructuring: US$12 million. Actual costs: US$9.4 million). This component was designed to
  finance (i) contract staff and operating cost of a MoF CBR Facility Project Support Unit (PSU) to be
  established in the MoF and responsible for overall project management, monitoring, and reporting; (ii)
  contract staff and operating costs of an IARCSC CBR PSU responsible for the management,
  implementation, and monitoring and reporting for Components 2 and 3; (iii) consultancy services to assist
  the MoF CBR Facility PSU in carrying out appraisal and review of implementation progress and results of
  CBRPs; and (iv) contracting of a firm to provide logistics support and supply services.

  Specific changes to the component: The restructuring clarified the roles of the MoF, the IARCSC, and
  their individual PSUs. To accelerate civil servant recruitment, the restructuring included: (i) transfer of
  recruitment responsibility from the IARCSC directly to the respective LMA; (ii) establishment of a grievance
  redressal mechanism to inject transparency and accountability into the recruitment process; and (iii) hiring
  of an M&E firm to improve the monitoring and reporting of results.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. Restructuring decreased planned project financing from US$350 million to US$150 million,
  resulting from the narrowing of project scope and dropping of Component 3. The original grant amount –
  first tranche release – was signed for US$100 million out of the total approved ARTF (Afghanistan
  Reconstruction Trust Fund) financing commitment of US$350 million. Project restructuring did not change
  this amount but relinquished US$200 million of the remaining $250 million ARTF financing commitment for
  the project (ICR, p. 12). The remaining ARTF commitment of US$50 million was never requested (ICR, p.
  20). The ICR reported contradictory information about actual project costs, but the project team confirmed
  that the project's actual cost was US$71.75 million.

  Financing/Borrower Contribution . There were no other financing sources and no contribution from the
  borrower.

  Restructuring. There were three restructurings. The first, in 2016 (level 1) amended the PDO, Results
  Framework, Components and Costs, Financing Plan, Institutional Arrangements, and Implementation
  Schedule (ICR, p. 2). Restructurings in 2017 and 2018 (level 2) changed the Implementation Agency
  (2017)and extended the closing date (2017 and 2018).

  Dates. The project received a first six-month extension from December 31, 2017 to June 30, 2018 to allow
  sufficient time for the transition of the project into IARCSC, and for the IARCSC to plan the next phase of
  support. The final restructuring extended the closing date to December 31, 2018, which was required due to

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         AF: ARTF - CB for Results Facility (P123845)



                       a delay in preparation of the follow-on phase of support through the TAGHIR Project (Tackling
                       Afghanistan’s Government Human Resources Management and Institutional Reforms). The extension was
                       required to preserve gains by ensuring continuity of support, especially the timely payment of civil servant
                       salaries, until TAGHIR became effective.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project's focus on governance was central to the Afghanistan Country Partnership Framework
(CPF) FY17-20. Both the government and donor community recognized ownership of service delivery as
central to government legitimacy, efficacy, and the development of sustainable state systems. In recognition
of this, the efforts of the government and donor community were intensified to address public administration
reform and a capacity building agenda to reduce reliance on non-civil service staff, called “parallel (or
second) civil servants." The project was conceived during a difficult period in Afghanistan's reconstruction
period. The state had very low capacity and relied heavily on international donor-funded TA through heavy
financing of parallel civil service. While this donor-funded TA proved to be an integral part of the
stabilization of state capacity and support to urgent development objectives, the effort was short-term and
unsustainable. Weak civil servant capacity in line ministries persisted. The CPF recognized that by focusing
on key institutional strengthening efforts – such as, key functions – of government agencies, it will stimulate
growth, promote stability and accountability to support development processes and agenda.

The CBR project was designed to support a government-led and context-specific approach to
capacity and institution building that complemented existing ministry-specific service delivery and
other sectoral reform programs and promoted state sustainability. Through the injection of human
resource capacity, the CBR took a demand-driven approach aimed at building the capacity, performance,
and accountability of LMAs to demonstrate full ownership over reforms. The CBR closely supported the
CPF's Pillar 1 (Building Strong and Accountable Institutions) and objective 1.2 (to support effectiveness and
accountability of key service delivery ministries to build capacity) by improving public financial management
and fiscal self-reliance; performance of key LMAs and municipalities; and service delivery through
enhanced citizen engagement (ICR, p. 15).

The PDO also contributed to the government’s strategic vision, “Towards Self-Reliance:
Commitments to Reform and Renewed Partnership.” The PDO was aligned with the government’s effort
to improve the capacity and performance of core line ministries responsible for national priority programs
(EPP, p. 8). Specifically, it aligned with one of the six clusters of Afghanistan’s National Development
Strategy, Human Resources Development (ISN, pp. 7-8).


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                                       Page 4 of 16
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  AF: ARTF - CB for Results Facility (P123845)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To assist the government in improving the capacity and performance of select line ministries in carrying out
               their mandates and delivering services to the Afghan people (original) / To improve the capacity and
               performance of priority line ministries and independent agencies in selected reform areas (revised)

               Rationale
               The original design of the project recognized that capacity constraints at provincial and district levels were a
               key cause of low budget execution rates, weak service delivery impact, and weak accountability. The project
               aimed to address these constraints to effective service delivery by facilitating the posting of high-capacity staff
               at the sub-national level and by de-concentrating spending and recruitment authority from Kabul, the capital
               city. This was to be achieved through the implementation of specific capacity and institution building
               programs. This philosophy remained the core platform for the restructuring of the project in 2016 when the
               project's Theory of Change (ToC) was formally developed around the revised objective.

               The ToC (ICR, p. 9) assumed that “if higher caliber personnel, including existing National Technical
               Assistance (NTAs), are integrated as core civil servant staff in selected departments, it will drive development
               and reform implementation whilst enhancing accountability and ownership in those ministries." This was
               driven by past Bank’s support to Afghanistan’s public administration reform. Reflecting on the lessons, the
               central premise of CBR’s design required consensus at the highest levels. Hence, the project-support
               capacity building was intended to be fully owned by the government. The ministries would lead their own
               reform by establishing institution building framework, results and monitoring arrangements, and
               implementation framework. Toward these goals, the project was to provide TA, human resources, and partial
               financing (wage bill) and training through LMAs' CBRPs. This, in turn, was to create more efficient and
               effective governance, a more accountable civil service, and improved public spending, ultimately to improve
               service delivery and self-reliant, responsive government.

               The ToC clearly outlined the path from intervention to impact and identified risks. However, it may have
               underestimated these risks and its impact on project implementation.

               Outputs and Intermediate Results

                     22 LMAs developed streamlined CBRPs (ICR, p. 17).
                     Development budget execution reached an average of 74.6%, exceeding the target of 60%. All
                        targeted LMAs and central institutions reached the target except the Ministry of Communications and
                        Information Technology and the Ministry of Mines and Petroleum (ICR, p. 17).
                       14 CBR LMAs met goals for business process simplification, not reaching the original target of 25, but
                        exceeding the revised target of 13.
                       23 LMAs completed pay and grading (P&G) with CBR support, reaching the target of 22.
                       The project recruited 76 of the targeted 450 women into contracted positions.
                       200 civil servants were trained through a Mid-level Management Development Program (MMDP),
                        including 90 women, reaching the overall target of 200.
                       A grievance redress mechanism was established.


                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AF: ARTF - CB for Results Facility (P123845)




      An e-recruitment system was piloted by MoF.

Outcomes

The restructuring of the program accelerated implementation and improved LMA access to CBR.
Project restructuring simplified criteria for access to the program and removed key identified implementation
bottlenecks, such as eligibility criteria, the three-tier approach, and the Advisory Group. The project simplified
the CBRP templates for priority LMAs and shifted focused support towards 13 ministries (determined based
on their contribution to key government priorities). These revisions aligned project activities with the priorities
of the then new government. This effort attracted and renewed higher-level commitment, which enhanced the
demand for CBR.

The restructuring enhanced TA to line ministries for the development and implementation of CBRPs.
Reduction of the key outcome target for staff recruitment, from 2,400 to 1,500 positions, was based on an
assessment by the government and the Bank of realistic and affordable capacity enhancement
requirements. It also reflected a renewed emphasis on fiscal sustainability owing to an external aid
environment that was altered from the original design of the project (when a continuation of donor funding
support of the government wage bill was expected to hold throughout and potentially beyond the project's
lifetime). LMA training, such as the MMDP, was integrated in CBRPs under Components 1 and 2. This re-
arrangement strengthened linkages between LMA training and results, intended to ensure that project
financing was more strategic and demand-driven.

Restructuring helped the project to recruit more qualified people to core government positions as
Tashkeel. Nearly half of CBR recruits were Director General and Director positions responsible for
government policies and programs. Anecdotal evidence on the contributions of CBR recruits from ICR
interviews held in Kabul noted that many of them instilled new ideas and provided strong levels of leadership
to the LMAs. Their professionalization was reported to have enhanced transparency and accountability of
functions. According to the ICR, CBR was perceived “to have succeeded in ‘breaking monopolies (of
corruption)’ at the provincial level” (ICR, p. 20). However, there was no data in the ICR to support this claim.

Equalizing NTA pay reduced a longstanding constraint in the path towards mainstreaming capacity
into the core civil service. The improved donor commitment to the CBR approach was reflected in their
broad compliance with a harmonized TA pay scale and guidelines that CBR helped to develop in tandem with
project restructuring. The ICR reported that over 90 percent of non-security civil servant salaries are now
structured according to the eight grade P&G (ICR, p. 26). As a result, the project was able to attract higher
caliber recruits who were previously out of reach. Though there is no data to substantiate this claim, the ICR
highlighted that almost half of CBR recruits were key director general and director positions. For example, the
Director General of the Civil Service Management Directorate (CSMD) was a proactive key player in CBR
implementation. He led the design of the successor of TAGHIR project and many activities, such as
enhancements of personnel and payroll management. (ICR, para.47, p. 20). This contributed to
improvements in both recruitment numbers and quality. Through NTA harmonization, CBR has made broader
contributions to the government's self-reliance agenda and supported institutional and fiscal sustainability. For
example, the ICR highlighted that by lowering NTA salaries has helped to improve the balance between
capital and operational expenditure, especially on the development budget. The ICR (page 18) noted that this
effort has led to several agreements by donors to gradually phase out NTA financing, with the assurance that
relevant human resource capacity injection would be made available to those ministries by CBR. The ICR
listed a few key example ministries, but no further details were provided to substantiate this claim.


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                AF: ARTF - CB for Results Facility (P123845)




                            Despite these gains, there were significant shortcomings in achievement of the PDO. Most importantly,
                            only 1,053 contracted positions were recruited, not reaching either the original target of 2,400 or the revised
                            target of 1,500. These included 462 (44%) at the subnational level, exceeding the original target of 20% and
                            the revised target of 15%.

                            Higher-level political commitment was absent. During the initial implementation period, the CBR ministries
                            were being led by acting ministers, leading to a lack of ownership. Partly as a result, the planned prioritization
                            of LMAs did not materialize, even after restructuring, scattering the project's efforts across too many
                            entities. The planned recruitment of even the lowered target of 1,500 staff in the 13 priority LMAs would have
                            produced an average of 115 new positions per LMA, enough to form a critical mass in each LMA. In practice,
                            however, this prioritization was not realized due to higher-level political pressure. Capacity was spread too
                            thin across 47 separate LMAs and across senior and middle-level management and technical grades. While
                            this meant that there was flexibility for the project to recruit and meet important ad hoc requests across
                            government, it ultimately contributed to a thin layer of capacity being spread across 47 separate LMAs. For
                            example, for the Ministry of Higher Education with a workforce of over 12,000, the project provided only 10
                            staff. For smaller LMAs, CBR recruited fewer than five, and often just one position.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Although all the planned project activities were implemented, the project fell short of achieving its key
                            outcome targets due to issues with project design, capacity, and political economy. After restructuring, project
                            implementation improved, but it still did not manage to fully achieve outcome targets as planned. The project
                            did contribute to the important reform of equalizing the pay of NTA with that of CBR appointees has reduced a
                            longstanding constraint in the path towards mainstreaming capacity into the core civil service. However, the
                            key outcome target for staff recruitment and placement was not achieved, and results were spread too thinly
                            across government agencies. The planned prioritization of 13 LMAs to enhance and focus capacity building
                            did not materialize, as stated above.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   The efficiency assessment of the project is based on implementation efficiency. The nature of CBR
   activities, which primarily focused on building human resource capacity and institutions, cannot be

                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AF: ARTF - CB for Results Facility (P123845)



quantified as value for money as required by traditional economic or financial analyses. This assessment
covers actual versus planned costs, key activities implemented on time, the extent of staff retention, efficacy of
human resource capacity injection, the existence and amount of procurement issues and delays, and time
overruns, among other issues (ICR, Annex 4, p. 50).

Ex-ante

The project design was informed by the analysis of the joint World Bank/government “Transition in
Afghanistan: Looking Beyond 2014” report, as well as past Bank experience for public administration
reform in Afghanistan. Due to a gradual decline in aid, the project took into account security, operations and
maintenance, and other recurrent expenditures handled through the external budget that were expected to
transfer to the core government budget by 2021. Given the shortage of suitable qualified Afghan professionals
and competing demands by international agencies, donors, and NGO’s operating in Afghanistan, there was a
high need for improved government capacity to absorb, manage, and effectively use increasing amounts of
donor funding provided through the Afghan budget rather than funded and implemented externally.

The analysis concluded that human resource capacity was an urgent development priority. The human
resource injection was the project’s largest expenditure and would increase the government’s wage bill. This
increase was projected to be manageable due to the modest scale of project-financed human resource capacity
injection (2,400 positions). The targeted positions to be recruited were Grades 1 and 2 (high-level), common
function positions across four defined technical areas, and specific non-managerial technical positions in mid-
level grades (Grades 3-5) only in the Tier 1 ministries. This arrangement was intended to assist the project in
targeting key “agent of change” functions but to also contain the risk of pressure to increase the wage bill across
government. It was also assumed that donors would continue to support the government's wage bill throughout
the lifetime of the project and probably for several years thereafter. At the time of project design, the costs
associating with maintaining the status quo far exceeded the fiscal costs of the project.

Ex-post

The arrangement of having two PSUs and split leadership between the MoF and IARCSC complicated
and delayed project implementation, coordination, reporting, and M&E. The IARCSC was initially intended
to lead administrative reforms but did not have the capacity to perform such large operation on its own. Hence,
the MoF was given overall responsibility. The MoF was made responsible for expenditure management, and the
IARCSC was responsible for human resource and capacity building training, aligned with its civil service
management mandate. While this arrangement made sense in theory, in practice, the two entities were engaged
in competition. Project components were often implemented independently, and recruitment was faced with
inconsistent criteria, terms of reference, and salary scales. Candidates who meet minimum requirements were
often not shortlisted or were rejected. The ICR did not expand on why this may have occurred. However, it did
mention that this event coincided with a period where bribery and other corruption practices were rampant (ICR,
pp. 28-29).

There were additional significant implementation inefficiencies. The tier system designed to support
reforms for all LMAs and approval process was overly complex and delayed implementation. For example,
the paperwork and conditionality to achieve high and middle tier status was burdensome. This led many LMAs
to ignore CBR and seek other support. The lowering of the overall CBR recruitment target from 2,400 to 1,500 at
restructuring was necessitated by slow implementation and the relatively short time remaining until project
closure. The lowered target was also based on a weighting by the government and the Bank of realistic and



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AF: ARTF - CB for Results Facility (P123845)



affordable capacity enhancement requirements. Financial management performance experienced significant
shortcomings (see Section 10b).


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?           Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                  0
 Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                  0
 ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objectives was Substantial, based on alignment with country conditions, government strategy,
and Bank strategy. However, both efficacy and efficiency are rated Modest due to low achievements.
Restructuring simplified the scope of the project and shifted implementation arrangements in a manner
that improved performance. However, the project was still faced with significant shortcomings internally
(overestimation of stakeholder capacity, competition among implementing agencies) and externally (complex
operating environment, including political economy pressures) that negatively impacted project outcomes.
Overall, the project experienced significant shortcomings, producing an Outcome rating of Moderately
Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcome is strongly impacted by the country’s ongoing political unrest and
political economy challenges, which may continue to influence government commitment and
prioritization of government expenditure. The overall macroeconomic outlook plays a critical role in the
government's ability to transition CBR positions to the core government budget. Continued peace talks and
peacebuilding with the Taliban would further exacerbate challenges. The reintegration of Taliban and ex-
combatants into the civil service corps would increase development expenditure. This would pose difficult
trade-offs for the country’s fiscal sustainability and elevation of state capacity (ICR, p. 52).


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AF: ARTF - CB for Results Facility (P123845)



Though the project upgraded key staff positions and improved ministry capacities in other areas,
certain risks persist. For example, the adoption of the harmonized NTA scale was an important step driven
by the project. However, this step risks sustainability due its continued external financing for “projectized”
capacity. Moreover, NTA is costly and continues to be financed outside of the government's payroll. Loss of
staff in the recruited CBR posts is a high risk, as many of these staff are in key director level positions who
frequently lead on policy development, management, and technical execution issues.

In response to these challenges, the Bank was proactive in developing a smooth transition from CBR
to the follow-on TAGHIR project as well as supporting analytical engagements to help the
government determine a strategy for a more fiscally sustainable and meritocratic civil service.
TAGHIR was designed to transition away from CBR’s projectized approach to full budget funding of key civil
service positions. A financing strategy and partnership has been agreed in line with fiscal space
considerations and prioritized LMAs. The new project’s financing strategy is grounded in the new Civil
Service Pay Policy. This policy maintains the P&G structure as the single harmonized salary scale to classify
all civil servant positions. At the same time, the project will introduce a variety of competency-based pay
increases to supplement base P&G pay. While TAGHIR is an important transition mechanism to improve
wage bill management, it is only a three-year operation and cannot be expected to secure sustainability.
Turnover is a risk, particularly for those CBR positions that have not yet been deemed by the government as
a priority for retention through TAGHIR . The ICR (p. 22) acknowledged that the project created a strong
foundation and positive momentum for the successor TAGHIR project, but retention of CBR recruits through
the core government budget cannot yet be determined. It is a long-term journey that requires consistency in
government commitment.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR (p. 34) reported that the project’s task team was comprised of experienced and
  committed members to provide technical support to the project. In the design stage, the team
  considered many relevant aspects such as strategic relevance, technical, financial, economic and
  fiduciary aspects. The 2011 World Development Report (WDR), the Bank’s Public Sector Management
  (PSM) strategy, and past support to Afghanistan through the Emergency Public Administration Projects
  (EPAP I and II) informed project design. EPAP I and II supported the establishment of the IARCSC with a
  mandate to both lead civil service reforms and manage the human resource functions of the government.
  The lessons learned from the WDR and PSM emphasized that effective interventions in government
  structures in fragile environments take longer than the traditional three-year project duration and should
  aim for service delivery results. Reflecting on these lessons, CBR was designed as a five-year facility that
  would complement existing ministry-specific service delivery and other sectoral reform programs. It was
  deliberately structured to encourage de-concentration of capacity and authority to manage resources to
  the sub-national level (EPP, p. 11).

  The project anticipated several political economy risks in the operating environment. These risks
  included lack of central agency cooperation; bias in recruitment and selection of senior management;
  unethical behavior in the civil service; politicization of CBR project funding allocations; misuse of project
  funds; inter-cadre competition; weak service delivery accountability; limited impacts of TA; and pay
  setting risks. In addition, the project also anticipated that patrimonial nature of the state could impede

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AF: ARTF - CB for Results Facility (P123845)



  the process of building a merit- and skill-based civil service. To mitigate these risks, the project
  anticipated hiring a human resources firm to enhance compliance with recruitment policies.

  Despite undertaking a thorough analysis, the project was not well-grounded in the realities of
  implementing public sector management projects in a country with very low capacity, continued
  years-long political unrest, and heavy reliance on aid. The project identified numerous risk mitigation
  measures; however, it heavily relied on assumptions that did not materialize. For example, the project
  assumed that the nature of the project would increase political commitment, implementation
  complementarity, and donor coordination and commitment on NTA rationalization and salary
  harmonization. In reality, donors did not harmonize NTA, and the government continued to pursue other
  NTA sources. In addition, these assumptions were reflected in the M&E framework, which proved to be
  ineffective (see Section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Even across three restructurings, the Bank’s supervision of the project was prompt and responded
 to counterpart requests in a timely manner to align project activities with the government’s
 strategic priorities. The Bank’s technical and fiduciary teams worked closely with government
 counterparts, allowing the project to continue moving forward with restructuring even during disruption
 within the government in 2014. The teams worked to streamline and align project design with current
 government priorities. Due to significant delays in hiring a human resources firm, the Bank dedicated its
 much of its supervision time to monitoring recruitment compliance until the firm was hired in 2014 (ICR, p.
 28). The ICR highlighted that the dialogue around fiscal sustainability initiated by restructuring created a
 strong foundation and positive momentum for the successor TAGHIR project (ICR, p. 22).

 From the appraisal to closing of the project, the task team leadership (TTLs) were changed once, at
 the restructuring in 2016. The Bank conducted regular supervision missions. The project also leveraged
 an in-country co-TTL and a Dubai-based TTL to supervise informal missions.

 The task team provided intensive hands-on support to project implementation. The Bank provided
 ex-ante quality verification of recruitments ahead of procurement of the human resources firm. After
 restructuring, the firm was recruited, but the Bank team continued to oversee and uphold the integrity of the
 recruitment process. All contract approvals and performance management of recruited civil servants were
 conducted by IARCSC with close monitoring by the Bank. The team provided quality review of CBRPs and
 involved GP colleagues to add sector and ministry knowledge and nuance to reviews. The task team
 also updated the M&E framework for monitoring CBR and prepared and disseminated monitoring reports
 on behalf of MoF and IARCSC in the initial months (ICR, p. 35).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory


                                                                                                         Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AF: ARTF - CB for Results Facility (P123845)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Initially, the results framework was ineffective due to an overly ambitious reform agenda. The
 primary output indicators were divided between tracking capacity improvements and ministry performance.
 All four PDO output indicators were based on the assumption of LMAs' ability and willingness to advance
 through the tier system. These assumptions never materialized. Furthermore, all indicators to measure
 outcomes were targeted at the highest tier (Tier 1). There were no indicators to measure progress or
 advancement at other levels of the Tier system.

 The results framework was also ineffective due to the unclear roles and overlapping of mandate
 between two PSUs, MoF, and IARCSC. The results framework clearly identified the mechanism for data
 collection and monitoring by either the MoF Afghanistan Financial Management Information System
 (AFMIS) or through coordination between the IARCSC and its PSU. The initial arrangement was to have
 these MoF and IARCSC jointly produce quarterly assessments of project implementation and progress
 reports, but there was no coordination and cooperation between the two entities. As a result, the Bank did
 not receive progress reports during the period before restructuring.

 The establishment of baselines for indicators was weak. The defined benchmarks were primarily
 from AFMIS or the IARCSC and its PSU. Some data supporting the setting of baselines were defined up-
 front, but others were defined only when ministries were approved to enter the CBR facility during the
 implementation period.

 The results framework and data presented in the ICR did not include measures for some planned
 activities and outcomes. For example, there was no discussion on the adequacy of complaints handling
 through the established grievance redress mechanism.



b. M&E Implementation
  Before restructuring, the reporting of project results framework was weak. The M&E unit was
  understaffed, which resulted in very little reporting or data collection on M&E.

  After the first restructuring in 2016, a TOC was developed and the results framework was adjusted
  to better reflect and track progress. The TOC was adequately written to support the
  underlying challenges that the project aimed to tackle. The adjustment of the results framework included
  (i) dropping indicators that were irrelevant or had proven difficult to measure and/or attribute to the
  project; Iii) introducing new and/or revising existing indicators to reflect changes in the design and scope
  of project components; and (iii) introducing new indicators to meet the Bank’s corporate requirements on
  measuring core sector indicators, such as gender. The revised indicators were much more explicit in
  measuring both the capacity injection and service delivery components of CBR. After restructuring, a new
  reporting template was also introduced, including monthly CBR implementation briefings, and a CBR
  newsletter was produced and widely distributed. These measures allowed the M&E unit to regularly

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AF: ARTF - CB for Results Facility (P123845)



  report CBR progress on a monthly basis and strengthened project management. All involved
  stakeholders – LMAs, the Bank, donors, and other implementing partners – received monthly progress
  reports on CBR.

  A firm hired to support the LMAs in developing and implementing CBRPs did not deliver on its
  objectives. It was side-tracked from its main quality assurance role. The CBRPs were not revised to
  streamline the new reform format in staffing, TA, and procurement. However, the task team added that
  during the firm’s engagement with the project, the firm managed to support some of the prioritized LMAs
  to develop a M&E plan with clear targets.



c. M&E Utilization
  After restructuring, LMAs, the Bank, donors, and other implementing partners received monthly
  progress reports on CBR. The ICR (p. 33) noted that this reporting provided the level of detail the
  government and task team needed to rightly identify bottlenecks and appropriately respond. The project
  team showed the ICR Reviewer some examples of the M&E reporting templates, which constituted
  a systematic mechanism for both the project team and PSUs to monitor progress. This reporting system
  is still being used throughout the priority and non-priority LMAs.

  The M&E system, however, in particular the indicators, was not designed to inform decision-
  making beyond the project. The system was largely output-driven, and the results framework did not
  include sufficient outcome indicators.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category C and did not trigger significant social risks or negative
   environmental impact.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Fiduciary management performance was impeded by lack of capacity to provide internal audit
   reports throughout the project cycle. During 2016-2019, the Bank did not receive any internal audit
   reports. This was due to capacity constraints within the Internal Audit Department of MoF and impacted the
   entire Bank portfolio in the country. At project closing, the financial management rating was Moderately
   Unsatisfactory due to ex post recruitment compliance audits. The Bank requested that all disbursements
   for non-compliant contracts be refunded (a total of US$475,670) (ICR, p. 33). Other shortcomings were
   related to control of fixed assets. A firm was hired to develop a fixed assets database, but the database
   was delivered too late to be adopted by the project. As a result, the project did not have a complete record

                                                                                                       Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AF: ARTF - CB for Results Facility (P123845)



   of fixed assets, no physical verification of fixed assets, weak contract management, and overall low budget
   utilization (ICR, para. 93, p. 33).

   After 2016, the Bank received all financial management reports in a timely manner except for the
   internal audit reports of the project. There were no overdue interim unaudited financial reports or
   external audit reports. The project settled ineligible expenditures, and all fixed assets purchased from the
   grant were transferred to the IARCSC before the end of June 2019.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The project team stated that the e-recruitment system has had impact beyond the scope of the project,
   having now been adopted by the civil service commission. The government continues to invest in the
   system, and today, the civil service recruitment process is done through this e-recruitment system for all
   ministries and all civil servant grade levels.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately           Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  The task team did a thorough
                                                                                  analysis but did not adequately
                                                                                  account for the reality of the
                                                                                  institutional and political
                                                                                  economy context. The
                                 Moderately           Moderately                  shortcomings in project design
Bank Performance
                                 Satisfactory         Unsatisfactory              were by and large responsible
                                                                                  for the low achievement of
                                                                                  intended outcomes. Risk
                                                                                  mitigation measures were relied
                                                                                  on assumptions that proved
                                                                                  incorrect.
Quality of M&E                   Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                  High


12. Lessons




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AF: ARTF - CB for Results Facility (P123845)



The following are key lessons deriving from the ICR:

     1. Designing a project based on incorrect or incomplete assumptions can negatively
        influence project implementation and outcomes. This project's initial design misread the
        level of political commitment. The tier system was overly complex and required commitment
        from high-level officials to see it through. At the time, the priority CBR ministries were led by
        acting ministers, which led to lack of commitment and ownership of the project. In addition,
        overestimating the ministries' capacity to absorb and manage the project jeopardized project
        outcomes.
     2. Unclear terms of reference for multiple implementing agencies can complicate
        coordination and unravel planned synergies. The dual project implementation structure
        with two PSUs – MoF and IARCSC – resulted in lack of coordination and leadership, a
        problem that was exacerbated by limited capacity. Strong implementing partners with
        adequate authority and clear roles enhance implementation success.
     3. Third-party verification is critical in ensuring the transparency and quality of
        recruitment, particularly in fragile settings. Third-party agencies can independently carry
        out robust ex-ante quality assurance and shield against political intervention.
     4. A demand-driven approach can encourage ad hoc requests, which can negatively
        affect project results. This project's recruitment allocation allowed it to meet many
        important ad hoc needs across government. However, it ultimately contributed to limited
        impact across too many LMAs.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR's quality is rated High. Given the complexity of the original project components and country context,
the authors made a credible attempt to capture the issues facing the project and its outcomes. The ICR
included a strong review of the country context and issues impacting project efficiency. It was commendably
realistic about the difficulties of project implementation pre- and post-restructuring and the less than satisfactory
outcomes. The narrative was concise and supported the ratings with available evidence. The ICR explicitly
outlined the project’s theory of change to underscore the project's intended logic and underpin the ratings.



Though the ICR provided explicit ad comprehensive evidence to support its narrative and ratings, there
were some minor shortcomings in the completeness of data and information. For example, there were
inconsistencies in the reporting of actual project costs.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating


                                                                                                      Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
AF: ARTF - CB for Results Facility (P123845)



High




                                                                            Page 16 of 16
