          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          UY 1st Prog PubSect Comptitiv&Soc I DPL(P116215)



                                                                                     Report Number : ICRR0021973

   1. Project Data



    Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
    Uruguay                                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


    Programmatic DPL
    Planned Operations:          2              Approved Operations:          2

    Operation ID                                Operation Name
    P116215                                     UY 1st Prog PubSect Comptitiv&Soc I DPL


     L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
     IBRD-79530                                 31-Dec-2011                                        100,000,000.00

     Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
     14-Oct-2010                                31-Dec-2011

                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                              0.00

     Revised Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                              0.00

     Actual                                       100,000,000.00                                              0.00




     Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
     Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Clay Wescott                 Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)


PHPROJECTDATATBL




     Operation ID                               Operation Name
     P123242                                    UY 2nd Prog PubSct, Comp&Soc DPL/DDO ( P123242 )



                                                                                                      Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY 1st Prog PubSect Comptitiv&Soc I DPL(P116215)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-79530,IBRD-80940                   25-Jun-2015                                                       0.00

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Oct-2011                             25-Jun-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                         260,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                                  0.00                                             0.00




2. Program Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The Programmatic Public Sector Competitiveness and Social Inclusion Development Policy Loans consisted
   of two DPLs. The development objective (PDO) for the first operation (PSCSI-1) was: (i) Strengthening public
   sector administration; (ii) Improving competitiveness through measures seeking to facilitate trade, strengthen
   the business environment and develop financial markets; (iii) Improving social inclusion through measures
   seeking to enhance the equity and efficiency of health, education and social protection systems (Program
   Document (PD): p. iv). The second operation, PSCSI-2 had the same objective (PD: p. iv).




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   The three policy areas supported by the PSCSI series were:

   Policy area 1: improving public sector management by increasing public sector transparency, flexibility,
   and agility; and by implementing performance-based budgeting.

   Policy area 2: improving competitiveness by expanding trade through trade facilitation efforts and
   customs reform; strengthening the business climate; and supporting financial market development.

   Policy area 3: improving social inclusion by strengthening the social protection systems; expanding
   coverage and improving efficiency of the health care system; and improving equity and quality of the
   education system.




                                                                                                  Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY 1st Prog PubSect Comptitiv&Soc I DPL(P116215)



c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates

   Program costs, financing and dates. The commitment under PSCSI-1 was US$100 million, and under
   PSCSI-2 it was US$260 million with a deferred drawdown option. PSCSI-1 was approved on October 14,
   2010, became effective on February 8, 2011, and disbursed immediately after effectiveness. PSCI-2 was
   approved on October 25, 2011 and became effective on December 9, 2011. Its original closing date, June
   25, 2015, was postponed to June 25, 2018, at which time it closed undisbursed (see Section 3b).




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives


  The PDO (and project design) drew on Uruguay’s experience during the global crisis and lessons the
  government drew from it – the need to strengthen fiscal and financial policy, and labor and social policies, in
  case of a potential recurrence. The different parts of the PDO reinforced each other. For example, enhanced
  public administration and results-based budgeting had been identified as a key enablers for improving
  government efficiency, and in turn reducing the cost of doing business (PSCSI-1 PD: p. 26). Despite a
  generally solid macroeconomic framework, the crisis years 2008-2010 had left the country with a sizeable
  public debt largely denominated in foreign currency. The PSCI loans provided a backstop against potential
  destabilizing shocks – the first loan was immediately drawn down to mitigate the urgent need for financing,
  while the second loan was deferred, serving as a guardrail against future shocks. At the same time, the loans
  served to promote the implementation of the government’s reform program to improve public sector
  management, competitiveness and social inclusion and gradually achieve higher and sustainable rates of
  growth.
  The series also was a cornerstone of the Country Partnership Strategy at the time the series was
  developed. A new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) was introduced in December 2015 covering the
  period FY16-FY20 and the series remains relevant under that CPF. While broadening the scope of Bank
  interventions – for instance drawing attention to natural resource management as a key to growth and
  sustainability – it also maintained the focus on promoting a prudent fiscal stance while rebuilding fiscal space
  over the medium term by raising spending efficiency in the provision of public goods; and on further fostering
  private sector development – two key elements of the government’s reform program.




  Rating
  Substantial


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY 1st Prog PubSect Comptitiv&Soc I DPL(P116215)




b. Relevance of Design
  The results chain as described in the Policy Reform Matrix was straightforward, laying down prerequisites
  (prior actions) for launching activities that gradually could achieve the PDO. Supported measures were
  prioritized based on extensive analytical work by the Bank, and by government programs. While the prior
  actions (as well as the triggers supporting the release of PSCSI-2) were plausible initiatives for moving
  towards stated objectives, these were in most instances set in general terms (“increase”, “decrease”), while
  milestones set for 2015 and 2018 measured progress on outputs and outcomes. In some instances, outcome
  indicators were too narrowly defined, as noted in Section 9a. More generally, considering that the series went
  on for almost eight years, it would be plausible that some information on results would be available – for
  instance the efficiency gains from improved public sector management mechanisms such as performance-
  based budgeting.

  As noted in Section 3a, PSCSI-1 was disbursed immediately after effectiveness to meet the immediate needs
  for financing. To address potential future risks, the design included a Deferred Drawdown Option for PSCSI-
  2, providing quick access to financing in the case of a potential shock that could reverse the favorable trends
  that were underpinning the country’s macroeconomic management.

  The PSCSI series’ design complemented other Bank operations that focused on expanding capacity and
  improving quality in education (P111662), increasing access to primary health care (P050716), and
  strengthening the institutional framework for innovation to enhance competitiveness (P095520). It also built
  on achievements under a previous programmatic DPL series that had focused on improving voluntary tax
  compliance, expanding family allowances, and financial sector reforms through legislation that strengthened
  capital markets. An Institution Building Technical Assistance Loan (IBTAL-P097604) was structured to
  support core elements of the government’s public administration modernization agenda, and
  addressed institutional needs arising from the reform program supported by the PSCSI series. PSCSI was
  also closely coordinated with the programs of Uruguay’s other development partners, including the Inter-
  American Development Bank and the Andean Development Corporation.

  There was an adequate macroeconomic framework and treatment of possible risks in place at the time of
  appraisal of PSCSI-1. The government's cash reserves, planned borrowing, exchange rate management and
  prudent fiscal policy were appropriate in light of the uncertain global economic outlook at the time. If global
  and domestic growth turned out to be less than expected, the Bank’s financing would help to achieve fiscal
  and monetary targets.

  At the time of the appraisal of PSCSI-2, the macroeconomic framework was also judged to be solid, with
  internal demand the key driver of growth, inflation expected to decline, a stable banking system, and
  manageable current account and fiscal deficits. PSCSI-1 helped address an urgent need for funding so that
  the government could continue implementing reforms. PSCSI-2 provided quick access to funding if
  vulnerabilities emerged from external shocks. The access to actual and contingent credit lines also helped
  Uruguay's investment grade rating, thus giving a positive signal to credit markets (PD1, pp. 11-14; PD2, pp. 6-
  9; ICR pp. 11-12).


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            UY 1st Prog PubSect Comptitiv&Soc I DPL(P116215)




       Rating
       Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To improve public sector management

    Rationale
    The objective was to be achieved by: (i) making public administration more transparent, flexible and agile;
    and (ii) implementing performance-based budgeting (PBB). Increased transparency was promoted by
    legislation expanding the use of online transactions to public services (prior action under PSCSI-1) and the
    adoption of output and outcome indicators for selected expenditure programs (prior action under PSCSI-
    2). The former supported expansion of e-government; and the latter was to improve the quality and impact
    of public spending.


    The following outputs/outcomes were achieved under the PSCSI series:

    E-government. The number of processes that can be started and completed electronically rose from a
    baseline of 20 in 2009 to 766 in 2018, exceeding the target of 25.

    PBB. A comprehensive platform is now operational to analyze budgets for which output and outcome
    indicators have been identified. This includes seven priority areas, and 11 other areas (unspecified in the
    ICR), covering altogether 16 expenditure programs. The PDO target of covering 40 expenditure programs
    was met in substance, taking into account the change in methodology and program consolidation over the
    period (ICR, p. 17). However, a platform showing program outcomes in priority areas is not fully
    operational, in part due to shortage of experienced technical staff in line ministries despite efforts to attract
    and train new staff.




                                                                                                            Page 5 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            UY 1st Prog PubSect Comptitiv&Soc I DPL(P116215)




    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     To improve competitiveness

    Rationale
    The objective was to be achieved with several measures aimed at enhancing trade facilitation, the business
    climate and financial market depth. Trade was to be facilitated by reducing logistics costs in trade flows
    through the creation of a national commission for trade promotion (prior action under PSCSI-1), and by
    improving port and customs efficiency with the introduction of risk-based inspections in customs (prior action
    under PSCSI-2). The business climate was to be improved by the introduction of a one-stop shop for the
    creation of firms (PSCSI-1). Financial market development was to be promoted with the introduction of a
    capital markets law designed to enhance investor confidence in capital markets through such means as
    opting for a regulatory approach rather than a self-regulatory one (prior action PSCSI-1). A prior action for
    PSCSI-2 included additional measures aimed at enhancing investor confidence (tax incentives, capital
    market promotion, standards for stock offerings). The areas of trade facilitation, business licensing and
    access to finance that were supported by the series, were among the top business environmental obstacles
    for firms (Enterprise survey, 2017). Other perceived obstacles were being addressed with support from other
    partners, such as assistance on tax reform from the Inter-American Development Bank.




    Trade facilitation. Processing of import and export documents in 2018 took on average 24 hours, compared
    to an average of 53 hours for LAC countries; inspected cargo declined from 30 percent to 12 percent; and
    the number of irregularities detected relative to total cargo inspected rose from 1.1 percent to 2.1
    percent. The changes introduced at the customs level indicated the likelihood that logistics costs went down
    as waiting times at borders became shorter while the effectiveness of border controls increased. Some
    aspects still needed more work: for example, Uruguay took 96 hours to perform customs operations,
    compared to the Latin American country average of 62 hours, and costs in Uruguay were double the
    average.

    Stronger business environment. With the introduction of the one-stop-shop for establishing businesses, the
    time to establish a new business dropped to 6.5 days in 2018 from a baseline of 65 days.

    Financial markets. With the implementation of a capital markets law, financial markets saw a rise in market
    capitalization, private sector issuances, stock exchange activity as follows: market capitalization rose from a
    baseline of US$139 million in 2009 to US$852 million in 2018; new private sector issuances rose from eight



                                                                                                        Page 6 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            UY 1st Prog PubSect Comptitiv&Soc I DPL(P116215)



    per year in 2009 to nine in 2018; and stock market activity increased from US$6,200 million in 2009 to
    US$20,294 million in 2018.

    While the changes in financial market activity could be attributed to the measures introduced under the
    Program, the results were also influenced by other factors: according to the ICR (page 15) these
    developments took place against a background of reluctance on the part of the private sector to engage –
    both for historical and cultural reasons. Consequently, while capital markets showed value growth, there
    was a downside: only 6 percent of industry financing (out of US$2.4 billion) was raised through capital
    markets, with the rest mainly coming from bank loans and raising private funds. Membership in the stock
    exchange fell from 74 in 2011 to 25 in 2019.
    During the duration of the series, Uruguay’s ranking on the World Competitiveness Index improved from 64
    to 54 (World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Reports, 2010-2011 and 2019). This improved result
    was driven by several factors including economic fluctuations and, in the case of financial markets,
    exogenous factors. However, there is a plausible connection between the achievements in the three areas
    supported and improved competitiveness.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective
     To improve social inclusion

    Rationale
    Social inclusion included measures to enhance the equity and efficiency (access to and quality of) social
    protection, health and education systems. Several measures supported achievement of the
    objective. Coverage under the social protection system was to be expanded, notably by expanding the
    family allowance and food assistance programs to still poor but uncovered families (PSCSI-1), and by
    increasing the food allowance for the extremely poor (PSCSI-2). A first phase of a reform of the beneficiary
    identification system, targeting adolescents and children, was also initiated as a prior action for PSCSI-
    2. Formal health insurance coverage was to be extended to include primary care controls for children and
    pregnant women (PSCSI-1); and to spouses with 3 or more children (PSCSI-2). Equity and quality of the
    education system was to be promoted by reducing the digital gap through the distribution of laptops to all
    children in public primary schools and by providing wireless connectivity to the Internet in said schools
    (PSCSI-1); and to secondary public schools (PSCSI-2).

    Social protection. The number of households in extreme poverty declined from 0.8 percent of households
    in Uruguay in 2009 to 0.1 percent in 2018 against a target of 0.4 percent.



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 13
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               UY 1st Prog PubSect Comptitiv&Soc I DPL(P116215)



    Health. Health insurance coverage rose from a baseline of financing 43 percent of primary care services for
    pregnant women and children in 2009 to 72 percent in 2018, against a target of 60 percent.

    Education. Digital access in public primary schools rose from a baseline of 95 percent to 100 percent, and in
    grades 1 to 3 in public secondary schools in the interior of the country (excluding Montevideo and
    Canelones) from a baseline of 30 percent to 96 percent, equal to the target. In grades 1 and 2 of secondary
    schools in Montevideo and Canelones, coverage increased from a baseline of zero to 94 percent, equal to
    the target.
    The ICR (p. 15) notes that languages were taught online thrice weekly throughout the country, while in the
    past only 30 percent of schools had English lessons. The greatest effect of digital access has been on the
    poor: evaluations indicated that the achievement gap in math between 1st and 5th quintile
    students substantially narrowed.

    Summary: All three areas of intervention promoted social inclusion through improved access to social
    benefits and services as noted above, enhancing beneficiaries’ ability and opportunity to participate in
    society. While national economic factors were likely to influence poverty rates and social protection, and
    therefore attribution was less straightforward than in the health and education sectors, results were
    nevertheless strongly tied to the three activities under this objective, which all expanded access to and
    raised quality of services for poor and vulnerable groups.


    .




    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  Relevance of objectives was rated substantial as program objectives addressed macroeconomic stability,
  supported the government’s reform program, and continued to reflect the new CDF, although maintaining a
  narrower focus than that adopted in the CDF. Design was rated modest reflecting weaknesses around
  the results framework. Efficacy was rated substantial for all three objectives: the first exceeded one target and
  made progress towards the second; in the second, four out of five targets were met or exceeded, and one was



                                                                                                       Page 8 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UY 1st Prog PubSect Comptitiv&Soc I DPL(P116215)



nearly met; and in the third, significant gains were made towards stronger social inclusion under the series,
while at the same time recognizing the influence of external factors on social protection results. .


a.    Outcome Rating
      Moderately Satisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

According to the ICR, the government was committed to the program, which drew on its development
strategy. This was reinforced by the series building on earlier DPLs and included activities that were already
underway, including e-government, PBB, health sector reform and digitalization of the education system.
Economic risks persist. Uruguay is vulnerable to outside shocks to the regional and global economy, in
particular through its dependence on Argentina and Brazil, and on commodity prices. The overall fiscal deficit
will be nearly 5 percent of GDP in 2019, with gross public sector debt nearly 70 percent of GDP, almost twice as
high as projected in the PDs. The risks are mitigated by generally sound economic policies aimed at achieving
high and sustainable economic growth, such as the ones supported under this series, and by macroeconomic
management that focuses on maintaining fiscal discipline.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
      Modest

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

     The series supported the government’s reform in the targeted areas, while at the same time providing a
     backstop against the country’s vulnerability to potential external economic shocks that were likely to
     influence fiscal balance by the introduction of a deferred drawdown option. It drew on experience from a
     preceding DPL program, related projects, and substantial analytical work that the Bank and other
     partners were carrying out including the Investment Climate Assessment, the Global Competitiveness
     Report, the Doing Business Report, and Uruguay's Expanded National Household Survey, along with
     focus group meetings with workers and entrepreneurs. (PSCSI-1 PD, p. 21). While the series addressed
     fiscal challenges and reduced fiscal risk while introducing initiatives to support economic growth, the
     results framework had weaknesses noted in Sections 3b and 9a, notably in a relatively weak outcomes-
     focus (the emphasis was on outputs and intermediate outcomes) and in the formulation of outcome
     indicators, including the absence of quantitative targets, something that presented difficulties in
     assessing achievements. Another shortcoming was that implementation risk due to a potential shortage
     of trained personnel had been rated low on the expectation that shortages would be addressed through
     capacity strengthening efforts by the Bank, government and other donors (PSCSI-1 PD: p. 49; PSCSI-2


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY 1st Prog PubSect Comptitiv&Soc I DPL(P116215)



   PD: p. 39). In the end, some measures such as the platform for performance budgeting were only
   partially achieved due to personnel shortages.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  Regular supervision missions – ten over a period of five years - maintained a constructive relationship with
  country entities and helped advance the project. Supervision was often carried out jointly with the parallel
  IBTAL, drawing on synergies between the two entities. At the same time, the project took some eight years
  to reach the ICR stage, during which time there were several changes in task manager and sector
  specialists. Government observed that this made the policy dialogue less effective than hoped for.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  Government ownership was strong, as the series had been informed by a series of consultations
  involving the government and key stakeholders. Those consultations had also informed the development
  of the government’s longer-term development plan. Still, the series, and in particular the introduction of
  the PBB platform, would experience difficulties in implementation with a shortage of technical staff. Loan
  preparation also benefited from consultations with the parliament, civil society organizations, research
  institutes and the private sector. The Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) conducted these
  discussions and oversaw monitoring of the series implementation, collaborating fully with the Bank
  supervision teams.


  Government Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  Not assessed.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY 1st Prog PubSect Comptitiv&Soc I DPL(P116215)




  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
   The policy reform matrix (the results framework) set out the legal and regulatory actions serving as prior
  actions for the series, as well as defining expected outcomes. The latter were measurable, but some lacked
  specific targets. In some instances, they were too narrowly formulated to adequately serve as sufficient
  outcome indicators, for example the indicator on financial markets. The education PDO indicators and targets
  were very similar to the outputs in the education prior action; a better PDO indicator would have measured
  improved learning outcomes facilitated by the improved connectivity supported by the prior action. More
  generally, the adequacy of outcomes became uncertain in the absence of a stronger results chain.



b. M&E Implementation
  All indicators included in the policy reform matrix were monitored by the government as well as the Bank
  through its ISRs. The MEF collected data every six months to assess progress.



c. M&E Utilization
  The information gathered during Bank supervision and MEF monitoring served to assess progress; a key
  point in time was a comprehensive stocktaking of program policies as PSCSI-2 was being prepared. At that
  time, continuing concern over the regional economic situation led to the decision was taken to proceed with a
  deferred draw-down operation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  The ICR does not rate environmental or social effects for the series. However, the proposed operation is not
  likely to have any significant effects on the environment (PD, p. 47)




                                                                                                 Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UY 1st Prog PubSect Comptitiv&Soc I DPL(P116215)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The ICR does not discuss fiduciary compliance



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.



d. Other
    ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  IEG notes moderate
Outcome                       Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory     weaknesses in the results
                                                                                  indicators
                                                                                  IEG notes the
Risk to Development                                                               economic/financial risks in the
                              Negligible              Modest
Outcome                                                                           absence of debt backup
                                                                                  arrangements
                              Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory     ---
                              Satisfactory
Borrower Performance          Satisfactory            Satisfactory                ---
Quality of ICR                                        Modest                      ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

  The following lessons are drawn from the ICR:
 .
 Business regulations need to be aligned with business practices. In this series, the Government and
 Parliament laid down a legal and regulatory framework hoping that it would make participation in formal
 capital markets attractive. This turned out not to be the case: a more careful analysis of private sector
 incentives could have promoted an approach that would have been more attractive to the private sector.


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UY 1st Prog PubSect Comptitiv&Soc I DPL(P116215)



Technical assistance can be an essential complement to development policy lending. In this project,
an institution-building technical assistance loan provided financing as well as knowledge and advice to
agencies implementing the reforms. Government officials stressed to the ICR mission that the technical
assistance loan was crucial for implementing key components of the DPL, such as the transition to
performance budgeting, expansion of e-government and reform of customs.

World Bank participation in a high-income country in a crisis situation provides market signaling that
can encourage policy reforms. Prior to the series, the government was facing fiscal financial constraints
that threatened to delay or even stop progress on key policy reforms, including in particular the ones that
subsequently would be addressed under the PSCSI series. The series, especially its first phase, brought the
government the means and confidence to continue with its reform process (ICR, p. 11).




.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The structure of the ICR is a bit unconventional with valuable pieces of information distributed throughout the
text – for instance, the discussion of performance indicators, or targets; and implementation challenges appear
as lessons, and are also covered under Relevance, Quality at Entry, and Supervision. A focused reading does
allow the reader to assess and piece together the results and ratings for the operation, but with some
difficulty. IEG attempted to set up a meeting with the Task Team Leader to clarify these and other issues, but
he did not respond.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Modest




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 13
