     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KI: Telecomms and ICT Development (P126324)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0022001

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P126324                                     KI: Telecomms and ICT Development

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Kiribati                                    Digital Development


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H7800,TF-11213                          30-Jun-2017                                             5,134,205.18

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jul-2012                                 30-Jun-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              1,000,000.00                                       4,100,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               5,100,000.00                                       4,100,000.00

 Actual                                           5,134,205.18                                       4,100,000.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Peter Nigel Freeman         Ebru Karamete                 Ramachandra Jammi                IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) in the financial agreement (page 5) is used in this review. It was to
   strengthen the legal, regulatory and institutional environment enabling a market-driven telecommunications
   sector, and facilitating improved connectivity for the Outer Islands in the Recipient's territory. This was almost
   identical to the PDO stated in the Project Appraisal Document [PAD] (page 6).




                                                                                                      Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KI: Telecomms and ICT Development (P126324)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1. Information and Communications Technologies (ICT) Policy and Legal Support
   (Original Budget of US$1.30 million, US$1.20 million at closing) Under this component, the project delivered
   assistance to the Ministry of Communications, Transport and Tourism Development (MCTTD) to carry out
   work in the following areas:

   a) ICT policy review and coordination; b) transformation of Telecom Services Kiribati Ltd. (TSKL); and c)
   legal and regulatory advice.

   Component 2. ICT Regulatory Support (Original Budget of US$1.20 million, US$1.20 million at closing)

   This component established a medium-term program of technical assistance and capacity-building
   (including on the job and formal training) for the Telecommunications Authority of Kiribati (TAK) [and later
   the Communications Commission of Kiribati (CCK) after a name change] in the following areas:

   a) New market entry; b) general regulatory support; and c) technical management and training.

   Component 3. Outer Islands Connectivity (Original Budget of US$2.20 million, US$2.10 million at
   closing) This phase consisted of:

   a) Phase 1: Provided technical assistance to MCTTD and CCK; and b) Phase 2: Provided Outer
   Islands connectivity subsidy for new infrastructure and service delivery projects for the Outer
   Islands identified in Phase 1, using an output-based aid approach.

   Component 4. Project Management (Original Budget of US$0.40 million, US$0.60 million at closing)
   Overall project administration and fiduciary matters including procurement.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The original cost was US$ 5.10 million and the final amount actually disbursed was US$ 5.13
   million.The difference was due to a change in the exchange rate between the SDR and the US$.

   Financing: Consisted of an IDA grant of US$ 1.00 million (IDA-H7800) and co-financing of US$ 4.10
   million from the Governments of Australia (US$ 3.1 million) and New Zealand (US$ 1.0 million) through the
   Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility Trust Fund (TF-11213).

   Borrower Contribution: There was no Borrower contribution.

   Dates:The project was approved on July 26, 2012, became effective on November 9, 2012 and was
   originally scheduled to close after five years on June 30, 2017. However, the project was extended by two
   years due to the need for further capacity building at MCTTD and CCK, delays in privatizing TSKL, and in

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KI: Telecomms and ICT Development (P126324)



   making Ocean Link operational, as well as changes to the implementation of the Outer Islands Connectivity
   Program (OICP).

   Restructuring: The date changes above were made through a level 2 restructuring on May 2, 2017, with
   agreement from the Governments of Australia and New Zealand.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context:

The Republic of Kiribati was one of the most remote and geographically dispersed countries in the
world. The population at project appraisal was 92,000 spread over 22 coral atolls and a single volcanic
island. The capital of South Tarawa was the most populated island with approximately 40,000 people. "One
of the main challenges facing Kiribati was how to overcome its remoteness by developing the basic
infrastructure it needed to connect its people domestically and internationally" (ICR paragraph 1). Kiribati
has few natural resources and was one of the least developed Pacific Islands. Its economy was dominated
by the public sector (public expenditure was equal to 86 percent of gross domestic product). The
Government was heavily reliant on aid from development partners, as well as volatile fishing license fees,
and draw-downs from a trust fund that was established with revenues from the exploitation of now-depleted
phosphate deposits. "Strengthening the poorly-performing state-owned enterprise sector was a central
focus of ongoing reform efforts". (ICR, paragraph 1)

Sector Context:

The ICR stated that "Kiribati was one of the least “connected” countries in the world. At appraisal, much of
the population either had no access to ICT or, if they lived within range of the existing, unreliable
networks, often could not afford the service (ibid, paragraph 3). About 40 percent of the population relied
entirely on public access (radio, satellite-based telecenters). Broadband internet penetration at appraisal
was less than one percent of the population. Almost all telecommunications subscribers and individual
users were on South Tarawa (20 percent mobile teledensity) and Kiritimati (13 percent mobile teledensity).
The sole service provider at the time, Telecommunication Services Kiribati Ltd (TSKL), had planned to
expand mobile network expansion to some of the Outer Islands close to South Tarawa. However,
projections at the time indicated that fixed and mobile teledensity in Kiribati would not exceed 20 percent by
the end of 2012, which was low by both global and regional standards. Initial attempts to introduce
competition through direct negotiation with prospective suppliers did not make much progress" (ICR
paragraph 3). The ICR also noted that "After a review of options, and with technical assistance support
through the World Bank and the Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID), the
Government of Kiribati (GoK) decided on a more comprehensive reform program to prepare a new policy
and legal framework, which would set the stage for a competitive market and provide the required
regulatory mechanisms". (ICR, paragraph 6)

Strategic Relevance:



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       KI: Telecomms and ICT Development (P126324)



The PDO aligned well with the Bank’s Regional Partnership Strategy (RPF), FY17–FY21, in particular
objective 4.2: “Increased access to basic services and improved connective infrastructure”, which
identified that mobile phone coverage was critical to help remote communities become connected.
Technology was also key to developing tourism, better disaster management, and facilitating access to e-
services, especially e-commerce. The rationale for the Bank’s shift to a RPF for Kiribati [and eight other
smaller islands in the region] was based on issues of scale and because of similarities in the types of
challenge being faced. The RPF indicated that the Bank would continue to support legal and regulatory
reform to improve the enabling environment for private investment in ICT infrastructure and also to assist in
providing catalytic financing for “backbone” infrastructure, such as submarine cables and satellite
connections providing international connectivity, as well as applications that use new ICT infrastructure.
Such infrastructure was pertinent for the expansion of the tourism industry, fisheries management, labor
mobility and disaster risk management response and mitigation, particularly for the Outer Islands, where
there was minimal communications infrastructure.

The PDO according to the ICR (page 9) was in line with the development objectives of Kiribati's partners,
which had earlier provided assistance to help improve the ICT sector, and in doing so helped lay the
groundwork for the project. The project was supported through a partnership arrangement between the
Bank, and the Governments of Australia and New Zealand. AusAID - now the Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade (DFAT) - had worked together closely with the Bank in support of telecommunications reform in
the Pacific for several years. DFAT provided financing, through the Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility
(PRIF), to support the Bank’s advisory assistance program, both country-specific and regional. DFAT and
the Bank also collaborated on the preparation of analytical work on the Pacific connectivity challenges. The
project built on the strength of this relationship: DFAT through PRIF, co-financed this operation through
a recipient-executed trust fund.

The relevance of this project and its PDOs to the broader ICT landscape in Kiribati was also being
demonstrated through the implementation of another Bank-financed project, the Kiribati Connectivity Project
(P159632). This is part of Phase 4 of the Pacific Regional Connectivity Program and will connect Kiribati to
the rest of the world via a submarine fiber cable. This development, when completed, was expected to
significantly reduce the cost of international connectivity, as well as facilitate further growth of demand
through a reduction of prices. Further technical assistance financed by the project was to be provided to
CCK in the areas of licensing, interconnection and access, and landing party agreements, including any
implementing or ancillary regulatory instruments ensuring cost based, non-discriminatory and open access
to capacity.

The Kiribati Telecommunications and ICT Development Project depended on other projects for its ultimate
success. It was, moreover, unlikely to completely realize its full potential because of the absence of the
prerequisite technical competencies to maximize the full benefits, despite activities related to capacity
building and knowledge transfer integral to the project. For this reason relevance was substantial rather
than high.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  KI: Telecomms and ICT Development (P126324)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthen the legal, regulatory and institutional environment enabling a market-driven telecommunications
               sector.

               Rationale
               The Theory of Change was that legal and regulatory reforms and institutional capacity building ensure
               transition from a monopoly (state-owned incumbent operator) to a market-based private sector driven and
               competitive telecommunications sector, that would mean better service for the users, leading to greater use
               of internet and mobile services and ultimately to improved economic growth and a reduction in poverty.

               Outputs:

                     Telecom Services of Kiribati Ltd (TSKL) was transformed to Amalgamated Telecom Holdings Kiribati
                        Ltd. (ATHKL); target achieved.
                       Sector laws and rules were updated in line with the revised Government policy in order to make the
                        legal and regulatory framework more effective in delivering sector performance. The Communications
                        Act was amended and the Communications Commission of Kiribati's accountability was completed.
                        The National ICT policy 2019 was developed and endorsed by the Cabinet; target achieved.
                       The existing policy was reviewed and revised to improve ICT policy making capacity. It was endorsed
                        by the Cabinet; target achieved.
                       Reform of spectrum management was mostly achieved: Baseline - management plan designed for
                        single operator; a new spectrum management system has been purchased and is operational but staff
                        still require more training (partly due to staff turnover); target mostly achieved.
                       Updated telephone numbering plan was adopted: An eight-digit numbering plan is now operational;
                        target achieved.
                       Interconnection regime was adopted: Baseline no regime. Interconnection and access rules finalized
                        and approved; target achieved.
                       Dispute and mediation measures were put in place: The baseline was 'no mechanism in place',
                        Consumer protection rules were finalized and consumer protection is now in place; target achieved.
                       Number of direct beneficiaries (including % female): Baseline zero; target 40,000; actual 93,615. It
                        was not possible to dis-aggregate the number of beneficiaries by gender; target exceeded.

               While the legal and regulatory environment was strengthened the institutional environment required further
               capacity building. The project team noted that the absorption capacity of the government institutions was
               constrained due to the limited number of qualified staff. The capacity building at the Ministry of
               Communications, Transport and Tourism Development (MCTTD) and the Communications Commission of
               Kiribati (CCK) predominated as there needed to be a regulatory framework and tools in place to have
               effective oversight of the industry. Strengthening institutional capacity in the two relevant agencies was a
               challenge due to the small number of staff and the acute lack of skills among the staff. While gaps were
               addressed through the use of technical assistance offered by the project, the transfer of skills and knowledge
               was not as successful as initially envisioned. Thus, there remained serious concerns about the ability of CCK
               to successfully oversee the sector (ICR page 23). As an example, infrastructure sharing rules that had been

                                                                                                                Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KI: Telecomms and ICT Development (P126324)



developed as part of the project have yet to be implemented by CCK. The CCK also experienced a significant
delay in enabling interconnection of the new operator, thereby delaying the benefits of competition in the
sector. However, as the project team pointed out to IEG, the challenge associated with capacity building in
Kiribati is not only relevant to this project but the general human resource capacity in the country. This limits
the absorptive capacity of Government institutions.

Outcomes:

Although there were delays in privatizing Telecom Services Kiribati Ltd (TSKL) and in making Ocean Link
operational, the privatization was successfully completed. In addition, a PPP arrangement was launched
to attract private sector provision to uneconomic localities in the Outer Islands. While there were still
remaining institutional capacity weaknesses as mentioned above, the project achieved the building of a more
market driven telecommunications sector. The following results were reported in the ICR:

      Coverage of telecom services was extended to 85% of the population. Target achieved,
      Internet broadband subscribers increased as a percentage of the population: Baseline 1%; target
       20%; actual 89%. Target exceeded.
      Increase penetration of mobile telephones and internet, including the number of direct
       beneficiaries: Baseline 12%; Target 40%; Actual 47% Target achieved. Women make up 53% of the
       population but it was not possible to dis-aggregate the number of beneficiaries by gender. The
       expansion of services by ATHKL, introduction of competition and licensing of Ocean Link contributed
       to this achievement.
      Decrease in tariffs of mobile services and internet access: The baseline price for a 3-minute local
       mobile call was US$ 0.70. The target was 0.55 and the actual was 0.17. Target exceeded.
      Price of a 3-minute call to Australia: Baseline US$ 7.00 (formerly US$3.00); Target US$ 5.20 (formerly
       US$2.20); actual US$ 2.10. Target based on revised indicator exceeded.
      Price of monthly internet services (256 kbps): Baseline US$ 55.00 (formerly US$ 70.00) ; target US$
       41.00 (formerly US$ 53.00); actual US$ 19.00. Target exceeded.*See M&E discussion for details of
       why the indicator needed revision.

Based on these outcomes, the achievement of the objective is rated Substantial.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Facilitate improved connectivity to the Outer Islands.

Rationale
The Theory of Change was that the project provided technical assistance, a connectivity subsidy and a PPP
arrangement to increase the penetration rates in the Outer Islands. The increase in mobile and internet

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                KI: Telecomms and ICT Development (P126324)



                            penetration would improve connectivity and access to ICT services in the Outer Islands leading to economic
                            growth there.

                            Outputs:

                            A PPP agreement to be concluded to expand services to four Outer Islands was signed between
                            BwebwerikiNet Ltd (BNL) and Amalgamated Telecom Holdings Kiribati Ltd (ATHKL) was signed in August
                            2018 at a cost of US$ 1,800,000. Additionally, ATHKL was obliged to maintain the High Frequency radio
                            service. Under the PPP arrangement the Government of Kiribati retained the ownership of the PPP-
                            funded infrastructure (land access, towers, buildings and electricity solar panels) so that these could be
                            passed to another operator should the selected partner exit the market of one or more of the islands subject
                            to the PPP arrangement.

                            Outcomes:

                            The following results were recorded on the improved connectivity of the Outer Islands:

                                   Mobile penetration in Outer Islands: Baseline 1%; target 40%; actual 65%. Target exceeded, based on
                                    an industry data survey.
                                   Internet penetration in Outer Islands: Baseline 0.5%; target 20%; actual 65%. Target exceeded, based
                                    on an industry data survey.

                            Based on these results, the achievement of the objective is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of this project is rated substantial. Despite the delays in implementation of the OICP, and
                            major challenges faced with building capacity at the implementing agencies, the project mostly achieved its
                            objectives and laid the foundation for the full benefits of connectivity once a submarine cable system lands in
                            Kiribati. Both the Bank and the other Development Partners realize that the strengthening of capacity will
                            need ongoing support through follow on projects.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial




                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KI: Telecomms and ICT Development (P126324)



 5. Efficiency
The ICR was not able to run a comparative economic and financial analysis as such an analysis was
not undertaken at the time of appraisal. Analysis of the least cost subsidy model and adjustment to current price
levels demonstrate that the expansion to the four Outer Islands using 2.5G service would have cost the
Government USD$1,866,679. ATHKL delivered a faster and more modern 3G service (far superior to the 2.5G
service initially envisioned) was capable of fulfilling broadband functionality at a slightly lower cost of USD
$1,800,000.

Using the International Telecommunication Union (ITU ) Impact of Broadband on the Economy, Broadband
Series 2012, it was estimated that a 10% increase in broadband penetration would yield an additional 1.38% in
GDP growth. Based on the evidence collected to date, Kiribati has seen a growth in the penetration of
broadband penetration from 12% to 47%, which is an increase of 35% between 2012 and 2019. Extrapolating
the figures, the contribution of broadband to GDP growth in Kiribati could be approximated to 4.83% between
2012 and 2019. The World Bank’s Pacific Possible Report 2017 further estimates that the ICT sector’s
contribution to GDP in Kiribati would be about US$27 million by 2040, as well as contributing US$4 million to
Government revenue and increasing the number of available jobs by 700. The project amount of US$5.10
million has already generated a sizable injection of private sector funds into the ICT sector. The investments
made by ATHKL in the ICT sector in Kiribati can also be treated as a proxy indicator for the mobilization of
private sector funds directly linked to project implementation. ATHKL has invested approximately US$22
million into the ICT sector in Kiribati since project inception. This analysis does not include several key aspects,
which could not be measured, such as the impact of other licensees (for whom revenue has not been
disclosed), the boost to local businesses engaged in providing ICT services and recharge services, as well as all
other impacts associated with education, health and general improvement in public and private sector
efficiencies through the use of ICT.

Administrative and operational issues.

The heavy reliance on technical assistance and the weak institutional capacity within the Ministry of
Communications, Transport and Tourism Development (MCTTD) and the Communications Commission of
Kiribati (CCK) contributed significantly to the need for the project to be extended. Even with the extension of 24
months, activities related to the OICP were only just completed by the project closing date.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KI: Telecomms and ICT Development (P126324)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The overall project is rated Moderately Satisfactory given substantial relevance, substantial efficacy but modest
efficiency. Although the evaluation of achievements clearly demonstrated that targets were met or surpassed,
there were moderate shortcomings in efficiency because of the administrative and operational inefficiencies
caused by weak capacity of the Communications Commission of Kiribati and the Ministry of Communications,
Transport and Tourism Development that could not be sufficiently addressed under the project..


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Three risks are evident:

Institutional sustainability: To manage and maintain oversight of the ICT sector the project
established and supported key institutions, to better regulate the ICT sector in Kiribati. The project
provided technical assistance as well as equipment and training to enable MCTTD and CCK to carry out
their roles. This area, however, was the most vulnerable as outcomes associated with strengthening the
legal, regulatory and institutional environment and enabling transition to a market-driven telecommunications
sector were heavily reliant on the appointment and retention of skilled staff to oversee the sector. The skills
gap for project implementation was addressed in part by the use of technical assistance provided for under
the project, with an emphasis on skills and knowledge transfer. Nevertheless, there was an expectation that
there would be a long period of reliance on technical assistance beyond the scope of this project and some
suggestions were made under the lessons section. In terms of the expansion of coverage to the Outer
Islands, the key challenge was the small population spread over extensive areas. The intention was to
leverage universal access funds from private sector investment. Government providing an additional subsidy
for roll out.

Commercial sustainability: The reforms facilitated the arrival of private sector players such as ATHKL and
Ocean Link as well as a number of smaller internet service providers. Implementing arrangements for the
expansion of services to the Outer Islands Connectivity Plan (OICP) were expected to experience low to
negligible risks given that the PPP arrangements were protected by a bank guarantee. The launching of the
Pacific KA broadband satellite service as well as the imminent submarine cable will ensure that there is
adequate bandwidth to expand the range of service to consumers. It is estimated that it currently costs
ATHKL approximately 40% of its revenue to sustain the satellite connectivity costs but once the cable system
is activated, the costs have the potential to be reduced by at least 60%. There is some evidence of a
strong uptake of services in the newly established four Outer Island sites covered under the OICP,
as 24.30% of the population subscribed to such services within four months of their being launched. In
addition, follow on projects by the Development Partners including the World Bank will continue to include
institutional strengthening components.



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KI: Telecomms and ICT Development (P126324)



Maintenance of the level of services: Current service maintenance as well as introducing new services are
expected to be encouraged by the growth of the market in Kiribati and should be stimulated substantially
when the submarine cable system arrives in the country. Services established by this project should
encourage the private sector to help enable lower costs, greater value for customers, and a significant boost
to economic growth prospects is expected to underpin sustainable service provision. Until there is ample low-
cost bandwidth available, however, the locations that have high cost bandwidth will be less well served than
the larger markets with low cost bandwidth. In the case of Kiribati, the submarine cable project is expected to
deliver a low-cost high bandwidth solution to Tarawa and the nearby islands that account for some 65% of
the country’s population.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank invested considerable resources during the design phase of the project and built on earlier
  engagements with the Bank. The project team's experiences in dealing with ICT-related matters in the
  Pacific were critical ingredients in the preparation of the project. Lessons were drawn from previous
  experience and ongoing work in the region was taken into account.

  The team identified the general lack of capacity related to technical aspects, project management and
  administration but underestimated the extent of the training that would be necessary to build the requisite
  capacity. Special attention could have been given to ensure financial management was improved and a
  procurement adviser would have helped considerably to overcome the procurement challenges
  encountered. The Theory of Change was appropriately addressed but there were minor mistakes in
  two indicators that were presented in the appraisal report and which had to be rectified later.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 There was a total of 18 technical in-country supervision missions undertaken by the Bank project team.
 This is a very high number considering the size of the project, but it demonstrated the commitment of the
 project team to ensure smooth implementation and the achievement of the PDOs. The technical missions
 were critical in ensuring there was constant, albeit sometimes slower than anticipated, progress. A total of
 12 Implementation supervision reports were completed during project implementation, in which problems
 were identified and suggested solutions were clearly articulated. The team advised on how to adapt to
 changing technology, encouraged greater private sector participation and advised appropriately when it
 became clear that additional time was needed for capacity building. This involved preparing a restructuring
 paper. It would have been appropriate to have included in this paper the changes that had to be made to
 three indicators but this was not done. Nevertheless, overall the quality of supervision was satisfactory.



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KI: Telecomms and ICT Development (P126324)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results indicators used during design were considered adequate and relatively easy to report against
 and to track results during the course of implementation. An exception was the results indicator for
 “Improved ICT Policy Making”, where the indicator was that MCTTD should complete a review of all current
 ICT sector policies, which at that time was only the National ICT Policy 2011. Use of easily quantifiable
 indicators, such as number of ICT-related policies developed, or implementation of key measures as
 outlined in the policy document might have contributed better to measurement of this outcome (ICR page
 24). A similar argument could be made for the “Legal and Regulatory framework to be more effective at
 delivering sector performance” indicator, which would have benefited through the adoption of an indicator
 that could comprehensively track sector achievements instead of merely observing that the
 Communications Act had been revised.



b. M&E Implementation
  Three indicators required minor modifications, which were made during project implementation. Two
  modifications were due to errors discovered in the PAD because "price per minute" had been entered as
  "price for three minutes". This led to unrealistically low targets exceeded by 323% in one case and 248%
  in the other. Clearly more challenging targets had to be introduced. This was necessary as the
  developments in the ICT industry in Kiribati could not be measured using the baseline figures and targets
  proposed in the PAD.

  Regarding the third indicator on the price of monthly internet services, a change was necessitated as a
  result of the fast-changing technology associated with the delivery of broadband internet service. The
  original definition of "internet service" was based on a fixed broadband asymmetric digital subscriber line
  service, which was the only technology available at the time. However, technology changes meant that
  mobile broadband quickly became the key driver for the expansion of internet services. New baseline and
  target values had to be introduced but it was not deemed necessary to make these changes in
  a restructuring as the scope of the project remained unchanged. In IEG's view, since a restructuring had
  to be done anyway, it would have been good practice to report on the necessity for these changes.
  However, IEG agrees that in the circumstances a split evaluation was not needed. The baseline and
  target had to be corrected to take into consideration the use of mobile broadband as the delivery platform
  for broadband internet services. The above changes did not affect the methodology related to the
  collection of project data or the concept of the indicators selected.

  Although the data for reporting purposes were the responsibility of the MCTTD and CCK the data had to
  be verified during the missions that were undertaken during the life of the project. This meant there was a

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KI: Telecomms and ICT Development (P126324)



  heavy reliance on the industry for the collection of data, however, since CCK (technically the regulator to
  collect such data) suffered from a serious lack of trained staff.




c. M&E Utilization
  The data collected were sufficient to demonstrate the rate of progress during implementation and
  provide the project team with an insight into areas where interventions were required and
  modifications were necessary.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was categorized at appraisal as C, but triggering Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.0 and
   Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12 as a precaution. However, the land needed was minimal and no
   environmental and social safeguards issues were identified during project implementation, ATHKL was
   given access to small parcels of land for the deployment of mobile infrastructure with the full support of the
   local communities and the Government and in full compliance with the Government’s Environmental, Social,
   Health and Safety requirements as well as the Bank’s Environment and Social Safety guidelines, which
   were included in the bidding document for the PPP arrangement.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   The limited capacity of the MCTTD had caused the PAD to flag fiduciary issues as a high risk. In the event,
   some financial management weaknesses were indeed identified. These included issues concerning poor
   monitoring of project contracts, lapses in the updating of the commitment register, and travel
   advance acquittals which had been outstanding for a significant period of time. There were also lapses with
   statutory obligations related to deductions for the Kiribati Provident Fund and taxes, which would increase
   the risk of penalties under statutory compliance requirements.

   However, the audited accounts for the project were ready in time for the relevant ICR mission and within
   six months from the end of the fiscal year as required. Audits during the lifetime of the project were
   generally carried out within a reasonable time frame and management made efforts to address issues that
   had been identified for improvement. It was noted that the last audit undertaken for the financial year 2019
   was unqualified. It was of concern, however, that CCK has not produced an annual report since its


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KI: Telecomms and ICT Development (P126324)



   formation under the Communications Act 2013. It was considered imperative in the audit reports that
   this gap be addressed to improve CCK’s accountability to the sector and development partners.

   Procurement:

   Unfamiliarity with procurement processes by staff as well as the absence of a procurement adviser
   presented significant challenges to project procurement. Nevertheless. the procurement rating
   was moderately satisfactory by the time of the last ISR reported in April 2019.

   The ICR noted (page 26) that there was an absence of quotes for the purchase of small tools and building
   materials for the Outer Islands mobile building. The project had been initiated and for the most part was
   administered outside of the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP), which was an
   online system to help the World Bank and Borrowers plan and track procurement activities under Bank-
   financed projects. The users experienced system lags (due to a weak Internet connection) during migration
   to the online system, which made the process cumbersome and difficult. There were also limited
   capabilities and capacity of local staff at the implementing agencies in the administration of STEP and the
   Client Connection systems. The Bank project team, nevertheless, were consulted on the relevant terms of
   reference and evaluation reports by the client and comments were prepared and incorporated as required.
   No instances were recorded of procurement being undertaken without due process or not in accordance
   with the procurement plan.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Most of the youth that are now using the Internet, particularly through mobile broadband have little or no
   supervision from their parents. This is primarily due to the fact that the parents themselves are not aware
   of cyber security risks, as they themselves have very limited knowledge of the topic. There is a need for
   general education on the risks of oversharing digital activities. On the other hand, there are potentially
   huge positive educational benefits due to access to the internet.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                Modest efficiency due to weak
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   capacity of implementing
                                                                                agencies.
                                                                                Moderately satisfactory QAE
                                                                                due to underestimation of the
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   extent of training that would be
                                                                                necessary to build the requisite
                                                                                capacity.


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       KI: Telecomms and ICT Development (P126324)



Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are adapted from the ICR.

     1. To ensure sufficient human capacity and retention of skilled staff for overseeing the
        ICT sector, there should be greater collaboration between the Pacific Island policy
        makers and regulators and more efforts to share expertise and retain knowledge.
        There is a need for mentoring and short-term industry attachments in addition to on-line
        collaboration including sharing of experiences and best practice. While capacity building
        using international forums and conferences are valuable for learning, in-country assistance
        for staff training may provide additional opportunities for skills enhancement.
     2. Measures are needed to protect especially new internet users from the vulnerability
        associated with cyber security. Government could request development partners to work
        with them to develop a plan to increase local awareness and there should be legislation
        introduced as a foundation for such a strategy.
     3. The involvement of the private sector in the reform process is critical to enhance the
        ICT sector service provision in a sustainable manner. Properly sequenced reforms that
        create an enabling environment for private sector participation would mean having a level
        field and equal opportunity for the private sector.
     4. Technological innovation through the use of satellite connectivity and encouraging
        the use of distributed networks (where the core of the telecommunications exchange
        is offshore) are the key to success in small and isolated markets. Although cable
        remains the most robust solution for international connectivity, satellite connectivity options
        are often the best solution for connecting isolated and sparsely connected islands.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well prepared and thoughtful with some useful lessons. However, it could have been more
concise. The explanation about the changes in the indicator values was convoluted and could have been better
explained. The overall outcome rating of satisfactory was also optimistic given that there remained serious
concerns about the ability of CCK to successfully oversee the sector (ICR page 23).The Theory of Change was
unclear as there were two objectives, not three, and some outputs were actually outcomes. Overall, however,
there was sufficient information to understand the achievements of the project, how it fitted in with related
projects and the serious human resource constraints that affected implementation progress.



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  KI: Telecomms and ICT Development (P126324)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                             Page 15 of 15
