     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pakistan Competitiveness and Growth DPC(P157207)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0021567

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P157207                                   Pakistan Competitiveness and Growth DPC

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-58610,IDA-58620                       31-Dec-2017                                      492,462,936.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Jun-2016                               31-Dec-2017

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                         500,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          500,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                      492,462,936.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Jorge Garcia-Garcia        Clay Wescott                 Malathi S. Jayawickrama       IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The operation has two broad development objectives: (a) improving the business environment and (b)
   enhancing fiscal management through improving revenue management and making public spending more pro-
   poor. (Program document -PD-, par. 1)
   The operation was financed by both a budget support credit and a policy based guarantee, together supporting
   the same development objectives (on the credit and guarantee see Section 2c below) .




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pakistan Competitiveness and Growth DPC(P157207)




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   The operation was structured around two pillars: I. Improving the business environment; and II. Enhancing
   Fiscal Management. Pillar I covered policy reforms aimed at enhancing the investment climate, developing
   the capital market, enhancing financial inclusion and improving corporate governance, reforming SOEs and
   privatization; six prior actions underpinned the reforms. Pillar II covered policies that aimed at mobilizing
   revenue, improving debt management and improving pro-poor policy making; five prior actions underpinned
   these reforms.
   The operation included a policy-based guarantee that the authorities requested and was added during the
   preparation of the IDA credit. The DPF consisted of two financing sources, the credit and the guarantee,
   each one with its own project code. Both the credit and the guarantee supported the policy matrix and hence
   shared the prior actions. The guarantee would help to enhance debt management by diversifying financing
   sources, and allowing the authorities to issue long-term maturity debt which it could not do up to that
   moment. It would also reduce pressure on domestic financing, thus freeing up space for expanding private
   credit to increase business investment and growth.



c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   The operation consisted of a development policy credit (SDR 352.8, equivalent to US$500 million) and a
   policy-based guarantee (US$420 million). Both the credit and the guarantee were approved on June 21,
   2016. The credit became effective on June 28, 2016 and the guarantee on June 23, 2017. Both closed on
   December 31, 2017.
   The program had two project codes (Project ID), one for the IDA development policy credit (P157207) and
   other for the IBRD policy-based guarantee (P159839). The credits were numbered IDA-58610 and IDA-
   58620 and the guarantee was numbered IBRD G-2410.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  Over the first half of the 2010 decade, Pakistan suffered from slow growth and economic instability. By mid-
  2016, the country had weathered these problems after reforms and an adjustment program carried out under
  the IMF’s Extended Fund Facility. Reestablishing macroeconomic stability and strengthening macroeconomic
  fundamentals were the first priorities of the government that took office at the time. After clearing power
  sector arrears, reducing exemptions and concessions on taxes and improving the governance and pro-poor
  orientation of its social protection program (Benazir Income Support Program – BISP), the government
  focused its long-term economic goals on fiscal consolidation, reform of state-owned enterprises, improved
  trade competitiveness, a better investment climate and better access to finance. The pillars of the Pakistan
  Competitiveness and Growth Development Policy Credit were aligned with these goals. Pillar 1, improving the
  business environment, focused on the investment climate, access to finance and governance and reform of
  state enterprises. Pillar 2, enhancing fiscal management, focused on aspects of fiscal consolidation related to
  mobilizing revenue, managing public debt and using the resources for poverty programs more efficiently,


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 11
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Pakistan Competitiveness and Growth DPC(P157207)



       including by better targeting of poor people. Pillar 1 supports the private sector development pillar of the
       FY15-20 Country Partnership Strategy while Pillar 2 supports the inclusion pillar of the strategy.



       Rating
       Substantial

   b. Relevance of Design
       The credit focused on private sector development and fiscal aspects, the policy areas addressed by two
       Fiscally Sustainable and Inclusive Growth credits approved in FY14 and FY15. The credit helped complete
       some reforms started three years earlier, like a reduction in tax exemptions. In areas where past efforts had
       not been so successful, such as privatizing state-owned enterprises, the design of the credit switched to
       reforming the enterprises and making them more accountable. The credit also introduced new reform
       areas such as SOE reform, debt management and poverty measurement. Linking the policy-based
       guarantee to a debt strategy strengthened the design and had the potential to support stronger measures to
       consolidate debt management and reduce fragmentation.
       The results matrix presents a framework that seems logical and coherent at first sight. Closer scrutiny
       unveils that in some cases the prior actions by themselves would not lead to the expected results and the
       achievement of objectives. For example, a new poverty line helps measure poverty better but that is only a
       first step in addressing poverty and in enhancing fiscal management. Likewise, publishing SOE financial
       statements are only an initial step towards reforming SOEs but more needs to be done to improve fiscal
       management (PD, Annex 2). Also, credit for housing as a share of total loans is not a good measure of
       access to finance.
       Macroeconomic framework. By mid-2016 Pakistan’s economic activity had gradually recovered and the
       authorities had managed to bring inflation down to low single digits, bolster foreign reserves to four months
       of imports, and reduce power subsidies (IMF, Country Report No. 16/94). The IMF reported that prudent
       monetary and fiscal policies anchored inflation expectations, and the current account deficit had stabilized at
       about 1 percent of GDP. International reserves had been increasing steadily and the banking system
       remained profitable and well-capitalized although nonperforming loans (NPLs) were still elevated, at 11.4
       percent. Annual growth accelerated in 2016/17-2017/18 to 5.4 percent but slowed in 2018/19-2019/20 to
       about 2.9 percent, affecting tax revenues. The fiscal deficit (including grants) increased from 4.4 of
       GDP in 2015/16, to 6.4 of GDP in 2017/18, a result of growing expenditures and stagnant revenues. Total
       government debt increased from 66 to 72 percent of GDP between 2015/16 and 2017/18.



       Rating
       Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL



                                                                                                           Page 3 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pakistan Competitiveness and Growth DPC(P157207)




Objective 1
Objective
Improving the business environment

Rationale
The operation supported: (a) reforms in the legislation governing financial transactions, financial institutions
and the capital markets, (b) reforms in tax payments processes, (c) actions to improve the quality of
information on state-owned enterprises and (d) legal reforms to reduce entry barriers in the insurance sector.
These actions aimed at enhancing the investment climate, developing the capital markets, improving
financial inclusion and corporate governance and reforming the state enterprises sector.
Investment climate. To improve access to credit the program supported an amendment: (a) to the Financial
Institutions Bill that facilitated the use of inventories and receivables as collateral and strengthened lenders’
claims on collateral and (b) to the Credit Bureau Act that eliminated the provision that the central bank had to
verify all credit reports. The expected result was better access to credit, measured as a rise from 30 to 50 in
the “distance to the frontier” indicator for getting credit of the Doing Business. The indicator rose from 30 to
50 between 2016 and 2017 and fell to 45 in 2018, nearly achieving the target . To improve the ease of
paying taxes the Federal Bureau of Revenue posted online the simplified and streamlined tax payment
processes. Taxpayers submitting tax returns online increased from about 420,000 in March 2015 to
1,013,254 in December 2017, exceeding the 773,000 target.
Capital markets. To deepen capital markets the program supported an amendment of the Securities and
Exchange Commission of Pakistan (SECP) to facilitate cooperation with international regulators, to empower
it by ensuring its independence, to improve the governance of its Policy Board and to strengthen its
supervisory and punitive powers. These actions were required to match the Commission’s power with its
growing mandate to become a more effective regulatory agency. Also, reflecting the reviews of the
International Organization of Securities Commissions and the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)
the Commission integrated the three Pakistan stock exchanges into a single exchange, which was another
prior action of the credit. The expected outcome, an increase in the listed capital in capital markets, was
partially achieved. The capital increased from 1.18 to 1.28 trillion Pakistan Rupees between June 2015 and
June 2017, below the expected 1.48 trillion.
Financial inclusion. The potential for housing finance was constrained after the foreclosure provisions in
the Financial Institutions Act of 2001 were declared unconstitutional. The decision created uncertainty and
deterred the development of the housing finance market. To increase housing finance the operation
supported amendments to the foreclosure procedures established in 2001, including the borrower’s rights to
the foreclosed property. The expected result from the reforms was not achieved: between 2014 and 2017
housing finance rose 38 percent and overall private finance rose faster. As a result, housing finance fell from
1.6 to 1.5 percent of private sector credit and failed to reach the 2.0 percent target.
Corporate governance, privatization and stated-owned companies (SOEs). Weak corporate
governance had deteriorated accountability and reduced the financial performance of SOEs. The sub-par
performance increased the fiscal deficit as the Ministry of Finance had to transfer resources to SOEs to
finance their deficits and to pay for their capital increases; also, their contingent liabilities raised the risk of
government debt as the federal government guaranteed more than 75 percent of them. To improve
governance the operation also supported actions to collect data and publish reports on the financial and non-
financial information of all federal SOEs and to transform the State Life Insurance Company into a public


                                                                                                        Page 4 of 11
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Pakistan Competitiveness and Growth DPC(P157207)



    limited company. In December 2017 the Ministry of Finance published the SOEs financial information for
    fiscal years 2013/14, 2014/15 and 2015/16, thus achieving the target. The target of passing the State Life
    Insurance Company Act by the Senate highlights the risk of supporting an action not under the control of the
    DPC’s implementing ministry: the Senate has not yet passed the bill, so the expected result is not achieved.
    Overall, the investment climate improved and the volume of housing financed increased but there is no
    evidence that capital markets deepened and corporate governance improved.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     Enhancing fiscal management

    Rationale
    The operation supported (a) actions to improve tax compliance and reforms in the system granting
    concessions to taxpayers; (b) changes in the administration and long-term planning of debt management; (c)
    actions to strengthen the targeting of the income support program; and (d) updating the information on
    poverty and the method for measuring it.
    Improving revenue management. To expand Pakistan’s low tax base the program supported actions to
    eliminate the discriminatory tax concessions granted through statutory regulatory orders and starting the
    auditing of taxpayers using a risk-based system. The operation completed the third phase of eliminating tax
    concessions started under other Bank credits; completing this final step meant that tax expenditures for 1.5
    percent of GDP had been eliminated over the three phases. For the audits the authorities started auditing 40
    large taxpayers selected under a risk–based criteria instead of the random and desk-based practice audit
    used before. The cuts in tax concessions and in other exemptions reduced tax expenditures, helping to raise
    the tax/GDP ratio to 12.5 percent in FY16/17, above the target of 12.2 percent target. There is no information
    on the impact of the audits.
    Improving debt management. Total government debt was about 68 percent of GDP in 2015/16 (IMF,
    Country Report 19/380, Table 1), higher than the 60 percent recommended in the Fiscal Responsibility and
    Debt Limitation Act. To improve debt management the program supported strengthening the Debt Policy
    Coordination Office and publishing a medium-term debt management strategy for FY2015/16-2018/19. The
    expected result was achieved: maintaining the share of foreign debt in total debt within the range of 20-35
    percent in line with the government’s medium-term debt strategy. The 2017 IMF Article IV report notes that
    “the effectiveness of the Debt Policy Coordination Office has been strengthened by enhancing its staffing
    and improving debt management practices through the formulation of a debt and risk management
    strategy” (2017, par. 27). While debt management may have improved, debt levels have grown from 68
    percent of GDP in 2015/16 to 84 percent in 2018/19 and to a projected level of 81 percent in 2019/20 (Ibid).
    Also, the ICR notes that since June 2017 “domestic debt maturities have shortened as the Government



                                                                                                       Page 5 of 11
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Pakistan Competitiveness and Growth DPC(P157207)



    focused on short-tenor domestic borrowing to finance an increasing deficit”, which makes “a strong case for
    focusing also on the maturity profile of domestic debt.” (page 29).
    Improving pro-poor policy making. Pakistan’s poverty program and poverty policy were informed by the
    National Socio-economic Registry of 2010 and by poverty information unknown to the public because
    governments did not publish the results of Household Income and Expenditure Surveys even when poverty
    rates declined. The credit sought to improve the quality of policy-making on poverty by having the
    government update its socio-economic registry, use dynamic updating of the registry going forward, and use
    the 2013/14 survey data (the most recent at the time) and the cost of basic needs method to publish a new
    series on poverty going back to 2005-06. The expected results were to have (a) the new poverty line
    announced and the information on poverty trends since 2005/06 published by April 2016; and (b) at least 2.5
    million households with score cards in June 2017. The targets were met: the government released the
    2015/16 poverty rates in April 2018 and about 3.8 million households had updated scorecards by February
    2018.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  The program covered two policy areas of substantial relevance and was aligned with the government’s
  development plan and the WBG’s Country Partnership Strategy. In most instances, the prior actions could lead
  to achieving the objectives, but in other instances some of the prior actions could not ensure that the objectives
  would be achieved even after the program ended. Drawing a new poverty line does not enhance fiscal
  management, and converting the State Life Insurance Company into a limited company in itself does not ensure
  an improved business environment. The relevance of design was modest. Of the four sub-objectives under
  objective 1, the results indicators were not achieved in two cases and were partially achieved in one case which
  makes efficacy modest. As for objective 2, the results indicators were achieved for all of the three sub-objectives
  and the technical aspects of fiscal management may have improved (e.g., spending money on the poor not on
  the rich, better financial approach to fiscal management). While the technical aspects of managing debt have
  improved, growing government expenditure, stagnant government revenues and the consequent larger fiscal
  deficits and debt/GDP ratio amidst a favorable external economic context suggest that better technical
  management of debt and of poverty programs is insufficient to control rising debt levels when expenditure runs
  amok.

  No specific results were associated with the policy-based guarantee. A summary of the main outcomes
  follows. Pakistan had difficulties in securing long-term international loans from private banks because they were
  not willing to hold Pakistan's risk debt for more than three years. The guarantee allowed the government to
  launch a competitive process to procure a medium-term loan from international lenders with four international

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 11
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Pakistan Competitiveness and Growth DPC(P157207)



banks submitting their proposals in May 2017. With the Bank’s guarantee the government borrowed US$700
million from Standard Chartered Bank at competitive rates and a 10-year amortization schedule. Over the life of
the policy-based guarantee Pakistan saves 165 basis points per year equating to some US$70 million of net
savings.




a.    Outcome Rating
      Moderately Satisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

Over the past five years Pakistan has undertaken an adjustment program that the IMF and the World Bank
supported. The main risk to the operation’s outcomes arise on the county’s macroeconomic stability, which
depends on managing fiscal policy prudently, continuing fiscal reforms and sustaining them over the medium-
to-long term. The planned reforms include strengthening tax revenue mobilization, including eliminating tax
exemptions and loopholes, carrying out the comprehensive plan designed to address the accumulation of
arrears in the power sector, improving revenue collection, reducing losses, enhancing governance in the sector
and adjusting energy tariffs in a timely and regular manner. Although the authorities may have declared their
commitment to reduce the debt/GDP ratio and sustain the progress on fiscal adjustment, the growing
government expenditure, the stagnant government revenues and the consequent larger fiscal deficits and
debt/GDP ratio in the last four years indicate their commitment was weak. The Bank team told IEG that a new
Minister of Finance in a new government is working to reduce fragmentation and to consolidate debt
management, with support from technical assistance and a new DPL under preparation with the Bank.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
      Substantial

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

     The program addressed important issues affecting the business environment and fiscal management.
     The pillars of the operation were aligned with the government’s goals and the objectives of the operation
     were appropriate; the actions to be carried out were clear and well defined, and mainly linked with
     results with some exceptions (see Sections 3b and 9a). The arrangements envisaged the World Bank
     engaging with teams implementing technical assistance programs in the agencies implementing the
     reforms.
     The Bank did not fully exploit its knowledge and experience in designing a clear, coherent and
     convincing results framework. For example, support to improving the business environment could have
     been better informed by the Enterprise Survey, as well as by the Doing Business Report.

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pakistan Competitiveness and Growth DPC(P157207)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The Bank team in Pakistan had expertise built on extensive prior engagements in reform areas supported
  by the DPC and the Policy-based Guarantee. Their oversight was enabled by a monitoring system for
  tracking prior and follow-on actions, and results outcomes. A workshop brought together specialists from
  government and the Bank to look across the spectrum of ongoing reforms, including those supported by
  the DPC, and to identify areas needing increased attention.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  The program document identified the Ministry of Finance as the agency responsible for supervising and
  implementing the operation and the Ministry’s External Finance Division as the direct counterpart. The
  Ministry helped advance reforms that had stalled and its staff met regularly with World Bank staff, with
  the Government’s technical staff and with other relevant stakeholders to solve problems affecting the
  execution of the operation.
  While the government delivered on the operation’s prior actions, improved its fiscal management and
  used the policy-based guarantee in an effective manner, its conduct of fiscal and debt policy puts a cloud
  on its commitment to manage fiscal policy in a prudent manner. Large expenditures followed by sluggish
  growth weakened the political support needed to reform tax and expenditure policy.


  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  N/A


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pakistan Competitiveness and Growth DPC(P157207)




  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The Ministry of Finance was in charge of coordinating with Bank staff in the design of the operation and in
  following up on the status of reforms and of the results indicators. As already flagged in Section 3b, the
  logical chain between actions, results and objectives was not always appropriate, with some expected
  results too broad or ambitious, and others not well connected to the measures supported, such as the
  indicator for housing finance (share of credit going to this) that does not provide a measure of whether the
  use of collateral was a binding constraint. Some targets such as capitalization of the stock market and the
  tax/GDP were affected by the overall macro situation. Also, the larger taxes collected at the border
  contributed to increasing the tax/GDP ratio, which was supported by additional regulatory import duties
  meeting conditions of the IMF program but not supported by the prior actions of the DPC. The target for
  increasing housing finance as a percent of overall private finance was too ambitious for a stand-alone
  operation. A better indicator on access to credit would have measured the volume of credit backed by
  relevant collateral.



b. M&E Implementation
  The program document did not define a plan for implementing M&E. The ICR only discusses the
  implementation concerning the Act of the State Life Insurance Corporation. The review concludes that the
  authorities and the World Bank collected the data in a timely manner. A minor effort was required to gather
  that information.



c. M&E Utilization
  The operation was disbursed in a single tranche. No information was gathered to improve its impact. The
  Bank could have used the time between approval and closing to gather information to learn more about the
  operation’s impact.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 11
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Pakistan Competitiveness and Growth DPC(P157207)



   The PD (p. 41-2) concludes that the operation isn’t likely to have significant environmental effects. The ICR
   (p. 30) points out links between prior actions and poverty reduction, gender or social development, including
   support to financial inclusion, the National Socio-Economic Registry update and revised poverty line.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
The ICR does not report fiduciary issues.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
    ---


d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                              Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory     ---
                              Satisfactory
Risk to Development
                              Substantial             Substantial                 ---
Outcome
                              Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory     ---
                              Satisfactory
                              Moderately
Borrower Performance                                  Moderately Satisfactory     ---
                              Satisfactory
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                 ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

 The ICR’s principal lessons are summarized below:


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 11
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Pakistan Competitiveness and Growth DPC(P157207)



  •  To raise large sums of money and obtain positive outcomes the borrower needs to plan and act ahead of
  its needs so that it can enter the market when the market sentiment is in its favor.
  • The benefits of a World Bank guarantee are likely to increase if the guarantee has flexibility, the borrower
  considers multiple market segments, has a sufficient large number of banks to submit proposals and
  requests proposals under a transparent and competitive process.
  • When reforms take time to implement and to deliver results, a standalone operation is less appropriate than
  a series of policy loans, where the initial operation can be front-loaded with the more difficult reforms, when
  the momentum for reform is likely to be stronger.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR summarizes well the origins, preparation and implementation of the operation. Its explanations are
clear and to the point. Its assessment of risk to development outcome could have benefited from looking at the
performance of fiscal accounts, in particular the growth of expenditures, of the fiscal deficit and the
government’s debt. The lessons sections could have been shorter; the information presented tends to obscure
what lesson the ICR is delivering.
The ICR has good information about the program. A minor shortcoming is the length of the main section of the
report, 35 pages compared to the standard 15 pages. The Bank team told IEG the reason for the longer report
is that it covered two instruments: the credit and the guarantee.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 11
