     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021917

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P128950                                  REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Bosnia and Herzegovina                   Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51880                                31-Jul-2018                                         31,775,369.83

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Oct-2012                              31-Jan-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           34,100,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                            34,100,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                        30,209,891.99                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       John R. Eriksson            Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both the Financing Agreement (FA) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD), the Project
   Development Objective (PDO) was to support the development of a sustainable real estate registration
   system with harmonized land register and cadastre records in urban areas of both the Federation of Bosnia
   and Herzegovina (FBiH) and the Republika Sprska (RS) (FA, page 6, PAD, paragraph 9). This review will
   assess the achievement of this singular PDO broken down into two sub-objectives as follows:



                                                                                                Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)



         to support the development of a harmonized land register and cadastre records in urban areas of both
          the FBiH and RS; and
         to support the development of a sustainable real estate registration system in urban areas of both the
          FBiH and RS.

   The key outcome indicators under the harmonization aspect of the PDO were:

         Coverage: Number of Cadastral Municipalities (CMs) with land register and cadastre data harmonized
          in FBH and Real Estate Cadastre (REC) established in the RS. A cadastral municipality was an
          administrative unit for land administration used in the countries that emerged from the former
          Yugoslavia. Smaller in area than a political municipality, this may contain as few as 2,000 properties.
          As of March 2019, there were 3,482 cadastral municipalities in BiH.
         Governance: Percentage of CMs with harmonized land register and cadastre/REC data publicly
          accessible online and percentage of users who considered real estate registration services reliable.

   The key outcome indicators under the sustainability aspect of the PDO were:

         Sustainability: Ratio of real estate registration revenues over costs. Sustainability was measured by
          the degree an institution generated revenue to match its costs, charged affordable fees, delivered
          quality services without discrimination and within a reasonable time (PAD, paragraph)
         Other World Bank (core): Number of direct project beneficiaries (joint and individual land owners), of
          which a certain percentage were female.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Real Estate Registration Data Development: (US$18.3 million at appraisal, US$20.1 million at closing)
   In FBiH this component financed vulnerability mapping, social monitoring, and public awareness campaigns
   to support registration of real estate rights and vectorization of cadastral maps. These activities led to a
   harmonized land register and cadastre data of land, buildings, and rights based on field data. In RS, this
   component financed vulnerability mapping, including coordinate reference system development, social
   monitoring, and public awareness campaigns to harmonize land, buildings and rights, based on real estate
   cadastre data.

   2. Real Estate Registration Infrastructure Development (US$11.1 million at appraisal, US$10.3 million at
   closing) In FBiH and RS, this component financed the improvement of working conditions and infrastructure
   in cadastre and land registration offices through office renovations, provision of furniture and equipment,
   and information and communication technology system development plus the creation of digital archives in
   RS.




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)



   3. Policy and Institutional Development and Project Management (US$4.7 million at appraisal, US$3.7
   million at closing) In BiH and RS: policy and institutional development in the sustainability and governance
   of real estate registers and project management and monitoring support through the provision of technical
   assistance, training, incremental operating costs and equipment.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: Total project cost reached US$34.1 million and disbursed US$30.2 million. The balance is
   anticipated to be fully utilized by the project closing date (see Dates below).

   Financing: This investment project was financed by the International Development Association (IDA).

   Borrower Contribution: There was no Government contribution.

   Dates: The project was approved on October 25,2012, and made effective 11 months later, on September
   23, 2013. The Mid Term Review (MTR) was conducted on June 6, 2016. The original closing date of July
   31, 2018 was extended to January 31, 2020. The Borrower requested Additional Financing (AF). With the
   AF, the project implementation period would exceed ten years. Therefore, in accordance with Bank
   operational policy, the reviewed document is an interim ICR. There were two level 2 restructurings:

         On January 2, 2016 to change legal covenants - to extend the due date for submitting the long-term
          strategy and business plans of both implementing entities from December 31, 2014 to December 31,
          2016, and allow the RS Geodetic Authority (RGA) to purchase an additional office, and reallocate
          funds among disbursement categories.
         On October 6, 2017 to adjust targets in the Results Framework, extend the loan closing date by 18
          months, and reallocate resources among disbursement categories. The Government requested the
          extension to keep the Project Implementation Units active during the AF negotiations scheduled for
          November 2019. The AF Board approval date was anticipated for January 2020. The 18-month
          extension considered the lengthy ratification process -- the credit became effective after an 11
          month delay -- the underestimation of the time needed to harmonize land registry and cadastre data,
          and establishing Real Estate Cadastre (RECs). The following changes were made in the Results
          Framework: (i) PDO outcome indicator targets were reduced to reflect the actual costs and pace of
          implementation; (ii) 2 PDO indicators were dropped because these could not be monitored; (iii)
          World Bank-required core indicators were added (see Section 4, Efficacy below). In addition, this
          restructuring addressed baseline methodological and data availability issues.

   According to the Bank Task Team's March 20, 2020 email to IEG, after this interim ICR was prepared, the
   project closing date was extended a second time for another 18 months to July 31, 2021. The AF was
   anticipated to be effective by then and the new closing date for the project with the AF was anticipated to be
   July 31, 2022.




3. Relevance of Objectives




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)



               Rationale
               The PDO was relevant to the country's reform agenda and consistent with the BiH Land Administration
               Sector Policy and Strategy adopted in 2011. In July 2015, the Council of Ministers of BiH, the Government
               of Republika Srpska (RS), and the Government of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH)
               adopted a joint program of structural reforms known as the reform agenda. In its Governance for Growth
               strategy in general, and the Justice Sector Reform in particular, priority measures included the creation of a
               favorable environment for sustainable economic development through a harmonized system of land registry
               (p 108). This harmonization would lead to legal security in proprietary rights and foster a favorable
               environment for investments. The PDO was relevant to the reform measures identified such as programs to
               enhance, harmonize, and make available real estate records and train employees of the land registry
               administrations to deliver high quality service.

               The PDO was relevant to the current World Bank Country Partnership Framework (FY 2016-2020) and
               supported the three focus areas of (1) increasing public sector efficiency and effectiveness, (2) creating
               conditions for accelerated private sector growth, and (3) building resilience to natural shocks (CPF,
               paragraph 42). Financing the inputs that the registration agencies needed to improve their service delivery
               contributed to the first focus area. The Project adopted e-services, operating procedures, legal reform, and
               improved office environments to efficiently and effectively deliver its services. The Project was also relevant
               to the second CPF focus area because clear and secure property data fostered the trading of property,
               reduced transaction costs, and facilitated its highest and best use. Banks accepted real estate as security
               for mortgages, and allowed owners access to investment funds. The Project also contributed to the third
               CPF focus area because creating a complete and secure record of real properties would facilitate rebuilding
               and reconstruction following a natural disaster.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             - to support the development of a sustainable real estate registration system with harmonized land register
                             and cadastre records in urban areas of both the FBiH and RS

                             Rationale
                             The Theory of Change for this objective started with activities or project components such as data
                             development, data infrastructure, and policy and institutional development. These activities would target
                             urban areas in both FBiH and RS. The activities would generate outputs such as properties registered, details
                             captured by software, and results being available online. These outputs would work toward harmonizing
                             records of land registry and cadastre records in both areas.


                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)



The key outcome indicators were:

     Coverage: Number of Cadastral Municipalities (CMs) with land register and cadastre data harmonized
      in FBH and Real Estate Cadastre (REC) established in the RS.
     Governance: Percentage of CMs with harmonized land register and cadastre/REC data publicly
      accessible online and percentage of users who considered real estate registration services reliable.

OUTPUTS

     427 CMs with harmonized land register and cadastre data established RECs in urban areas (baseline
        35, original target 524, revised target 468, partly achieved). The target was reduced following the
        2017 restructuring based on actual costs and pace of implementation. In RS 253 CMs exceeded the
        target of 190. In FBiH 174 CMs partly achieved the target of 278. However, according to the Bank
        Task Team's March 20, 2020 email to IEG, data harmonization and REC establishment was
        completed in 527 CMs, exceeding target.
       443 CMs were covered by vulnerability mapping (baseline 0, original target 489, revised target 433,
        exceeded)
       590,655 hectares of land area with use or ownership rights were recorded as a result of the project
        (baseline 0, original unrevised target 503,000 hectares, exceeded)
       The established IT system was deemed capable to maintain harmonized data, achieving target.
       In RS, 70 percent (baseline 65, original target 93, revised target 80 percent, partly achieved) of the
        cadastral maps were in digital form. The revised target in RS was reported not likely to be met even
        though only 10 percent of the maps remained to be digitized because of the following: (i) the RS GA
        staff were focused on establishing the RECs; (ii) there were procurement delays using government
        funds; and (iii) about 7 percent of the RS territory were not yet surveyed and could not be vectorized.
        This meant that maps or surveyed properties would be expressed in points, lines, and curves based
        on mathematical equations, not on solid colored square pixels. As a result, no matter how large or
        small one zoomed in on a vectorized image, the lines, curves, or points remained smooth, not
        pixelated. According to the Bank Task Team's March 20,2020 email to IEG, 73.5 percent of RS
        cadastral maps were converted in digital form (target remained partly achieved).
       In RS 18 REC offices (baseline 0, original, unrevised target 17, exceeded) were purchased (ICR
        Annex 1).
       In FBiH, 62.6 percent (baseline 27, original, unrevised target 40 percent, exceeded) of the cadastral
        maps were in digital form.
       In FBiH 50 land registry and cadaster offices were renovated (baseline 29, original, unrevised target
        49, exceeded).
       In RS, the European Terrestrial Reference System (ETRS) was not used in cadastral surveys in RS
        (baseline 0, original, unrevised target 100 percent, not achieved) because of procurement issues
        (see Section 10, Other Issues, (b) Fiduciary Compliance, Procurement below). According to the Bank
        Task Team's March 20, 2020 email to IEG, the RGA informed the Bank they will postpone the
        tendering of this activity and will advise the Bank when they plan to achieve the target.
       9 types of E-services were provided to key stakeholders in both RS and FBiH (baseline 2, original,
        unrevised target 10, partly achieved). These services resulted in 4,345,717 individual cases
        (baseline 0, original, unrevised target 30,000, exceeded). According to the Task Team's March 20,
        2020 email to IEG, under the AF, with the steady increase in access to the data, the targets were
        revised for 2020 (3.3 million) and 2021 (3.1 million. Calculating the individual cases would be rectified

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)



       in the AF. In addition, FBiH GA provided access to the cadastre data of its State Investigation and
       Protection Agency (SIPA) and its Intelligence and Security Agency (OSA BiH)

OUTCOMES:

      Coverage: There were 427 CMs with harmonized land register and cadastre data in FBiH and Real
       Estate Cadastres (RECs) were established in the RS urban areas (baseline 35, original target 524,
       revised target 468, partly achieved). According to the Task Team's March 20, 2020 email to IEG,
       data harmonization and REC established were completed in 527 CMs, exceeding target. In RS 253
       CMs exceeded the target of 190. All CMs with land register and cadastre/REC data were publicly
       accessible online by December 31, 2018, achieving target (baseline 8 percent) in FBiH through
       www.katastar.ba for cadaster data and www.e-grunt.ba for land registry data. In RS, cadaster and
       registration data were available online at www.rgurs.org/en/servisi/geoportal.
      1,116,602 land parcels with use or ownership rights were (baseline 516,000, target 1,113,000,
       exceeded). 473,012 land parcels were female owned (target 369,858, exceeded).
      Governance: In the RS, both cadastre and land registry records were managed by the RS Geodetic
       Authority (RGA) and were harmonized under a single record called Real Estate Cadastre (REC). In
       the FBiH, the municipal cadastre departments managed cadastre data while land registry offices in
       municipal courts managed land registry data. The FBiH GA (FGA) coordinated the harmonization of
       the cadastre and land register information. Customer satisfaction surveys in FBiH and RS provided
       the value for the user perception of quality of real estate registration services. According to the Task
       Team's March 20, 2020 email to IEG, the first surveys were conducted in 2015 and 2016 with a 78
       percent level of satisfaction (target 80 percent, target unmet). The FBiH completed a delayed
       survey showing a 74 percent level of satisfaction. The results of the delayed RS survey was not yet
       available.
      The project benefited 1,326,579 direct beneficiaries (baseline 90,000, original target 1,680,000,
       revised target 1,480,000, partly achieved) of which 35.10 percent were women (baseline 30 percent,
       original, unrevised target 35 percent, achieved). According to the Task Team's March 20, 2020 email
       to IEG, the project benefited 1,675,708 direct beneficiaries. 35.8 percent of these beneficiaries were
       women (target exceeded). 1,116,602 land parcels (512,145 land parcels in FBiH and 604,457 land
       parcels in RS) with use or ownership rights were recorded (baseline 516,000, target 1,113,000,
       exceeded). 473,012 land parcels were female owned (target 369,858, exceeded).

In summary, data was developed, data infrastructure was completed, and policy and institutional development
were implemented in both FBiH and RS urban areas. Properties were registered, details were captured by
software, and results were available online. These outputs harmonized land registry and cadastre records.
Most of the outcome and intermediate indicators were achieved, if not exceeded. The partial achievement of
some indicators and the unmet intermediate outcome indicator did not diminish the achievements under this
objective. As a result, this outcome was rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)




Objective
- to support the development of a sustainable real estate registration system in urban areas of both the FBiH
and RS

Rationale
The Theory of Change for this objective took off from the activities achieved by the objective above such as
data development, data infrastructure, and policy and institutional development. The outputs implemented in
the target urban areas of FBiH and RS were properties registered, software in place, and continued
availability of online access to harmonized data. A self-financing registration system would be achieved when
the host institutions generated sufficient revenues to match its costs by charging affordable fees to deliver
quality services without discrimination and within a reasonable time period (ICR, paragraph 6).

The key PDO outcome indicators under this sub-objective were:

      Sustainability: Ratio of real estate registration revenues to costs.
      Core: Number of direct project beneficiaries (joint and individual land owners), of which a certain
         percentage were female.

OUTPUTS:

      100 percent of the CMs with land register and cadastre Real Estate Cadastre were publicly accessible
         online (baseline 8 percent, original, unrevised target of 100 percent, achieved)
      1,326,579 direct project beneficiaries benefited from the project (baseline 90,000, original target
         1,680,000, revised target 1,480,000, partly achieved) of which 35.10 percent were women (baseline
         30 percent, original, unrevised target 35 percent, achieved)
        408 public awareness campaigns were completed in target areas (baseline, 0, original target 489,
         revised target 468, partly achieved). According to the Task Team's March 20, 2020 email to IEG,
         public awareness campaigns were completed 542 CMs (target exceeded). In RS, 3 campaigns were
         completed (baseline 0, original target 2, revised target 4, partly achieved). In RS, 4 six-month long
         campaigns were underway and scheduled for completion in 2019.
        2 customer service surveys were completed (baseline 0, original target 6, revised target 4, partly
         achieved) reporting 78 percent of customers were satisfied with the quality of real estate registration
         services (baseline 75, original target 90, revised target 80, partly achieved). According to the Task
         Team's March 20, 2020 email to IEG, the final 2 customer surveys were completed in 2019 where
         FBiH reported 74 percent satisfaction with services. The RS survey results were not yet available.
        1 Impact Evaluation study was completed (baseline 0, original, unrevised target 2, partly achieved).
         A second, final phase of the impact evaluation was scheduled for 2019 (PAD, Annex 7, paragraph 4).
        Analytical reports were produced providing gender disaggregated data to inform decision making (no
         numbers reported in the ICR Annex 1). The FBiH land registration software (e-Grunt) generated
         gender disaggregated reports. In RS, database records included gender information. The land
         registration software was adjusted to generate gender disaggregated reports.
        7,781 persons were trained in land registration activities (baseline 1,047, original unrevised target
         6,000, exceeded)
        Both RS and FBiH had operational and sustainable IT units with competent staff. In RS, RS GA had
         budget allocated for software maintenance. In the case of FBiH, software responsibility was



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)



         transferred from the MOJ to the FBiH GA. The FBiH GA had a fully functioning IT department. The
         budget contained annual allocation for software maintenance.
        2 long-term strategies for real estate registration were completed, achieving target.
        In RS, 8 technical reports (including 2 studies on land consolidation) and legislative drafting support
         for by-laws for the new cadastre law legislation were noted as completed by January 2020 (baseline 0,
         original, unrevised target 8, partly achieved).
        Electronic conveyance, however, was not achieved. Conveyance refers to the transfer of
         ownership/title from one entity to another. This transfer included document preparation from the time a
         property is listed to settlement and completion of transaction. A component of digital
         conveyance required a certification authority center responsible for issuing and verifying digital
         signatures. Both FBiH and RS had e-government platforms. These platforms allowed for e-signatures
         and e-payments. These were linked to the government systems. Tests were undertaken for both FGA
         and RGA. However, there were no legal frameworks or certification authorities for e-signatures.
         Therefore, no tests were undertaken for the registration software. Technically, the indicator was
         achieved but not operational until legal and institutional arrangements were adopted and
         implemented. However, the implementing agencies did not have these responsibilities.
        The system had not been technically enabled for the entire country (both FBiH and RS, baseline 0,
         target Y, not achieved) with key registers such as personal ID, company ID, and address registry. In
         FBiH, the cadastre system was technically enabled but not in RS. In RS agreements were signed with
         (i) the Ministry of Interior to exchange Personal ID and Address Registry data, and (ii) the Agency for
         Intermediary, IT and Financial services (APIF) to exchange Business Entities register, Cadastral and
         Address Registry data. The arrangements and web services were being tested at the time of this
         interim ICR.
        Digital archiving was operational in 89 priority offices (baseline 3, original, unrevised target 20,
         substantially exceeded). In FBiH, digital archives were operational in 82 offices. In the RS, digital
         archives were established in 12 offices, according to the Task Team's March 20, 2020 email to IEG.
        Volume and Value of mortgages achieved were almost achieved in RS while exceeded in FBiH
        The volume and value of transactions or requests for registration in the land registry offices below
         show that this indicator was almost achieved in RS and substantially exceeded in FBiH

OUTCOME:

The PDO outcome indicator relative to sustainability was deleted during the MTR because two elements of
the indicators could not be monitored, i.e., (i) the ratio of real estate registration revenues (coming from the
GAs, Courts, Ministry of Justice (MOJ), and CMs) over (ii) the costs of real estate registration delivered to the
provided (GA, the Courts). The FGA could not monitor the revenues and expenses because of the
decentralized administrative structure. The RGA chose not to monitor CMs, Land Registration Offices, the
FMOJ, and the FGA to instead co-finance the purchase of a building and establishing RECs. The ratio of
expenses to revenues did not follow the trend identified in the PAD and hence, could not be compared.

The project benefited 1,326,579 direct beneficiaries (baseline 90,000, original target 1,680,000, revised target
1,480,000, partly achieved) of which 35.10 percent were women (baseline 30 percent, original, unrevised
target 35 percent, achieved). According to the Task Team's March 20, 2020 email to IEG, direct beneficiaries
reached 1,675,708 million (target exceeded), of which 35.8 percent were women (target achieved).

In summary, after building on the achievements under the first objective above, there was no data to support
the objective that the land registration system was sustainable. Legal and regulatory features of electronic

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)



                            conveyances still needed to be completed and would be addressed by the AF leading to a modest
                            achievement of this objective.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy is rated substantial for the following reasons:

                                  the outputs and outcomes under the first sub-objective were substantially met. Harmonization in the
                                   target cadastral municipalities were achieved and were publicly available. There were drawbacks that
                                   had to do with data collection or available data that will be addressed in the remaining period of the
                                   project and under the AF.
                                  the outputs and outcomes under the second sub-objective were modest. The sustainability of the land
                                   registration system could not be supported by non available data. At the same time, there were legal
                                   and regulatory features of electronic conveyances that needed to be addressed during the AF.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency: At appraisal, the PAD’s Economic Analysis identified three direct benefits
   from the Project, improvements in (i) compliance of registration and cadastre records; (ii) registration service;
   and (iii) access to credit. Two models measured these benefits to prepare an ex ante economic cost-benefit
   analysis (CBA):

                               a Property Market Dynamics model that estimated the increase in market transaction volume and value
                                 due to improved registration services, and
                               a Mortgage Market Dynamics model that estimated the reduction of mortgage and consumer interest
                                 rates spreads.

   The second model could not be replicated at closing due to lack of information to verify that mortgage interest
   rate changes were due to the Project. The first model generated an EIRR of 76 percent.

   At closing, an ex-post economic CBA used the Property Market Dynamics model, using actual project outputs
   and costs. However, data harmonization/REC creation had only been running for a short period and attribution

                                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)



was doubtful. Benefits estimated at EUR297 million derived from the increase in property values and number of
market transactions due to the use of cadastre and registration systems. This, in turn, generated benefits in
improved access to housing finance. Project cost was estimated at EUR30.6 million inclusive of projected costs
up to the project closing. The EIRR was 127 per cent, using a 12 per cent discount rate (there was no rationale
for the use of a 12 percent discount rate).

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: The delay in Project effectiveness (January 25, 2013 to
September 23, 2013) cascaded to an 11-month implementation delay (ICR, paragraph 14). This delay was
apparently an average for BiH projects but was not adequately factored in during appraisal. The delay was from
two sources - the complex signing and ratification procedures (see Section 12 Lessons below) and the
underestimation of the time required for the harmonization of data from the land registry and establishing Real
Estate Cadastres (RECs). As a result, preparatory activities were negatively affected, such as non renewing of
contracts for certain staff of the Project Implementation Units (PIUs). This led to a loss of institutional and
technical knowledge. Retroactive financing was available but not implemented because the Project had not
been ratified by both entities. In January 2016, the FA was amended to extend the due date to meet the
covenant that applied to the submission of the long-term strategies and business plans for the sustainable
management of real estate registration services in RS and FBH (ICR, paragraph 16).

The moderate shortcomings in operational efficiency, unexplained discount rate used, and the non replicability
at closing of the second model to establish efficiency, resulted in a modest rating for overall efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   53.60
 Appraisal                                                76.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   58.90
 ICR Estimate                                             127.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives was high. Efficacy was rated substantial. There was evidence supporting mostly
achieving targets under objective one and modest achievements in objective 2. This interim ICR was prepared
in October 2019. The Bank team indicated that all targets would be achieved by project closing in January 2020
but no data was provided in this ICR. Efficiency was rated modest because of a shortfall in administrative and
operational efficiency. The moderate shortcomings in the project efficiency warranted an overall outcome rating
of Moderately Satisfactory.


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to development outcome:

      Financial risks to sustain the registration system. These risks refer to the robustness of financial
       flows and financial viability. Both the FBiH GA and RS GA have strong political and financial support
       from their respective entity government. However, current models of funding do not give the RS GA
       and FBH GA financial autonomy. Both the RS GA and FBH GA are service-oriented institutions that
       are able to raise revenue to achieve financial autonomy. They both show good revenue flows from
       their services to support a move to self-financing status. In the FBiH, the volume and value of
       transactions have tripled or quadrupled from a baseline figure of 70,000 transactions valued at BAM
       644 million (EUR 329 million) to 304,640 transactions at a value of BAM 2.803 billion (EUR 1.065
       billion) by the end of 2018. In the RS, the figures have also risen, somewhat more modestly, from
       44,000 transactions worth BAM 405 million (EUR 207 million) to 55,660 transactions worth BAM 512
       million (EUR 262 million). To mitigate these risks, both agencies will conduct in-depth assessments
       under the proposed AF to strengthen financial viability of the agencies.
      Technical risks in maintaining the FBiH registration software (e-Grunt). The FBiH MoJ did not
       have a budget nor an IT department. Hence, the Land Registration Project (LRP) and the Real Estate
       Registration Project (RERP) funds were used to outsource the maintenance of e-Grunt over a
       decade. To mitigate this risk, the FBiH government transferred software maintenance to the FBiH GA,
       which was a fully functioning IT department. In 2018, the government issued a decree allocating
       maintenance funds for the FBH software.
      Risk in Government ownership/commitment (for example, continuation of supportive policies
       and budgetary provisions). The agencies are well established organizations. They function
       effectively. The governments recognize their successes. Services are in demand and routinely used
       by the public. The respective entity governments support both agencies. However, risk remains that
       the entity governments may not continue to provide supportive policies and budgets to both agencies.
       This risk is mitigated by the AF currently being negotiated to indicate Government commitment and
       guided by experience elsewhere showing that reliance on central budget funding creates uncertainty
       and restricts what agencies can achieve.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project was the second phase of the predecessor Land Registration Project (2007-2012). The
  project was part of a programmatic approach to a fully functioning and sustainable land administration
  system that would facilitate investment and good governance. Land administration covered systems to

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)



  administer land rights (such as land registers and cadastres) land use planning, dispute resolution,
  valuation and taxation. This project included the improvement of the legal framework, testing
  methodologies for data harmonization, establishing real estate cadastres (REC), completing IT strategies,
  and investing in human resources and technology. The Bank team was fully familiar with the strategy,
  relevance and approach of the project. The preparation adequately covered technical, financial, and
  economic aspects of the project. The implementation and M&E arrangements took off from the LRP.
  activities to achieve the PDO. Poverty, gender and social developments aspects were considered.

  In summary, a minor shortcoming in risk assessment was evidenced by the resulting delay in loan
  effectiveness, the need to reduce targets because of implementation delays, underestimation of the time
  required to harmonize data and establish RECs, and use of non-monitorable indicators to show how to
  achieve sustainability. These showed significant shortcomings in identification and preparation, rating this
  as moderately unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank supervision was appropriate and well targeted throughout implementation. There were
 semiannual supervision missions. According to the ICR, aide memoires identified problems reflected in
 candid performance ratings, and provided appropriate corrective measures to achieve the PDO. The delay
 in securing the October 2017 restructuring, however, was attributed to the complexity of reaching
 agreement in BiH. Reports were completed and submitted promptly. The implementing
 agencies complemented World Bank supervision, and acknowledged that advice was
 appropriate, professional and highly appreciated. The Bank team also worked with the implementing
 agencies for transition arrangements, as evident in the preparation underway for AF at the government's
 request. The Government showed its commitment to the project by ensuring that the PIUs remained active
 to help with the AF negotiations. Administrative procedures, however, remained weak. This was evident in
 the lack of ability by the implementing agencies to collect data to monitor sustainability of the PDO outcome
 indicators. The implementing agencies provided adequate staff.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)



a. M&E Design
 There were two implementing agencies: The Federal Administration for Geodetic and Real Property Affairs
 (FGA) of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH), and the Republic Administration for Geodetic
 and Property Affairs (RGA) of Republika Srpska (RS). The FBiH and RS constitute Bosnia Herzegovina
 (BiH).

 M&E under the RERP followed the data gathering and analysis under the LRP, including some project
 baseline data. The Theory of Change was sound. Key activities involving registering land and cadastre in
 urban areas of FBiH and RS, improving the conditions of their offices, developing strategies, training staff
 and conducting public awareness campaigns led to outputs to achieve the PDO. The PDO was clear and
 specified achieving a sustainable system by harmonizing data. The indicators covered all project outcomes.
 World Bank required core indicators were added in the 2017 restructuring. Both agencies allocated
 resources to gather and assess data. The M&E design and arrangements were well embedded
 institutionally since this followed the LRP set up. The results framework clearly envisaged how the data
 would be collected, such as reports, assessments and customer surveys.

 The indicators were specific, measurable, and time bound. However, certain indicators could not be easily
 measured, and were dropped in the 2017 restructuring. These included data on revenues and costs;
 “average cost to user for secondary real estate registration” and “amount of time an average customer
 spends in the front office per visit for real property transfer and mortgage registration”. Some targets were
 set too high or too low. According to the Task Team's March 20, 2020 email, there was shorcoing in
 calculating the target indicator regarding the number of e-services delivered per year. There were
 difficulties in collecting some M&E data (see M&E Implementation below).



b. M&E Implementation
  Data supporting the indicators in the Results Framework were collected. The first of two customer
  surveys were conducted in 2015 (FBiH) and 2016 (RS). The first of two impact evaluation (IE) studies
  were undertaken at the start of the Project. There was a strong commitment to M&E from both
  implementing agencies. M&E data were openly reported on the implementing agencies’ web sites and in
  the Implementation Status and Results Reports. There were some difficulties in collecting data, resulting
  in the 2017 restructuring to amend indicators in the results framework. Implementation was also delayed
  leading to reducing some targets. The M&E rating was downgraded in late 2017 due to difficulties in
  obtaining these data. Delays in the second customer surveys and IE studies meant that a valuable
  source of information was not available for this interim ICR. There were some questions about
  methodology in setting baseline and targets for the level of satisfaction associated with the use of land
  registration systems. Against a baseline of 89.3 percent and target of 90 percent the results of the
  surveys conducted in FBiH (79 percent) and RS (75.1 percent) revealed differing methodologies and
  were not comparable.

  M&E functions and processes were likely to be sustained after project closing since this was the second
  phase of a two phased project design. Additional resources were also under consideration under the
  project's AF, currently under preparation and scheduled for Board approval in 2020.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E reports were used by the World Bank team and agencies to assess progress, identify issues,
  and modify implementation. The Project’s M&E reports became mainstreamed and now used by both
  agencies as a management tool. Evidence was provided by RS GA request to adjust disbursement
  categories when additional investments were required to establish RECs to achieve the PDO. The M&E
  reports were used to engage in policy discussions, particularly regarding women’s real property
  ownership. Transparent reporting of results improved governance and was offered as a best practice
  example for other government bodies in both entities.



  The Project’s M&E was rated modest even though it was well implemented and utilized. Weaknesses
  were observed in design that included several indicators that could not be monitored and unrealistic
  targets resulting in the 2017 restructuring. This led to adjustments of targets, dropping indicators,
  clarification of methodologies used in establishing user perception.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was assigned a category B and triggered OP/BP 4.01
   Environmental Assessment. No other safeguards were triggered. The project complied with the safeguard.
   An Environmental Management Framework was prepared for both implementing agencies. Sites where
   facilities were renovated had specific Environmental Management Plans, which were part of the contract
   documents for works and supervision. No works were done beyond the existing footprint of buildings. There
   was no resettlement, no chance findings, or asbestos removal from sites. Overall safeguards and
   environmental assessment were rated satisfactory (ICR, paragraph 64).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: Financial management was rated satisfactory (ICR, paragraph 65). The
   implementing agencies fully complied with the covenants of submitting acceptable financial reports
   including audits. The audit report for the year ending December 31, 2017 was submitted late on July 12,
   2018, due to the late selection of an audit firm. The auditors issued an unmodified opinion on the Project
   Financial Statements prepared by the PIUs. There were no accounting issues or internal control
   deficiencies noted.

   Procurement: Procurement performance was satisfactory. The government responded to all pending
   issues raised in the last Procurement Performance Review. Procurement functioned well with some delays
   in approvals and payments. There were no integrity investigations. However, there were procurement


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)



   problems associated with the European Terrestrial Reference System (ETRS) that RS was not able to use
   in its cadastral surveys as planned. According to the Task Team's March 20, 2020 email to IEG, the RGA
   intended to postpone the tender for this activity and will advise the Bank when they will achieve this target.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR offered six lessons from this operation that others implementing projects in BiH or
elsewhere may find useful (ICR, paragraphs75-80). Four of these are presented below:

      Designing a project in two-phases acknowledges limited borrower capacity and
       supporting service infrastructure. This project was the second of two steps to modernize
       land administration in BiH. This modular approach recognized that post conflict societies
       require a longer timeframe to achieve unity. An incremental approach to transformation
       requires both sides of the conflict to reach a shared vision and build upon less risky
       approaches. Such an approach, however, means that the benefits from data harmonization /
       REC creation may reach some owners later than others.
      Sequencing the implementation of IT systems in a modular (phased) approach may
       improve the way it works in the long run. A phased, step-by-step approach to
       development and rollout works well and can be easier to implement than a system that seeks
       to do everything from the start. Starting from a basic registration system, project software
       was progressively expanded and introduced new modules as the institutional capacities of
       the agencies increased. Using experienced in-house experts plus donor expertise also
       helped to build both software and IT capacity. The increased capacity will be invaluable in
       guiding the IT sector, particularly in RS, where the RS GA intends to replace its cadaster and
       land registration software.


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)



        Working closely with the Governments at the state and subnational levels may avoid
         delays in loan effectiveness and overcome obstacles to implementation. This project
         took 11 months to become effective. Project implementation was adversely affected. The
         2018 CPF Performance Learning Review in BiH found that complex signing and ratification
         procedures are chronic issues in achieving loan effectiveness. World Bank teams working
         with BiH should consider the Performance Learning Review recommendations to map out all
         administrative processes to avoid similar issues in the future.
        Indicators require readily available data to measure the financial sustainability of a
         real estate registration system. The PDO included an element related to the financial
         sustainability of the FBiH real estate registration systems. The results framework initially
         included indicators to measure the revenues and costs of these systems. During
         implementation, the FBiH GA realized it was not possible to monitor these indicators. In
         FBiH, there remained two registries - the cadastre (under the jurisdiction of 79
         municipalities) and the land registry (under the jurisdiction of 31 municipal courts). The FBiH
         GA oversaw the cadastre system but the Land Registration Offices (LRO) and cadaster
         offices did not have their separate records of revenues and expenditures. The attribution
         of project support to a financially sustainable real estate administration system could not be
         easily determined. The AF will obtain implementing agencies’ business plans to include
         accurate data on the revenues and costs of the FBiH and the RS real estate registration
         systems. Also included are policy discussions on a sustainable institutional framework for
         real estate registration in the FBiH and self-funding status in both entities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR offered a detailed overview of the project. The report was concise. The report focused on the results.
The narrative supported the ratings. The link of the evidence to the findings was clear, including when the
evidence showed that the targets were not achieved. The implementing agencies and independent surveys
provided evidence linked to findings. Performance and ratings followed guidelines and were internally
consistent. The annexes completed the story line and supported the achievements reported. There was
candid discussion of the shortcomings of the indicators in the results framework, the shortcoming in operational
efficiency and too short a period to claim causality. The ICR’s lessons were clear, useful, and based on
evidence outlined in the ICR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)




                                                                          Page 17 of 17
