     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021926

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P110075                                   BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Benin                                     Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-45870,TF-94664,TF-99823               30-Jun-2015                                        56,140,374.29

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Jun-2009                               31-Dec-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           70,000,000.00                                   3,818,182.00

 Revised Commitment                            57,744,866.92                                   3,362,692.03

 Actual                                        56,140,374.29                                   3,362,692.03




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan         Dileep M. Wagle              Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P115064_TBL
 Project ID                                Project Name
 P115064                                   BJ- GEF Energy Efficiency Program ( P115064 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-45870,TF-94664,TF-99823                                                                                   0

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Jun-2009

                                                                                                Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)




                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                       0.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                                        0.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                                    0.00                                                0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p.6) and the Global Environment Facility Grant Agreement (GA,
   p.5)—both dated July 13, 2009—the project objective was “to improve reliability, efficiency and access to
   modern energy services in the Recipient’s territory.” The FA and the GA defined “Recipient” as “Republic of
   Benin.”

   The Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p.5) stated the same objective with a minor difference that “Benin”
   was used instead of “the Recipient’s territory.” Furthermore, in the PAD (p. x), the Global Environment
   Objective was defined as “[t]hrough the introduction of energy-efficient appliances in Benin's residential and
   commercial sector, the project will reduce global greenhouse gas emissions.”

   Following IEG procedures, this Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) Review is based on the
   project development objective as stated in the FA and GA.

   Parsing of the Project Objective and Explanation for not Applying Split-Rating

   Neither the PAD nor the ICR provided a clear definition for “modern energy services.” However, from the
   description of the project’s intent (PAD, para. 23 on p.4) and the project design (PAD, pp.5-9), the project
   objectives are inferred as “to improve reliability and efficiency of power supply” and “to increase access to
   modern energy services,” the latter of which consisting of access to electricity and clean cooking facilities,
   such as fuels and stoves that do not cause pollution in houses.

   Project activities under Component A: Electrical Network Up-Grading (for details please see section 2d
   "Components” below) consist of the construction of transmission lines and rehabilitation of distribution network
   in areas which already have access to electricity. The outputs of these activities correspond to the
   achievement of the objective to improve the reliability and efficiency of electricity supply, which will be
   evaluated as the first objective. On the other hand, although the project activities under sub-component B.1 to
   increase access to electricity in rural areas and those under sub-component B.2 to modernize biomass
   energy services through inter alia promotion of inter-fuel substitution and supporting improved cookstove
   programs (please see section “d. Components” below) lead to different outputs, they, too, will be evaluated as
   one objective, since they target the same group of beneficiaries, i.e., the rural population, and support them
   move from traditional energy, i.e., kerosene for lighting and biomass for cooking, to modern energy, i.e.,



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



   electricity and liquefied gas, respectively. As a result, in this review, the project development objective will be
   treated as consisting of two objectives as follows:

   Objective 1: to improve reliability and efficiency of power supply in Benin; and

   Objective 2: to increase access to modern energy services in Benin.

   The project objective was not revised during project implementation. However, the results framework and the
   second component were substantially changed in the second restructuring in October 2013, resulting in a
   decrease in the project’s ambition in rural electrification. Although this would justify the application of a split-
   rating, since the project was restructured when the disbursement rate was at 15 percent, its impact on the
   evaluation of the achievement of the second objective was not material; therefore, a split-rating will not be
   administered. Furthermore, there was no target set for the increase in rural access to electricity in the original
   results framework against which the project outcomes could be evaluated before restructuring.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components with numerous levels of sub-components:

   A: Electrical Network Up-grading. (Appraisal cost: US$98.32 million, International Development
   Association (IDA) credit financing US$43.32 million and Global Environment Facility (GEF) grant financing
   US$1.82 million; actual cost was not reported; actual IDA financing US$39.97 million and actual GEF
   financing US$1.82 million)

   A.1. Construction of electrical transmission interconnection between Onigbolo and Parakou.

   A.2. Construction of electrical transmission interconnection between Sakété and Porto Novo.

   A.3. Technical assistance for the supervision of the works undertaken under sub-components A.1 and A.2.

   A.4. Rehabilitation and reinforcement of the Benin Electric Power Company’s (SBEE – Société Béninoise
   d’Énergie Électrique) electrical distribution network in major urban centers with a view to improving the
   quality of power supplied.

   A.5. Improving lighting and appliance efficiency in urban areas for households that already had access to
   electricity through, among others: (a) promoting the replacement of incandescent light bulbs by compact




                                                                                                        Page 3 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



fluorescent lamps (CFLs); (b) introducing energy efficient product standards and a labeling scheme for air
conditioners and CFLs; and (c) carrying out of public awareness programs.

B: Electrification and Modern Energy Services. (Appraisal cost: US$65.50 million, IDA credit financing
US$12.00 million; actual cost was not reported; actual IDA financing US$1.84 million)

B.1. Increasing access to electricity in rural areas by:

(a) developing a sustainable institutional framework to support rural electrification through:

(i) the provision of technical assistance and capacity building activities for Beninese Agency for Rural
Electrification and Energy Mastery (ABERME – Agence Béninoise d’Électrification Rurale et de Maitraise
d’Énergie) to enable the latter to fulfill its institutional functions (including financial management,
procurement, monitoring and evaluation, and environment and social safeguards related functions);

(ii) the preparation by ABERME of a comprehensive study with regard to potential rural electrification
concessions and thereafter implementation of the recommendations of said study, and preparation of an
administrative, financial and accounting manual and of an integrated financial management system for
ABERME;

(iii) the updating of the Rural Electrification Policy, including a proposed financing mechanism for
concessionaires and private operators; and

(iv) the provision of capacity building activities for local communities, potential private operators, and other
potential stakeholders, with regard to ABERME’s functions and rural electrification.

(b) implementing of at least four small pilot rural electrification operations, with community participation,
under which the Rural Electrification Fund would finance the development of business plans from potential
private operators and part of the investment related costs of the approved pilot operations.

B.2. Modernizing biomass energy services by:

(a) promoting community-based sustainable wood-fuel supply systems through the implementation of a
community forest management plan for 300,000 hectares of forests in the Moyen Ouémé region.

(b) promoting biomass energy efficiency and inter-fuel substitution by:

(i) expanding the adoption of improved carbonization systems to maximize wood to charcoal conversion
efficiency;

(ii) supporting private sector-based improved cookstove programs and private sector-based liquefied
petroleum gas inter-fuel substitution programs; and

(iii) strengthening the capacity of the General Department of Energy (DGE – Direction Générale de
l’Énergie) to implement the energy sector information and monitoring system;




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



(c) promoting the delivery of local rural community development services and participatory activities in the
Moyen Ouémé region as incentive mechanisms for compliance with the sustainable community forest
management plan, including:

(i) encouraging community participation in forest management decisions;

(ii) improving access to and sustainable exploitation of non-wood forest products by the local communities;

(iii) generating forest employments for local people, and promoting sound forest exploitation techniques;

(iv) promoting apiculture and reforestation activities; and

(v) using forest revenues to provide financial support to local development plans.

C: Sustainable Energy Services. (Appraisal cost: US$6.68 million, IDA credit financing US$6.68 million;
actual cost: US$5.14 million, actual IDA financing US$5.14 million)

C.1. Provision of technical assistance to Benin Electric Company (CEB – Compagnie Électrique du Benin)
to improve its financial autonomy and performance through: (a) the preparation of a five-year business
development plan, and (b) capacity building.

C.2. Provision of technical assistance to SBEE to improve its financial autonomy and performance through:
(a) the preparation of a five-year business development plan, including a clear mapping of its distribution
network, and (b) capacity building.

C.3. Provision of technical assistance to enhance the capacity of DGE to assess and make
recommendations with regard to the electricity sector regulatory framework.

C.4. Preparing an update to the energy sector master plan of 1997 to guide overall least cost energy sector
development, and establishment of a sector coordination mechanism to ensure least cost implementation
planning.

C.5. Provision of technical assistance to enhance the capacity of relevant public entities to actively monitor
environmental and social safeguards as they relate to the energy sector.



Revised Components

The project went through a major restructuring in October 2013. New project activities were added in line
with the request of the Government of Benin, and project activities with no progress were deleted. In May
2016, the components were revised again. The revisions to the components are given below:

Sub-component A.1 (b): Installation of protection and relaying equipment. This sub-component was added
with an estimated cost of US$1.41 million in the second restructuring in October 2013 to ensure the
achievement of N-1 criterion—the capability of delivering electricity from a generation site to a substation
without any load loss in case of a failure in one of multiple transmission lines between these two points—in
the transmission system. However, this activity was later cancelled in the fourth restructuring in May 2016.


                                                                                                  Page 5 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



  Sub-component A.4: In October 2013, installation of supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA)
  system was cancelled due to insufficient project implementation time left to complete this activity. Instead,
  the installation of 45,000 prepayment meters and connections was added as a new activity with an
  estimated cost of US$10.9 million, which was the top priority for the government and the utility at the time of
  restructuring.

  Sub-component B.1: The project was to support the Rural Electrification Fund and provide technical
  assistance to ABERME, but due to the weak capacity of the latter, there was no progress and this sub-
  component was cancelled. There were no counterpart funds available for this sub-component, either. This
  was a major revision, because under this component at least four small pilot rural electrification operations,
  with community participation, would be implemented to increase rural electrification.

  Sub-component B.2 (a): Due to limited cook stove manufacturing capacity, the scope of this sub-
  component was reduced, and the allocation was decreased from US$3.0 million to US$1.3 million.

  Sub-component B.3: Electrification of three priority localities. Due to the cancellation of the Rural
  Electrification Fund and ABERME sub-component, electrification of three priority localities was added as a
  new project activity with an estimated cost of US$1.5 million. The target was to increase access to electricity
  by 500-household new connections.

  Component C: Study on SBEE’s restructuring was cancelled in May 2016, because there was no progress.

  Component D: Project Preparation. (Appraisal cost in October 2013: US$5.00 million, IDA credit financing
  US$5.00 million; actual cost: US$4.40 million, actual IDA financing US$4.40 million)

  This was a new component added in the second restructuring in October 2013 to prepare critical pipeline
  projects. It had two sub-components:

      1. Preparation of Adjarala Hydropower Project through financing (i) the update of the Environmental
         and Social Impact Assessment and Resettlement Action Plan; (ii) the hiring of a panel of experts for
         the preparation phase; (iii) the audit of legacy safeguard issues of Nangbeto Hydropower Project;
         and (iv) laser, imaging, detection, and ranging from the Nangbeto reservoir to Mono River mouth.
      2. Preparation of studies of upcoming transmission and distribution projects. These studies included: (i)
         the technical and environmental studies of the 161kV transmission line from Natitingou to Porga;
         and (ii) the technical and environmental studies of the rehabilitation and extension of the distribution
         system.

  In the May 2016 restructuring, topographic studies for Adjarala Hydropower Project were dropped.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$178.51 million including US$8.00 million
  for contingencies. The actual project cost was not reported in the ICR. The project team commented that
  this information was not readily available from the borrower.

  Financing: At appraisal, the International Development Association (IDA) credit was estimated at US$70.00
  million and the Global Environment Facility (GEF) grant at US$1.82 million. In the second restructuring in

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



October 2013, the IDA credit commitment decreased from US$70.00 million to US$54.50 million mostly due
to the cancellation of Rural Electrification Fund and ABERME sub-component. At project closing in
December 2018, the IDA financing stood at US$54.50 million; the realization of the IDA loan disbursement
was 77.86 percent against original commitment and 100 per cent against the revised commitment. GEF
grant was fully disbursed.

In addition to the IDA and GEF financing, the Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP)
was estimated to provide US$2.00 million to the project as grant. ESMAP financing was replaced by grant in
the same amount from the African Renewal Energy Access trust fund in 2011. The realization of this grant
at project closing was US$1.79 million.

The estimated contributions of other donors at appraisal and their actual realizations at project closing were
as follows: (i) the European Investment Bank, US$ 23.09 million, actual US$26.09 million; (ii) Fond Français
De L’Énvironement Mondial US$1.30 million, which was fully disbursed; and (iii) Kreditanstalt fur
Wiederaufbau (KfW) US$18.70 million, which was also fully disbursed.

Borrower contribution: At appraisal, the contribution of the Government of Benin was estimated at
US$51.85 million, and the CEB and the SBEE were to contribute US$8.25 million and US$1.50 million,
respectively. The government’s contribution was substantially decreased at the second restructuring in
November 2013 to US$1.85 million since the government was not able to secure funding. The ICR did not
report the actual borrower contribution at project closing.

Restructurings and Dates: There were five project restructurings

      First Restructuring (October 7, 2011): At appraisal, funding from Africa Renewable Energy Access
       (AFREA) trust fund was not available and it was referred as ESMAP financing in the project
       appraisal document (Restructuring Paper dated October 7, 2011, p.4). The project was restructured
       to allow AFREA to co-finance some project activities which were mistakenly listed as items to be
       financed by IDA. These changes were as follows: (i) a clarification of activities to be financed under
       sub-component B.2 by IDA credit proceeds; (ii) revision of the disbursement table to reflect the
       changes in the activities to be financed by IDA; and (iii) extension of the effectiveness period to
       enable the signature of the AFREA grant agreement.
      Second Restructuring (October 14, 2013): In this restructuring, project components were
       substantially amended (for a detailed explanation please see Revised Components above in the
       previous section.) In line with the changes made to the components, IDA loan amount decreased
       from US$70.00 million to US$54.5 million. There was no change in the GEF grant amount. The
       definition of one of the key indicators was revised from “increased number of people with improved
       access to modern energy and electricity services” to “people provided with access to electricity
       under the project with household connections” and the target was decreased from 400,000
       households to 200,000 households. Indicators related to the cancelled project activities were
       deleted. Indicators were added to the results framework to measure the progress of the newly added
       project activities of installation of prepayment meters and electrification of new localities. Due to the
       weak project implementation capacity of SBEE and ABERME, their fiduciary responsibilities were
       transferred to the project implementation unit in the DGE, resulting in a decrease of project
       implementation agencies from four to two, the other being CEB. Lastly, the project closing date was
       extended by one year from June 30, 2015 to June 30, 2016 because it was estimated that the
       bidding process and the construction time of the distribution component would exceed the original
       closing date by one year (Restructuring Paper dated October 14, 2013, p.13).

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



         Third Restructuring (June 25, 2015): The closing date of the GEF grant agreement was extended
          by one year from June 30, 2015 to June 30, 2016 to align it with the revised closing date of IDA
          financing agreement to allow time for the completion of energy efficiency activities financed by this
          grant.
         Fourth Restructuring (May 12, 2016): Due the introduction of core sector indicators, indicators
          were amended in this restructuring without any material change in the results framework; technical
          and commercial losses were added as indicators and number of direct project beneficiaries was
          used instead of indicators measuring number of people benefiting from specific project outcomes,
          such as access to electricity. Furthermore, the measurement unit was changed from number of
          households to number of people, assuming that there were six people per household. Some project
          activities were cancelled, such as the installation of protection and relaying equipment, which was
          added in the second restructuring and a study on SBEE restructuring and the topographic studies for
          the Adjarala project. Cancellation of these activities did not have an impact on the results chain of
          the project. IDA credit proceeds were reallocated among project activities without any change to the
          total commitment amount. Most importantly, the project closing date was extended by two years
          from June 30, 2016 to June 30,2018, to allow the construction of the transmission line between
          Onigbolo and Parakou financed by IDA, which was delayed due to lengthy coordination process for
          a joint tender among co-financiers for the construction of the two main transmission lines, and the
          weak implementation capacity of the project implementation unit. As of this restructuring, the
          equipment for the Onigbolo-Parakou transmission had already been procured, but the construction
          had not started, yet. The closing date of GEF grant agreement was not extended since the energy
          efficiency project activities financed by this grant were expected to be completed by the project
          closing date of June 30,2016.
         Fifth Restructuring (June 20, 2018): The project closing date was extended by six months from
          June 30, 2018 to December 31, 2018 to allow the completion of the Onigbolo-Parakou transmission
          line, the construction of which was further delayed because of late mobilization of the contractor and
          pending compensation payments by CEB to displaced people due to land expropriations.



         Dates: The project was approved on June 23,2009 and became effective ten months later on April
          30, 2010. The original project closing date was June 30, 2015; which was extended three times: By
          one year in the second restructuring, two years in the fourth restructuring and six months in the fifth
          restructuring. As a result, the project closing date was extended by 38 months and the project closed
          on December 31,2018. The total duration of the project from approval to closing was 9.5 years.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At project closing, the project objectives were highly relevant to country context in Benin. The Growth
Strategy for Poverty Reduction, under the Aladia Benin 2025 strategy, aims at reducing poverty through,
inter alia, increasing public investments in infrastructure, including the power sector. Provision of reliable
power supply is a key area of focus of the 2025 strategy, especially to rural areas and northern regions of
the country. At 30 percent, nationwide electrification rate is lower than the Sub-Saharan Africa’s average

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



               electrification rate of 35 percent; the difference in electricity access rate between urban areas and rural
               areas is extremely wide at 56 percent and 6 percent, respectively. Furthermore, due to inadequate energy
               supply, wood fuel and charcoal for cooking still have a very high share in the country’s energy balance at 49
               percent, which has been adversely affecting forests (Benin Energy Service Improvement Project Appraisal
               Document, p.11).

               The project objective is also highly aligned with the World Bank strategy as defined in the Country
               Partnership Framework, 2019-2023 (CPF). Under the second objective to improve the quality of
               infrastructure, the Bank strategy aims at improving the performance of and access to power through
               increasing generation capacity and strengthening the administration of the system (CPF, p.24). These are
               expected to improve the reliability of power, and decrease technical and commercial power losses, which
               would increase the efficiency of the power supply. Under the eighth objective to reduce vulnerability to
               climate-related threats, the Bank strategy continues to focus on energy-efficient charcoal production to
               improve the management of forest resources, which are heavily used for fuel consumption (CPF, p.34).

               At the time of appraisal, the World Bank had already been providing support to SBEE under the Energy
               Services Delivery Project (ESDP) to reduce the utility’s operating costs and improve its efficiency while
               developing a sector strategy including the role of private operators. Therefore, this project benefited from
               the experience gained during the implementation of ESDP. Yet, although the project objective was
               adequately challenging given the experience of the World Bank in the country, they were rather ambitious
               when the weak institutional capacities of the SBEE and the newly formed ABERME were considered.

               Overall, the relevance of project objective is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve reliability and efficiency of power supply in Benin.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change for Objective 1

                             As explained in section 2.a Objectives, this objective was not clearly defined but could be construed from the
                             project design and the narratives in the PAD and the ICR. The project was designed to achieve this objective
                             through two separate interventions: (i) construction of a 161 kV transmission line from Onigbolo to Parakou in
                             the north, and another 161 kV line between Sakété and the industrial zone in Porto-Novo in the south; and (ii)
                             strengthening the SBEE’s distribution network through rehabilitation and construction of substations and
                             underground medium voltage network in bigger cities. The outcome expected from the construction of the

                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



transmission lines was improved reliability and efficiency of the transmission network. The Onigbolo-Parakou
transmission line was to establish the N-1 criterion, so that electricity could be supplied without any
interruption to the central and northern regions of the country should there be an outage in the only
transmission line supplying power to these regions from Togo. The rehabilitation and construction of
substations and underground distribution network in major cities were to improve the reliability of power
supply by stabilizing voltage. When the installation of 45,000 prepayment meters and connections was added
as a project activity in October 2013, the expected outcome was a decrease in commercial losses; hence
achieving further efficiency in power supply. Technical assistance under the third component would support
CEB and SBEE improve their financial autonomy and performance, with the expectation that this would
contribute to the improvement of the reliability and efficiency of power transmission and distribution. The
implementation of project activities under GEF-financed sub-component A.5—distribution of energy-efficient
compact fluorescent lamps and introduction of standards and labels for energy efficient light bulbs and air
conditioners—was to indirectly contribute to the reliability and efficiency of power supply through lowering
peak load demand. Project funding, i.e., inputs, was sufficient to implement these activities and a direct
causal link could be established between the project outputs and the outcomes.

However, the results framework did not address the issue of shortcomings in the power generation side; CEB,
which supplies electricity to both Benin and Togo, imports 95 per cent of the electricity from Nigeria (60
percent), Ghana (30 percent) and Cote d’Ivoire (5 percent). Power imports have been unreliable causing
severe outages (PAD of Energy Service Improvement Project, p.93). Furthermore, the original project
development objective (PDO) level indicators did not fully capture the achievement of this objective. The
indicator of “Benin transmission network responds to N-1 criteria” is an output level indicator measuring the
existence of the transmission line constructed by the project, rather than an outcome level indicator. The
other indicator of “power losses in Benin’s transmission networks” measured the transmission losses in GWh
which did not take into account the increased flow on the network when setting the target; therefore, it could
not capture the reduction in losses in percentage terms (ICR, p.22). The results framework did not include an
indicator measuring the reduction in power outages, which is the most relevant indicator to monitor the
improvement in the reliability of power supply. However, the intermediate results indicator which measured
the distribution level voltage fluctuations could have been a PDO level indicator since it directly captured the
improvement in the voltage quality in the project area, which shows the improvement and the reliability of
power supply. Lastly, the PDO level indicator added in the fourth restructuring in May 2016, i.e., electrical
losses per year in the project area—both technical and commercial—was useful in capturing the project
outcome of improving power supply efficiency.

The original theory of change had some major shortcomings and was not robust. The project team tried to
address some of those shortcomings during project implementation and some others were addressed in the
follow-on Energy Service Improvement Project and the First Fiscal Management and Structural
Transformation Development Policy Financing.

Outputs and Outcomes

At project closure, the construction of the Onigbolo-Parakou and the Sakété-Porto Novo transmission lines
were completed; nine substations were rehabilitated; and 45,000 prepaid meters were installed. Under the
GEF sub-component, 350,000 compact fluorescent lightbulbs (CFLs) were installed. All of the above listed
project activities achieved their targets.

As a result of the construction of transmission lines, especially the Onigbolo-Parakou line, the efficiency of the
transmission network improved; the loss rate was 5.44 percent at the start of project implementation and it

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



decreased to 4.34 percent between January and September 2019. This was mostly achieved by shortening
the transmission distance of the electricity imported from Nigeria to Northern Benin. Before the project,
electricity had to be transmitted via the line through Togo (The target was to reduce energy losses from 51
GWh to 24 GWh; it was not defined in percentage points. The loss at project completion was 67.6 GWh, but
this was not a correct method of measuring the achievement, because the energy flow at the start of the
project was 973 GWh, whereas it was 1,409 GWh in 2018. Therefore, measuring the reduction in percentage
points results in a better evaluation of the achievement of this outcome. However, since it is not known what
the energy flow was assumed to be at project closing, it is not possible to come to a definitive conclusion
whether the project was successful in achieving its target or not. Nevertheless, a 1.1 percentage point
decrease out of 5.44 percent is a substantial reduction in transmission losses).

On the other hand, the project was not successful in reducing electricity losses in the project area. The
indicator measuring these losses was added in the fourth restructuring in May 2016. The baseline line was 22
percent including both technical and commercial losses. The target was to decrease it to 20 percent. The
project closed with an electricity loss rate of 23.09 percent, even higher than the baseline. The main reason
for this poor performance was the increase in commercial losses from 11 percent to 13.09 percent. As
discusses above in the theory of change paragraph, the project did not address the commercial performance
of the SBEE. Therefore, this poor performance led to the follow-on project of Energy Services Improvement
Project.

Regarding the reliability of power supply, the results framework did not include any indicator. However, the
ICR provides additional information about the reduction in outages (ICR, p.21). In 2013, the duration of power
outages in the substations in the project area was 5,018 hours. This figure peaked in 2015 to 8,387 hours and
sharply declined to 1,623 hours after the rehabilitation of the substations. This is a notable achievement in
reducing the duration of power outages. The rehabilitation of substations resulted in eliminating voltage
fluctuations in project cities, too. According to the information provided by SBEE, distribution level fluctuations
was lower than seven percent, which was also the target. More stable voltage improves the quality and
reliability of power supply.

As result of the distribution and installation of CFLs at household level, the peak load decreased by 6.61 MW
against the target of 9.7 MW and the energy savings were 12.06 GWh against the target of 14.0 GWh. The
achievement was lower than the targets mostly because of replacing economic bulbs of 40W in the absence
of incandescent bulbs (ICR, p50). A decrease in peak load contributes to improving the reliability of power
supply by lowering demand.

The project was successful in improving the reliability of power supply by shortening the duration of outages,
eliminating voltage fluctuations and decreasing peak load demand, and improving the efficiency of the
transmission network; yet, the project failed to improve efficiency in the distribution system in the project area
where electricity losses increased from 22 percent to 23.09 percent against the target of 20.00 percent.
Overall, the project was substantially successful in improving the reliability and efficiency of the power supply.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)




Objective
To increase access to modern energy services in Benin.

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 2

“Modern energy services” are defined as consisting of two main components: (i) access to electricity; and (ii)
access to clean cooking facilities, such as fuels and stoves that do not cause pollution in houses. Although
the project documents do not provide a clear definition of “modern energy services,” the intent and design of
the project show that the project aimed at increasing access to modern energy services through increased
access to electricity and clean cooking facilities, such as promotion of inter-fuel substitution and supporting
improved cookstove programs. Therefore, it is advisable to evaluate the achievements of these two activities
separately, since they intervene in two different aspects of moving from traditional energy, i.e., kerosene for
lighting and biomass for cooking, to modern energy, i.e., electricity and liquefied gas, respectively. However,
since these two activities were designed under the same component to increase rural population’s access to
modern energy services, and the project objective did not explicitly include any reference to either one of
them, access to electricity and access to clean cooking facilities will be evaluated under one objective as
“access to modern energy services.”

Under sub-component B.1, the project was originally designed to provide support to the enhancement of the
institutional framework of Benin's newly established rural electrification agency, ABERME (Agence Beninoise
d'Electrification Rurale et de Maitrise d'Energie), to fulfill its functions in increasing rural access to electricity.
The project was also to support the Rural Electrification Fund (REF) to finance four small pilot rural
electrification operations—mini-grids with diesel-fired generators. Expected outcome was increased access to
electricity. The intervention was to be supported by IDA and borrower’s funds, and they were sufficient to
implement these project activities. There was a clear causal link between the project activities, project outputs
and project outcome. However, it was a rather ambitious objective, given that ABERME lacked institutional
capacity to implement these projects. It was expected that ABERME would be able to implement rural
electrification activities through concessions, while strengthening its institutional capacity, which was not
realistic. Furthermore, it was assumed that the borrower would provide a sizable amount of funds, i.e.,
US$53.30 million, to finance these activities, which did not materialize. Therefore, these activities were
cancelled at the second restructuring in November 2013 when the disbursement rate was at 15 percent.
Instead, the electrification of three priority localities was added to the project with a target of 500 new
household connections—3,000 people. The amount of IDA funds allocated to rural electrification activities
decreased from US$8.0 million to US$1.5 million.

The project activities under sub-component B.2 aimed at improving the inefficient use of traditional biomass-
based products, such as firewood and charcoal, which constituted 60 percent of Benin’s energy balance. The
inefficient and unsustainable use of biomass-based products resulted in a serious decline in forest cover in
the country; the project was to support the implementation of forestry management plans and management of
wood-fuel markets. These were further to be supported by expanding the adoption of improved carbonization
systems, with the expected outcome that the efficiency of wood-to-charcoal conversion would be maximized,
which would in return reduce aggregate wood requirement and labor effort. The project was to support the
promotion of private sector-based programs for improved cook stoves and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG)
inter-fuel substitution, which would increase access to clean cooking facilities. Lastly, the project was to
finance rural community development activities in the Moyen Ouémé region as an incentive mechanism for
compliance with the sustainable forest management plans. The project’s input, i.e., US$5.50 million, was
sufficient for a limited intervention to increase access to clean cooking facilities. There was a reasonable

                                                                                                       Page 12 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



causal link between the project activities, outputs and expected outcome of improving the access of the rural
communities to clean cooking facilities, both in terms of fuel and cookstoves, while protecting forests;
however, overall design of this component was very complex consisting of various smaller project activities.

Outputs and Outcomes

Electrification of six rural settlements—Bariénou, Sikki, Guessou-Bani, Dérassi, Tantéga-Tétonga and
Tolehoudji—was completed. As a result of these activities, 3,560 people were connected to on-grid electricity
against the target of 3,000. Furthermore, the ICR (pp. 44-45) states that around 1.18 million people were
“provided with access to electricity by household connections” against a target of 1.2 million. The project team
later clarified that the indicator should have read “people provided with new or improved services” in which
the latter covers the increase in the number of people with more reliable and better quality electricity services.
Therefore, it is not possible to know the exact increase in access to electricity other than those achieved
through the electrification of seven rural settlements.

As a result of the biomass activities, the first set of forestry management plans was developed and
implemented covering an area of 300,000 ha, as targeted. The installation of wood markets in rural
communities was also completed. Training was given to 1,150 farmers on improved carbonization and
logging techniques against the target of 450 farmers. Furthermore, the ICR (p.24) states that 24,670 new
households were provided access to gas cooking equipment and 25,000 new households access to improved
cook stoves. In response to a written question, the project team commented that “[f]our indicators were
created for component B, but they did not directly include the cookstoves or interfuel substitution. This is
probably mainly explained by the fact that much of the work on promoting the use of them was done indirectly
– through subsidies, through working with NGOs to spread awareness of their benefits, and through technical
capacity building to support the development of the legal, regulatory, and incentive framework for the
promotion of biofuels.” Lastly, in order to diversify income-generating activities in the project area and to
incentivize compliance with the forestry management plan, the project financed the construction of 16 honey
production sites and 22 water boreholes, and the purchase of beekeeping equipment for new beekeepers.
There were no targets set for these activities.

The impact of the project on the preservation of forests and reforestation can only be measured in the
medium-term. On the other hand, access to clean cooking facilities increased through the distribution of gas
cooking equipment and improved cook stoves. However, there is no information whether this equipment was
taken up by households, especially by women, who are in charge of cooking in rural areas and highly
exposed to health risks caused by indoor air-pollution. Given that only modest gains achieved in large scale
interventions, such as the distribution of 100 million cook stoves by the Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves,
more information is needed to evaluate the impact of the project on the transition from traditional energy to
modern energy in the project area and its impact on slowing the inefficient use of forest resources.
Furthermore, there is not sufficient evidence to evaluate the impact of improved carbonization and logging
techniques training program on improving wood fuel efficiency.

The project was successful in achieving the relatively low target set for increasing rural access to electricity.
The project was also successful in establishing a forestry management plan for efficient use of forest
resources as biofuel and increasing the number of households with improved cook stoves, the effects of
which could be better observed in the medium-term. Overall, the achievement of the project in increasing
access to modern energy services is rated Substantial.



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 24
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            There were weaknesses in the theory of change for both objectives. However, the project was substantially
                            successful in improving the reliability of power supply and efficiency of the transmission system, though there
                            was no improvement in the efficiency of the distribution system—technical and commercial losses increased
                            to 23.9 percent from a baseline figure of 22 percent. The project was also substantially successful in
                            increasing access to modern energy services in rural areas through increased rural electrification and access
                            to clean cooking facilities, while establishing a forestry management plan for efficient use of forest resources
                            as biofuel.

                            Overall, the efficacy of the achievement of the project objectives is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis

   At appraisal, economic analyses were conducted for the investments in transmission lines and rehabilitation of
   the substations. The other components, consisting of mostly technical assistance activities, were excluded from
   economic analysis.

   Transmission Line Investment

   The assumptions were relevant for a cost-benefit analysis of the transmission line investment between Onigbolo
   and Parakou. The lifetime of the transmission line was assumed to be 40 years and the annual increase in
   electricity demand as 6 percent. Costs were taken as the investment expenditure, including the costs for the
   implementation of environmental and resettlement safeguard policies, but excluding taxes, duties and price
   contingencies. Benefits were assumed to originate from (i) reduced transmission losses; (ii) increased reliability;
   and (iii) reduced non-distributed energy (PAD, p.72). The same assumptions were used at project closing. The
   calculations yielded an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 22 percent at appraisal and 36 percent at
   project closing. The increase in the project closing EIRR is due to the use of marginal cost of generation rather
   than the average cost of generation, and the updating of the cost of non-distributed energy, which was higher at
   project closing compared to appraisal. The net present values (NPVs) calculated at appraisal and project closing
   were US$59.95 million and US$80.41 million, respectively, at a discount rate of 10 percent. However, it should
   be noted that since the transmission line was energized just one month before project closing date, it is

                                                                                                                              Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



expected that economic analysis would yield better results when the transmission line gradually reaches its
optimal load.

Rehabilitation of Substations

In addition to the investment costs, supervision cost and operation and maintenance costs were included in the
economic analysis for the rehabilitation of substations. Benefits were assumed to be (i) the reduction of
distribution-level losses; and (ii) the reduction in unscheduled power outages (PAD, p.73). The same
assumptions were used at the second restructuring in October 2013 when prepaid meters were added to the
scope of work and at project closing. The calculations yielded an EIRR of 16 percent at appraisal, 26 percent at
second restructuring and 40 percent at project closing. The NPV calculations were US$10.11 million, US$5.6
million and a very high US$86.62 million, respectively, at a discount rate of 10 percent. The reasons for this
sharp increase in economic performance of this component are explained as (i) updated economic data, such as
the higher cost of unserved energy; (ii) very high baseline for the frequency and duration of unscheduled
outages; and (iii) higher projections for energy consumption in the project area (ICR, p.63). A sensitivity analysis
was conducted at project closing which assumed the increase in demand as 4 percent rather than 6 percent.
This calculation yielded an EIRR of 28 percent and an NPV of US$33.9 million.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

At appraisal, it was expected that the newly established ABRERA would have the institutional capacity to
implement a rural electrification project and the borrower would provide US$52.00 million to the Rural
Electrification Fund. These proved top be overly optimistic expectations, which did not materialize resulting in a
major restructuring of the project in October 2013 and scaling down of the rural electrification component of the
project. Similarly, the capacity of the rural cook stove manufacturer did not materialize against the expectations
at appraisal, and the funding for that sub-component had to be decreased. The project implementation was also
adversely affected by delays, initially caused by a lengthy effectiveness period and later by the joint tendering of
two transmission lines funded by different donors. Nevertheless, the rehabilitation of the substations and other
related works was completed on time in 2015, and the construction of the IDA-funded Onigbolo and Parakou
transmission line was completed in 36 months after the fourth restructuring in May 2016. The ICR (p.28) states
that these delays resulted in improvements of the work, budgeting the funds for contractor compensation,
executing the required studies before implementation, and the necessary changes in the procurement
arrangements. During most of the project implementation, the same Task Team Leader (TTL) was in charge of
the project, and from the project implementation documents and restructuring papers, it is understood that this
helped the project team focus on the implementation of this complex project and take proactive actions to solve
implementation related issues. Furthermore, the experience gained in this project and shortcomings identified
during implementation led to the follow-on Energy Service Improvement Project and the First Fiscal
Management and Structural Transformation Development Policy Financing.

Overall Efficiency

The project was efficient in achieving the objective to improve reliability and efficiency of power supply; the
economic returns of the related investment activities, which counted for 74 percent of the IDA financing, were
higher than those estimated at appraisal. On the other hand, there were some shortcomings in the operational
and administrative efficiency of the project, which resulted in a major restructuring of the project and lengthy
implementation delays. Overall, the efficiency of the project is rated Modest.




                                                                                                      Page 15 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       55.08
 Appraisal                                                  20.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objectives were highly relevant to the country context and aligned with the World Bank strategy;
however, given that this was the second project following the Energy Services Delivery Project, the objectives
were rather ambitious when the weak institutional capacities of the SBEE and the newly formed ABERME were
considered. Therefore, the relevance of objectives is rated substantial. The project was substantially successful
in achieving the objective to improve the reliability and efficiency of power supply, which was adversely affected
by the poor results in reducing distribution level technical and commercial losses. The project was also
substantially successful in increasing access to modern energy services by increasing rural access to electricity
and clean cooking facilities, while establishing a forestry management plan for efficient use of forest resources
as biomass fuel, the impact of which could be better evaluated in the medium-term. Lastly, the efficiency of the
project is rated modest due to shortcomings in operational and administrative efficiency.

Overall, the project outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The financial viability of Benin Electric Power Company (SBEE – Société Béninoise d’Énergie
Électrique) stands out as the major risk for the sustainability of the project outcomes in electricity
transmission and distribution. Financial situation of the utility is still precarious. SBEE’s revenues are not
high enough to cover its costs of service. The utility has been facing difficulties in collecting billed amounts,
with the highest share coming from public utilities; this has resulted in days in payable increasing to three
years. Because of a lack of adequate funds, maintenance has been inadequate. If the financial viability and



                                                                                                       Page 16 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



operational efficiency of the SBEE is not improved, the project outcomes in electricity transmission and
distribution could be adversely affected due to a lack of adequate operation and maintenance.

Unless the power generation constraints are addressed, the full benefits of the project might not
materialize. Benin still heavily depends on electricity imports from Nigeria and Ghana, despite recent efforts
to increase domestic generation capacity by diesel-fired generator, hydropower and renewable energy. The
unreliable power supply from these two countries, caused by lack of water in the Volta River in Ghana and
gas supply constraints in Nigeria, results in unscheduled shortages and below capacity usage of the
transmission and distribution network. This is a major problem affecting the reliability of power sector in
Benin and a constraint for economic development.

If the rural population is not encouraged to change their traditional cooking habits in favor of using
cleaner cooking facilities, the achievement of the project in increasing access to clean fuels and
cook stoves might not be sustainable. It is not realistic that simply distributing clean cooking facilities
would be sufficient for this new technology to take off in traditional rural communities. There are cultural and
technological obstacles for the acceptance of these new cooking methods, which require continuous
encouragement of the rural population to change their traditional behavior. This should be supported by
continuous awareness campaigns and creating other income-generating economic opportunities for the rural
population. Otherwise, it would be very difficult to sustain the use of cook stoves and the protection of forests
from inefficient fuel production. The impact of this intervention could be better evaluated in the medium-term.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically relevant to the country context; it was designed to address the issues in
  transmission and distribution of electricity, and to increase the access to electricity and modern cooking
  facilities in rural areas. In addition to investment activities, the project was designed to support the
  institutional strengthening of the project implementation institutions through limited technical assistance.
  The project design was skewed toward the electricity transmission and distribution investments. The
  support for rural electrification heavily relied on the availability of funds from the borrower; this was not a
  realistic expectation and it did not materialize. Furthermore, although the project benefited from the
  experience gained during the implementation of Energy Services Delivery Project and the rural
  electrification program in Mali, and the dialogue with the Government of Benin during project preparation
  led to the adoption of a set of decrees to further define the role of Benin's rural electrification agency
  (ABERME) and strengthen its independence as an agency (PAD,p.11), the assumption that ABERME
  would have the institutional capacity to implement the rural electrification activities was overly optimistic
  (ICR, p.24). It should be noted that, as an alternative, SBEE was considered as the implementation
  institution for the rural electrification component, but because of the financial weakness of the utility, this
  alternative was not accepted. In the second restructuring in October 2013, the fiduciary responsibilities of
  both SBEE and ABERME were transferred to the project implementation unit in the DGE, decreasing the
  number of implementation institutions from four to two.

  The economic analysis conducted for the electricity transmission and distribution activities of the project
  was sound. Technical analysis was sound, being based on feasibility studies prepared in 2008 during
  project preparation (PAD, p .17). Environmental aspects were adequate, and relevant safeguard policies

                                                                                                      Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



  were triggered. Risks were correctly identified; however, it was overly optimistic to assume that the
  project had the ability to address them during implementation. The impact of the project's activities on
  increasing access to electricity and clean cooking facilities in rural areas was not adequately assessed.
  The results framework broadly supported the achievement of the project objectives. However, there were
  major shortcomings in the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) aspects. The indicators did not fully capture
  the achievement of the project objectives, and in the case of increasing access to clean cooking facilities,
  there was no outcome level indicator.

  The project's effectiveness was delayed by ten months because of low implementation readiness and
  preparation of necessary studies for effectiveness. As of early 2013, the disbursement rate was at just
  two percent (ICR, p. 33). These led to two major restructurings, one in October 2013 and the other in May
  2016.

  Overall, on account of major shortcomings during project preparation, the quality at entry is rated
  Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (p. 39) states that there were more than 12 World Bank missions during project implementation.
 The turnover of task team leaders (TTL) was low; there were three changes of TTL, but the same TTL was
 in charge of the project for most of the project implementation period. This helped the project team to
 closely monitor the project implementation which is evidenced by the level of detail available in project
 documents. However, the project team’s focus was on addressing the implementation issues related
 mostly to the transmission and distribution investment activities for the achievement of the first objective to
 improve the reliability and efficiency of power supply.

 Despite a very slow progress in project implementation, the major restructuring was only processed in
 October 2013, more than four years after project approval in June 2009. This restructuring and the one in
 May 2016 addressed most of the project design shortcomings, but the weaknesses in the results
 framework continued until project closing, such as lack of indicators sufficiently capturing the achievement
 of project objectives, continued until project closing. The project team had been attentive to the requests of
 the Government of Benin since project preparation: Initially a technical assistance package was negotiated
 but upon the preference of the Government of Benin it was agreed to implement an investment project to
 establish N-1 security in the power network (ICR, p.31), and the sub-component B.2 Modernizing Biomass
 Energy was kept in the project although its addition was questioned in the decision meeting (ICR, p.32).
 Various changes were made to project activities during implementation, such as the addition of the
 installation of prepaid meters, and a new component to prepare studies for the Adjarala Hydropower Plant
 and future transmission lines.

 The supervision of fiduciary and safeguard aspects was adequate. Due to the lack of institutional capacity
 in SBEE and ABERME, their fiduciary responsibilities were transferred to the PIU at the second
 restructuring. The project team was proactively involved in securing the faster approval of project contracts
 by the National Director of Public Contracts Control, but these efforts were partially successful (ICR, p.33).

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



 The project team closely monitored the completion of payments to persons affected by the construction of
 the transmission lines under the Involuntary Resettlement safeguards policy, which was delayed due to
 lack of CEB funds for these payments (ICR, p.37); however, this was not sufficient to start the construction
 of the major transmission line between Onigbolo and Parakou on time, which was delayed until 2016.
 Shortcomings in the implementation of environmental safeguard were identified and corrected (ICR, p.37).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 There were major shortcomings in the design of the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework. The
 project objective was broadly defined; the PAD did not clearly define the objective “to improve access to
 modern energy services.” There was an overall causal link between the project activities, results and
 outcomes, but the achievement of the outcomes related to the improvement in the reliability and efficiency
 of power supply and increase in access to modern energy services, i.e., access to electricity and clean
 cooking facilities, was not fully captured by the results framework, because there was either no indicator, or
 the indicators were at the output level. According to the results framework (PAD, p.29) the outcome
 indicator for reduction in losses was in fact to be expressed in percentage terms, but it was defined in GWh
 under "Arrangements for Result Monitoring" (PAD, p.31), which was not the best way to capture the
 achievement of this outcome since it did not take the increase in overall energy flow into consideration
 (ICR, p.30). The project implementation unit (PIU) that was formed under the then ongoing Energy
 Services Delivery Project was responsible for M&E implementation and had familiarity with the process.
 However, data collection was to be conducted by CEB, SBEE and ABERME, all of which had insufficient
 implementation capacity.



b. M&E Implementation
  The shortcomings in the M&E design were partially addressed in the second restructuring in October
  2013 and in the fourth restructuring in May 2016. Indicators related to cancelled project activities were
  deleted and new indicators were introduced to measure the reduction in distribution losses and for newly
  added project activities, such as installation of prepaid meters. However, the results framework still
  lacked any PDO-level indicators fully capturing the outcome of project activities to increase access to
  modern energy services. The results framework did not include an indicator measuring the reduction in
  unscheduled outages in the distribution system, which is directly relevant to the improvement in the
  reliability of power supply. M&E data were reported by the PIU regularly and these were included in the
  Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs). If the project activity to install supervisory control and
  data acquisition (SCADA), which was cancelled in the second restructuring in October 2013, had been


                                                                                                   Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



  carried out, it could have most likely resulted in a more sound and reliable data collection and contribute
  to the sustainability of M&E functions and processes.



c. M&E Utilization
  In the second restructuring in October 2013, M&E findings contributed to the decision to delete inactive
  project components, such as the funding of the Rural Electrification Fund and establishment of four rural
  electrification projects. As a result, the project’s funds were partially transferred to other activities, while
  excess funds were cancelled. Due to the nature of such projects, results of which can only be achieved
  once the investments activities are completed, the project team’s focus was on project implementation.
  Since the shortcomings in the results framework continued until project closure, the M&E data could only
  be partially used to provide evidence for the achievement of the project objectives; the project team used
  other, additional, data, such as reduction in the duration of outages from SBEE’s annual reports, to
  provide evidence for the achievement of project activities (ICR, p.21). There was insufficient evidence
  supported by M&E findings for the achievement of project objectives to increase access to electricity and
  clean cooking facilities. On the other hand, findings in this project led to the follow-on Energy Service
  Improvement Project and First Fiscal Management and Structural Transformation Development
  Operation Project.

  Overall, although M&E findings were successfully utilized in strategy change and designing future
  interventions, the M&E design and implementation had significant shortcomings which makes it difficult
  to fully assess the achievement of the project objectives. Therefore, the M&E quality is rated modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and triggered
   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.12), and Forests (OP/BP 4.36).

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The project was expected to have adverse environmental
   effect due to the construction of transmission lines. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
   (ESIA) was prepared and disclosed in the Bank’s Infoshop and in Benin in January 2009. It was found that
   an unprotected 17,800 m3 of biomass would be lost during the construction of the transmission lines, which
   was outweighed by the overall benefits of the project. The Community Forestry Management Plan was to be
   used to manage the risks of deforestation because of an inadequate implementation of the clean cooking
   fuel activities. The risk of mercury being released into the environment due to improper recycling of compact
   fluorescent light (CFL) bulbs was to be managed by contractual arrangements which would implement a
   cash refund system for burnt CFLs (PAD, p.19-20).




                                                                                                        Page 20 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



  During implementation, the project was mostly in compliance with the environmental safeguard. However, in
  December 2012, it was found that safeguard measures were not fully integrated and that there were
  shortcomings in the dissemination and archiving of documents, such as studies and permits (ICR, p.37).
  Reporting on the implementation of environmental safeguard policy started in 2014. The project team
  confirmed that the project was in compliance with the environmental safeguard policy at project closure.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): A Resettlement Action Plan was prepared and disclosed in the
  Bank’s Infoshop and in Benin in January 2009. It was found that 184 families, consisting of 1,322 people,
  were to be resettled because of the construction of transmission lines. Awareness campaigns were
  conducted through the distribution of summaries of priority action programs and by holding extensive public
  consultations prior to the start of project implementation (PAD, p.19).

  During implementation, there were issues with the timely payments of compensations to the affected
  people. CEB was expected to complete all the payments by December 2014, but due to lack of funds,
  payments could not be processed. This resulted in protests from people who could not receive their
  compensations. By 2015, all the compensations payments had been processed. However, in 2018, it was
  found that 70 project-affected people did not receive their payments, because they did not contact the CEB.
  An action plan was implemented to close these pending cases (ICR, p.37). The project team confirmed that
  the project was in compliance with the Involuntary Resettlement safeguard policy at project closure.

  Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Forests (OP/BP 4.36):
  The project team commented that these three safeguard policies had already been complied with at
  appraisal by avoiding protected forest and sacred forest areas, and by avoiding the sacred natural areas of
  féticheurs—healers or diviners belonging to animist cults; the remaining part of the Physical Cultural
  Resources safeguard policy was satisfied by the ‘chance find procedure’, particularly during the construction
  phase, as required by Beninese environmental law (PAD, p.20). The project team also confirmed that the
  project was in compliance with these three safeguard policies at project closure.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The project adopted the financial management arrangements of the then ongoing Energy Services
  Delivery Project; the project implementation unit (PIU) in the DGE would handle the financial management
  of the components implemented by the DGE, CEB and SBEE. At appraisal, ABERME did not have the
  capacity to manage the fiduciary aspects of the components for which it was responsible. This was
  identified as a risk and mitigation measures were introduced during project preparation (PAD, p.18).

  During project implementation, it became evident that neither SBEE nor ABERME had the institutional
  capacity to manage the fiduciary aspects of the project. High staff turnover, too, adversely affected the
  financial management at these two institutions. Therefore, at the second restructuring in October 2013,
  their fiduciary responsibilities were transferred to the PIU (ICR, p.37). Furthermore, due to lack of
  counterpart funds, the rural electrification components of the project were also cancelled at the same
  restructuring.



                                                                                                  Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



   As the ICR (p.37) reports there were no issues in financial management; the project accounts were up-to-
   date during project implementation, and the financial monitoring reports were submitted to the World Bank
   on time. The project team also confirmed that all project funds were accounted for at project closing.

   Procurement

   There were significant procurement issues during project implementation. SBEE and ABERME did not
   have the capacity to implement procurement activities according the World Bank guidelines; therefore, in
   the second restructuring, this responsibility was transferred to the PIU. The procurement process was
   delayed at the start of the project because the feasibility studies and the environmental studies for the
   transmission lines were not ready, which delayed the preparation of bidding documents. It was further
   delayed, because the two transmission lines were tendered as a joint process with the other donors, i.e.,
   European Investment Bank and Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau (KfW). High staff turnover at the National
   Director of Public Contracts Control (DNCMP-Directeur National de Contrôle de Marches Publiques) and
   low contract size threshold for the DNCMP approval resulted in lengthy contract approvals. Changes in
   contracts’ ownerships, which required reprocessing of project documents, were another reason for delays
   in procurement (ICR, p.33).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                             Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                    Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                                                                              There is a discrepancy in the
                                                                              rating of the Quality of M&E in
                                                                              the ICR. In the main text of the
                                                                              ICR, it is clearly rated as
Quality of M&E                 Substantial          Modest                    modest, but in the summary
                                                                              section it was mistakenly
                                                                              entered as substantial.
                                                                              Therefore, there is no
                                                                              disconnect between the ICR


                                                                                                 Page 22 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)



                                                                                   rating and ICR Review rating of
                                                                                   Quality of M&E, which is
                                                                                   modest.
Quality of ICR                   ---                    Modest


12. Lessons

Two lessons were taken from the ICR with some adaptation of language.

Differences between World Bank procurement requirements and those at the national level
can result in lengthy project implementation delays and higher workload for the project
implementation unit (PIU). This is an issue widely seen in World Bank project, which is also
confirmed by this project. The DNCMP had a very low threshold for full approval of contracts, which
resulted in delays processing numerous small size projects up to four months, which was
substantially longer than the stated-timeline of 15 business days. The lower contract size threshold
for full contract approval also increased the work load of the PIU due to increased paper work.

Lack of institutional capacity of project implementation institutions can delay project
implementation and jeopardize the achievement of project objectives. Like the first lesson, this
one, too, is a common issue in World Bank projects. However, it is worth pointing this out here
again, since the project implementation and achievement of the project objectives were adversely
affected by the lack of project implementation capacity, especially, at the SBEE and ABARME. The
financial management and procurement responsibilities of these two institutions had to be
transferred to the PIU and the project activities related to rural electrification had to be cancelled. As
a result, the achievement of the objective to increase access to electricity was modest. The project
design at appraisal was overly optimistic about the SBEE’s institutional capacity and the mitigation
methods to improve ABERME’s capacity were not realistic. This major shortcoming was partially
addressed at the second restructuring in October 2013, more than four years after project approval.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The full impact of the project on increasing access to modern energy services, especially continous usage of
  clean cooking facilities by households and the success of the implementation of forestry management plan,
  would be better evaluated in the medium-term. A detailed assessment of this project, along with similar
  projects implemented in other sub-Saharan countries, could provide invaluable lessons for such interventions
  in the future.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                       Page 23 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BJ-Increased Access to Energy SIL (P110075)




The narrative of the ICR was internally consistent. It was candid about the shortcomings of this complex project.
In addition to reporting the achievement of the indicators’ targets, the ICR provided additional evidence from
other sources, especially for the achievement of the first objective. The discussion on economic analysis was
adequate.

However, the ICR’s focus was mostly on project implementation rather than on the achievement of the
objectives. The discussion on the achievement of the objective to increase access to modern energy services,
i.e., access to electricity and access to clean cooking facilities, was not sufficient. The Bank Supervision and
M&E Quality sections could have benefited from a more detailed discussion. The lessons learned were
important and backed by evidence from project implementation; however, they were generic. Actual project
costs by component were not reported, but the project team commented that this information was not readily
available. The rating for Quality of M&E in the summary section and in the main text was different. Other than
the Environmental Assessment and Involuntary Resettlement policies, there was no information in the ICR
about the other three safeguard policies triggered at appraisal.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                   Page 24 of 24
