        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Mali Energy Support Project SIL (FY09) (P108440)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0021788

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                     Project Name
 P108440                                        Mali Energy Support Project SIL (FY09)

 Country                                        Practice Area(Lead)
 Mali                                           Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                               Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-46170                                      30-Sep-2014                                        92,183,795.38

 Bank Approval Date                             Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Jun-2009                                    30-Jun-2018

                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              120,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                                92,122,298.23                                              0.00

 Actual                                            92,183,795.38                                              0.00




 Prepared by                    Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Fernando Manibog               Kavita Mathur                 Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) is "to improve the access and efficiency of electricity services in
   Bamako and in other targeted areas in the country" (Schedule 1, page 7 of the Financing Agreement dated
   June 6, 2009).

   For the purposes of this ICR Review, the following two sub-objectives will be assessed:



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali Energy Support Project SIL (FY09) (P108440)



   Sub-objective 1: To improve the access [to] electricity services in Bamako and in other targeted areas in the
   country.

   Sub-objective 2: To improve the efficiency of electricity services in Bamako and in other targeted areas in the
   country.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project was comprised of three main components, as follows:

   Component 1: Transmission and Distribution Reinforcement and Extension (appraisal estimate,
   US$107 million; actual cost, US$78.06 million). This component was intended to finance: (i) the upgrading
   of the electricity transmission line between Segou and Bamako; (ii) the upgrading and reinforcement of 30-
   kilovolt (kV) facilities in the Bamako peripheral area; (iii) upgrading and reinforcement of low- and medium-
   voltage distribution networks in Bamako and, among others, Kati, Segou, Kayes, Mopti, Sikasso and
   Koutiala; and (iv) connection of Oulessebougou and Kangaba, supplied by isolated diesel units, to the main
   grid.

   Component 2: Energy Efficiency and Demand Side Management (appraisal estimate, US$5.0 million;
   actual cost, US$4.66 million). This component was meant to finance: (i) an urban and rural residential
   household lighting program to replace incandescent or neon light bulbs with compact fluorescent lamps
   (CFLs); (ii) a street lighting program in key urban and rural areas centers to replace incandescent or neon
   light bulbs with CFLs and/or high-pressure sodium vapor lamps; and (iii) a lighting program for public
   facilities to replace incandescent light bulbs with CFLs.

   Component 3: Capacity and Institutional Strengthening of Key Sector Institutions (appraisal estimate,
   US$8.0 million; actual cost, US$9.46 million). This component was intended to finance programs to improve
   the following: (i) the operational and financial performance of Energie du Mali, Societe Anonyme (EDM SA)
   through the implementation of the Restructuring and Recovery Plan and capacity-building; (ii) the capacity
   of the Ministry of Energy and Water (MEW) to assess, monitor, evaluate and make recommendation on
   energy sector strategy development and planning, governance, environmental and social safeguards, and
   public dissemination activities; and (iii) the capacity of the Water and Electricity Regulatory Commission
   (CREE) to improve its regulatory tasks for the electricity and water sectors.

   Revised components. During the August 2013 Level 2 restructuring, the original project resources
   were reduced by 21 percent and the above components were revised accordingly. Activities that had not
   advanced sufficiently or those for which the economic justification became doubtful (in light of the emergent
   crisis) were dropped. For Component 1, the new 150-kV transmission lines to complete a transmission loop
   around Bamako and the connection of three secondary centers to the main grid were dropped. Instead, the
   upgrading and reinforcement of the transmission and distribution facilities around Bamako were expanded.
   For Component 2, given the already existing large market for CFLs, the Government requested that CFL

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali Energy Support Project SIL (FY09) (P108440)



   procurement be discontinued beyond the 250,000 CFLs already procured, and the funds be reallocated
   toward street lighting instead. For Component 3, the Government requested the reallocated resources to
   support the preparation of a new sector investment master plan based on a least-cost development
   strategy.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The estimated total project cost at the time of project approval in June 2009 was US$120
   million. At the time of project restructuring in August 2013, the project cost was revised to US$95
   million. The actual disbursement at the time of project closing in June 2018 was US$92.19 million, or 97
   percent of the revised project cost (ICR page 51).

   Financing and Borrower contribution. IDA fully financed the project. There was no Borrower
   contribution (ICR page 2).

   Dates. The project was approved on June 18, 2009 and declared effective on November 5, 2009. A mid-
   term review was conducted on February 4, 2013. The project had three restructuring events: The first major
   restructuring was in August 27, 2013, to cancel some of the financing, modify components and costs,
   reallocate among disbursement categories, adjust the institutional arrangements and implementation
   schedule, revise the results framework, and extend the closing date. The second restructuring on June 25,
   2015 involved another extension of the closing date. The third restructuring on June 20, 2016 involved an
   adjustment in components and costs, a revision of the results framework and implementation schedule, and
   an extension of the closing date. The project, which was originally scheduled to close on September 30,
   2014, closed with an almost four-year delay on June 30, 2018.

   Split Rating. In line with the IEG guidelines (page 46), a split rating will not be carried out for this ICR
   Review because the scope of the project shrank, commensurate with the decrease in commitments through
   a cancellation of funds, as explained immediately above under "Revised Components". Moreover, the
   original outcome indicators were not changed in substance, while the targets were adjusted. For example,
   the outcome indicator related to "increase in the number of households connected to electricity provided by
   EDM-SA in Bamako" had an original target of 382,000 households, which was decreased slightly after
   restructuring to 350,000 households. The target was increased slightly from 182,000 to 190,000 households
   for the outcome indicator related to "increase in number of households connected by EDM-SA outside
   Bamako." The original indicator on reduction in technical and non-technical losses were more realistically
   measured by an indicator on "total distribution losses on the interconnected grid reduced to 13.7 percent."




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At appraisal, the PDO, which remained unchanged until project completion, was substantially relevant to
the Bank’s strategic focus of promoting closer energy sector integration across Mali’s various regions. More
specifically, the project was aligned with the 2007–2011 Country Assistance Strategy’s objectives to
develop infrastructure, strengthen productive sectors, and consolidate the public sector reforms. In parallel,
the PDO was also closely aligned with the two main pillars of the Government’s Growth and Poverty

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Mali Energy Support Project SIL (FY09) (P108440)



               Reduction Strategy Framework (GPRSF) adopted in 2007 to (a) develop infrastructure and strengthen
               productive sectors, and (b) consolidate the public sector structural reform agenda.

               During the early part of project implementation, Mali dealt with a simmering political crisis that culminated
               with the 2012 crisis. At project closure, one of the largest United Nations (UN) peacekeeping operations still
               supported the country. With the weaknesses in technical capacity for implementation, in addition to
               governance and institutional challenges, project implementation delays resulted, leading to the cancellation
               of a portion of the project’s financial resources.

               Starting in 2012 and during implementation, the persistent conflict in the north and the unstable security
               context influenced the Bank’s support for Mali in major ways. With the 2012 political change, and within the
               context of OP 7.30 (Dealings With De Facto Governments), the Bank restructured its entire portfolio in Mali
               by way of the 2013 Interim Strategy Note (ISN).

               The PDO remained substantially relevant until project closure, despite the changes in the partnership
               framework. The ISN’s priorities for re-engaging with Mali included infrastructure construction and
               rehabilitation to lay the groundwork for economic recovery. The project was restructured and the Results
               Framework was revised to reflect on-the-ground realities. According to the ICR (paragraph 20): “The ISN
               identified emergency activities that were grouped under three priority pillars, of which Priority Pillar 3 aimed
               to prepare the conditions for economic recovery. A key identified priority under this pillar was the restoration
               of the EDM-SA’s financial capacity to invest in the extension and modernization of electricity infrastructure
               and a major expected outcome was an increase in access to electricity in rural areas.” The restructured
               project was consistent with Pillar 3 of the ISN. It also allocated resources to prepare a new sector
               investment master plan that included the analytical and technical basis for mapping out future electricity
               investments.



               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access [to] electricity services in Bamako and other targeted areas of the country.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             Through physical inputs including the expansion, rehabilitation, reinforcement and upgrading of the (medium
                             voltage) transmission and (low voltage) distribution network, several major outputs were expected, including
                             the upgrading of the high-voltage transit system, the doubling of the medium-voltage line, improvements in

                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mali Energy Support Project SIL (FY09) (P108440)



Bamako substations and new substations in regional urban centers, and the laying of underground electric
distribution lines. These outputs would lead to the completion of electrification in Bamako and regional urban
centers, from which the directly linked outcomes are increased electricity delivery as evidenced by an
increased number of connections and direct beneficiaries.

In the absence of the project, the persistent lack of electricity supplies and the low levels of energy access in
rural, peri-urban and urban areas could be expected to persist. In terms of achieving the PDO, the project's
investments are comprehensive, well-timed and appropriately sequenced. However, demand is growing at
such a rapid rate that the project-financed infrastructure would soon be inadequate and further investments
would be required.

Outputs

      Interconnection over 23 kilometers (km) of the second circuit of the 150-kV Kodialani-Sirakoro power
       line to increase transmission capacity and system availability, including 25 km of optical fiber and a
       supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system.

      Rehabilitation of the 150-kV Bamako-Fana-Ségou power line, including (i) the renovation of the 221-
       km power line linking Bamako to Ségou; (ii) the setup of a tower at the Fana substation to ensure the
       feasibility of transmission lines; and (iii) the installation of a 232-km optical fiber cable and accessories
       to secure transmission and availability of the electrical system.

      Upgrading of the transmission system at the Fana substation, including (i) the installation of a set of
       150 kV bars with a digital control system; and (ii) installation of high voltage (HV) and medium voltage
       (MV) equipment, and the Substation Control and Monitoring System.

      Upgrading of the HV substations in Kalabancoro and Kodialani.

      Construction or rehabilitation of five substations in Bamako and the Kati urban center.

      Installation and rehabilitation of 285 km of MV lines and 865 km of LV lines to facilitate the
       electrification of neighborhoods of the Bamako metropolitan and regional urban centers.

      Laying of three, 30-kV underground power distribution lines to link substations, as follows: (i)
       Kalabancoro and Badala substations; (ii) Badala and Balingue substations; and (iii) Dar
       Salam/Balingue/Balkou substations.

      Installation of 104 MV/LV transformers to facilitate the electrification of districts in Bamako urban
       centers and the localities of the Kati circle, Koulikoro region.

Outcomes

The ICR (pages 14 and 15) indicates that:




                                                                                                      Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mali Energy Support Project SIL (FY09) (P108440)




      A total of 20,836 connections was completed in the neighborhoods of Bamako and Kati. The details
       on the neighborhoods that were electrified, together with technical information on the networks
       completed, are presented in Table 4, page 14 of the ICR.

      Electrification and energy access was also provided in the urban centers of Sikasso, Kayes, Koutiala
       and Segou by connecting 9,863 households to the grid. The details for each of those four regional
       centers, together with the technical information on the network expansion and
       connections implemented, are presented in Table 5, page 15 of the ICR.

      The actual number of beneficiaries was 998,400, thus exceeding by more than threefold the target
       (set at the 2013 restructuring) of 285,950 beneficiaries. About half of the beneficiaries were women,
       which significantly exceeded the target (set at the 2013 restructuring) of 145,834 female beneficiaries.

The ICR (paragraph 30) concludes that the project "contributed significantly to increasing energy access", in
association with the Government's "deliberate policy to expand energy access" and "reach out to the
population and avoid the conflict spiraling down again." The Achievement of Objective 1, however,
encountered slow procurement and implementation delays stemming from the political crisis in 2012, leading
to the 2013 restructuring that cancelled activities (and corresponding financing) that had not advanced
sufficiently at that time, e.g., the completion of the transmission loop around Bamako.

On balance, based on these significant outcomes (while noting the crisis-fueled implementation delays), the
achievement of sub-objective 1 is substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the efficiency of electricity services in Bamako and in other targeted areas in the country.

Rationale
Theory of Change.

The implementation of inputs and activities--specifically a program to replace incandescent light bulbs with
compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs), introduce energy-efficient products, and raise public awareness--were
expected to produce measurable outputs, including the delivery and installation of electricity meters, CFLs,
solar products, and public lighting. These outputs, in turn, were expected to lead directly to improved
commercial and financial efficiency of EDM-SA, which would also be provided with training, modernization of
information systems, and capacity building in order to achieve the PDO. In the absence of the project's
support, distribution losses would have been significantly higher, and utility reform through improvements in
financial viability and operational efficiency would be much weaker if not absent.

Outputs



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mali Energy Support Project SIL (FY09) (P108440)




      EDM-SA acquired 13,332 conventional electric meters (of which 10,666 were single-phase and 2,666
       were three-phase) and 30,666 prepayment meters (of which 24,533 were single-phase and 6,133
       were three-phase).

      250,000 CFLs were distributed, equivalent to 4 megawatts (MW). However, this was based on a
       reduced program, since CFLs already had a significant distribution in Mali.

      Solar-powered lamp distribution was also limited. A total of 1,400 streetlights with solar-powered light
       emitting diodes (LEDs) were distributed.

Outcomes

      The CFLs distributed under the project resulted in annual gross generation saving of 14 GWh and a
       total economic present value (EPV) of avoided cost of generation of CFAF 5 billion or US$11 million
       over the maximum CFL life of 5 years (assumed from the third year, 30 percent of the CFLs will be
       degraded annually), with a levelized cost of energy saving of CFAF 8 per kWh or US$0.02 per kWh
       (ICR, page 16).

      The solar-powered lamps resulted in an estimated peak demand savings of 0.4 MW and annual gross
       energy savings of 1 GWh, a total EPV of avoided cost of generation of CFAF 0.9 billion or US$21
       million over the maximum LED and battery life of 10 years (assumed solar streetlights annual
       malfunctioning rate of 10 percent from the fifth year), with a levelized cost of energy saving of CFAF
       232 per kWh or US$0.5 per kWh (ICR, page 16).

      Efficiency improvements also resulted from the rehabilitation and upgrading of the transport and
       distribution networks under the project, by reducing the peak load and distribution losses. The
       operational efficiency outcome target was achieved, as is evident from peak load reduction having
       reached 7 percent, particularly in Bamako urban and suburban neighborhoods (ICR, page 16).

      Total distribution losses on the interconnected grid was only partially achieved, however, as the target
       was missed by 17 percent (i.e., a target of 13.7 percent and achievement in June 2018 of 16
       percent). EDM-SA could not fully control all the necessary factors to reduce losses, e.g, it had only
       partial control on the consumed and billed energy, revenue collection, and non-technical losses (ICR,
       page 16-17).

      The growth in demand and customer base, and the ensuing greater share of low-voltage connections,
       has resulted in a countervailing increase in technical (and possibly non-technical) distribution losses.

On balance, given the important shortcomings indicated above, the achievement of sub-objective 2 is modest.



Rating
Modest




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Mali Energy Support Project SIL (FY09) (P108440)


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The targeted energy access outcomes were achieved or exceeded (threefold with respect to the number of
                            beneficiaries). Efficiency gains at the level of utility operations were also achieved by reducing the peak load;
                            however, the reduction in distribution losses was only partially achieved. Implementation delays early on due
                            to the political crisis also resulted in the cancellation of certain investment activities, with the corresponding
                            benefits foregone. On balance, the project’s overall efficacy in achieving the PDO is substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The project’s economic analysis at appraisal was conducted for the transmission and distribution component, as
   well as the CFL and street lighting sub-components; however, there was no economic analysis in the PAD for
   the project as a whole. At completion, economic analysis was conducted covering 99 percent of the total project
   cost, and for the two aforementioned components as well. Thus, a direct comparison of the economic analysis at
   appraisal and at completion is not feasible.

   At completion, the whole project’s net present value (NPV) was US$84 million and the economic internal rate of
   return (EIRR) was 21 percent, using a 2.6 percent discount rate based on the Bank’s guidance on the social
   discount rates. This takes into account the levelized cost of energy savings of about 21 cents per kWh. As
   indicated above, the PAD did not provide NPV and EIRR estimates for comparison.

   Regarding the transmission and distribution component, the NPV at completion was US$72 million and the
   EIRR was 16 percent, compared to the lower figures at appraisal, i.e., NPV of US$9 million and EIRR of 12
   percent.

   At completion, for the CFL and street lighting sub-component, the 250,000 CFLs that were distributed (for an
   aggregate equivalent of 4 MW) resulted in annual savings in grow generation of 14 GWh. The net present value
   of the avoided generation cost is about US$11 million over 5 years, i.e., the maximum life of CFLs. At
   completion, a total of 1,400 streetlights had been outfitted with solar-powered LED lamps, resulting in peak
   demand savings of 0.4 MW and annual grow energy savings of 1 GWh. The net present value of the avoided
   cost of generation is US$21 million over the 10 years of LED and battery life.

   For the financial analysis at completion, the financial NPV was US$319 million when discounted at 0.4 percent
   (real, whereas the nominal interest rate for subsidiary financing is 2.5 percent). The financial analysis was
   conducted for the total investment, covering 99 percent of the project costs, since each component had a
   different implementing agency.

   In terms of implementation efficiency, the project took almost 9 years to complete, with extensions totaling 3
   years and 9 months. However, it is to be noted that the activities with implementation and procurement delays
   were cancelled at the 2013 restructuring, at which time most of the major transmission and distribution facilities


                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mali Energy Support Project SIL (FY09) (P108440)



had already been completed. The closing date extensions were mostly to complete distribution activities, rebuild
EDM-SA’s technical capacity and conduct investment planning for the energy sector.

On balance, given the project’s economic and financial efficiency, and taking into account the completion of the
project’s major investments around the original closing date, efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      99.00
 ICR Estimate                                               21.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives, efficacy and efficiency are each rated substantial. On balance—given the
shortcomings in achieving results for the reduced distribution programs for CFLs and solar-powered lamps, the
partial achievement of distribution loss reduction targets, and project implementation delays initially triggered by
the political crisis—the project’s outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

This outcome rating is in line with Appendix H, page 38 of the ICR preparation guidelines dated September 27,
2018, which indicates that a substantial rating for relevance, substantial for efficacy, and substantial for
efficiency, would lead to a Moderately Satisfactory outcome rating "for a project in which there are moderate
shortcomings in the achievement of one or more of the objectives/outcomes in the assessment of the overall
Efficacy." This is supported by the modest rating for Objective 2 in the Efficacy section.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There are negligible risks to the energy access expansion outcomes (Sub-objective One), since the
connections are already in place and a large number of beneficiaries were reached. However, there are
moderate risks with respect to the quality of service, which depends on the capacity of the Government and

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mali Energy Support Project SIL (FY09) (P108440)



EDM-SA to sustainably provide adequate resources for maintenance and continued investment in the
electricity sector.

There are significant risks to the energy efficiency outcomes (Sub-objective Two), since the financial viability
of EDM-SA continues to also be at significant risk given (i) Mali’s continuing reliance on costly thermal
generation to meet increased demand; and (ii) its inability to attract private investments due to the country’s
macroeconomic and political risks. In the medium term, subsidies will need to be reduced and the energy mix
will also need to be changed to move away from imported petroleum. Moreover, EDM-SA could benefit from
electricity imports from the emerging West Africa Power Pool, which could lower the cost of service.

There are high risks to the sustainability of solar-powered streetlights, since the concerned municipalities and
the regional departments of the Directorate of Energy are unable to perform this public lighting task properly
due to lack of trained staff and financial resources.

Overall sustainability is enhanced by the project’s support for (i) a Revenue Protection Program; (ii) the
installation of advanced enterprise resources planning and information systems; and (iii) the updating of the
energy sector strategy and turnaround plan. Energy access and energy efficiency improvements will also
continue to be supported under the recently-approved Mali-Energy Sector Improvement Project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Regarding the choice of the PDO, the Bank’s support for the extension and reinforcement of EDM-SA’s
  transmission and distribution networks—in order to improve energy access and energy efficiency in
  Bamako and regional centers—was fully aligned with Mali’s Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy
  Framework (2007) and its two main pillars: (i) to develop infrastructure and strengthen productive sectors;
  and (ii) to consolidate the public sector reform agenda. These were also the key strategic objectives of
  the Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (2007-2011).

  Regarding project preparation, the project’s physical components were based on feasibility studies that
  were reviewed by the Bank team and approved by the Government. EDM-SA established the technical
  aspects and cost estimates for the transmission and distribution components and cross-checked them
  with actual costs from similar activities within the region. Thus, the project’s technical design was sound
  overall.

  However, the energy efficiency activities and the measurement of results could have been strengthened.
  The activity to promote CFLs proved to be unnecessary since CFLs were already in full use in Mali. From
  the start, the solar-powered street lighting also had doubtful sustainability due to the failure to identify at
  the outset an entity that would assume maintenance and replacements costs.

  Moreover, mitigation measures to address procurement weakness were inadequate even though the
  procurement risk was rated high, leading eventually to implementation delays due to insufficient local
  capacity to carry out procurement tasks. Financial management risks were rated substantial at appraisal,
  and the mitigation measures were adequate, leading to smooth transactions during


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali Energy Support Project SIL (FY09) (P108440)



  implementation. Security and political risks were underestimated, thus causing major disruptions in
  project implementation when they materialized.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Project start-up was slow due to weaknesses in coordination and gaps in readiness for implementation.
 However, the Bank was quick in carrying out the necessary restructuring in 2013, which eventually proved
 to be effective in enhancing results that would have been otherwise difficult to achieve. The rapid
 interaction between the Bank’s management and the project team was critical to this effort. The Bank’s
 new arrangements that enabled operations in fragile environments were also used effectively to maintain a
 sustained dialogue with key stakeholders within Mali and with the donor community, restructure the
 portfolio as well as the project, and lay the basis for preparing an Interim Strategy Note.

 The ICR (paragraph 71) indicates that: “The reporting of implementation performance was candid. Aide
 Memoires and ISRs were prepared carefully and kept all stakeholders abreast of the project status and the
 perspectives toward achieving the outcome. All ISRs had an updated status of the Results Framework that
 provided the World Bank management and all internal stakeholders the information necessary to chart out
 the course of business continuation in Mali, and to provide guidance to operational staff.”



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD provided an adequate Result Framework that also delineated the arrangements for monitoring
 results on the ground. The performance indicators were measurable and formulated to enable accurate
 tracking of the expected outcomes. The design of the M&E framework was consistent with the project’s
 theory of change. For each of the indicators, the PAD delineated the data to be collected, the instruments
 for collecting data, the reporting frequency, and the institution/s specifically responsible for collecting the
 data. One moderate shortcoming is the need for stronger indicators and targets with respect to the energy
 efficiency activities, better control of distribution losses, and EDM-SA’s commercial and financial viability.




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali Energy Support Project SIL (FY09) (P108440)



b. M&E Implementation
  A medium-term review was conducted in January-February 2013, leading to a decision by the Borrower
  and the Bank to restructure the project’s scope and content, cancel a portion of the financing (21 percent
  of the originally approved amount), reallocate the remaining amount, revise the results framework, and
  extend the closing date. Consequently, the indicators were revised and the respective levels of the
  targets were adjusted. A new indicator related to the number of project beneficiaries was added;
  moreover, the separate indicators related to the reduction of distribution losses were all integrated into
  one indicator, given the technical difficulties of measuring each sub-component of those losses.
  According to the ICR (paragraph 74): “All ISRs updated the status of the progress toward the outcome
  target. Throughout project implementation, progress toward the outcome was documented and reported
  in the ISRs and this provided key stakeholders with a timely picture of the progress of the project on the
  ground.”



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data as reported in the ISRs enabled the Bank’s management to provide guidance to the project
  team on specific measures to address project implementation bottlenecks. This was especially important
  given the rapid and unpredictable changes and challenges in the project’s implementation arising from
  the politically fragile context in Mali. The results matrix in the ISRs proved to be a reliable instrument in
  achieving consensus regarding the actions needed to resolve implementation obstacles as they arose.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned a Category B rating, having triggered two Bank safeguard policies: (a)
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and (b) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Although it was
   assessed at the appraisal stage that the expected environmental and social impacts of the infrastructure
   investments would be minimal, mitigation measures still needed to be established. An Environment and
   Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Policy Framework were prepared. These called for a
   systematic screening process for the investment components, including the selection in clusters of the
   distribution infrastructure and the expansion and rehabilitation of transmission investments. The ISRs
   consistently rated safeguards compliance as satisfactory, given the limited social and environment incidents
   during project implementation. The ICR (paragraph 78) indicates that: “At project closure, the project had no
   pending claims from communities and individuals affected by the project and was therefore in full
   compliance of environmental and social safeguards.”




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali Energy Support Project SIL (FY09) (P108440)



   Financial management (FM) risks were rated substantial at appraisal. As one mitigation measure, the
   Project Implementation Unit (PIU) was given the responsibility for overall coordination of the FM and
   accounting system. The project contracted a qualified FM specialist to strengthen PIU’s FM capacity. Also,
   a new computerized accounting system was set up, customized to project needs and the information
   requirements of the financial statements. Despite initial disbursement delays for to weak technical capacity
   and inadequate readiness for implementation, FM was rated satisfactory throughout the project period. No
   FM issues were raised in the ISRs and aide-memoires. Annual audits were prepared on time, including the
   final external audit. None of the audits were qualified.

   Procurement risks were rated high at project entry. As a mitigating measure, it was initially proposed that
   EDM-SA and the Water and Electricity Regulatory Commission (CREE) oversee procurement and
   regulation but this did not materialize since both bodies lacked the necessary skills and expertise. This
   capacity had to be outsourced. Although there were delays in initiating procurement transactions, the ICR
   rated procurement as satisfactory overall (ISRs had some moderately satisfactory ratings), despite some
   cases of weak performance.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provided the following key lessons (with some adaptation in wording):

A focused project design produces better results than a complex project with multiple
objectives. The project’s positive achievements can be traced to having allocated most of the
project’s resources to reinforcing the transmission and distribution networks (90 percent of project
funds). The remaining funds were assigned to supporting energy efficiency activities, capacity
building, and institutional strengthening. The PDO was also formulated such that the desired results
focused on increasing electricity access and efficiency. The Bank team also gave consistent


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Mali Energy Support Project SIL (FY09) (P108440)



emphases to electricity infrastructure on the ground, which in turn also helped achieve efficiency
gains. More diverse and lower achievement levels may have been obtained if the project had been
expanded to include power utility reform or the expansion of rural electrification.

The World Bank can achieve results in fragile environments, if it can move more quickly
toward a systematic approach containing a set of dedicated procedures and guidance for
projects in fragile countries. The 2012 security crisis in Mali was overwhelming and initially
pointed towards the Bank’s closing up its operations until security was fully restored. The new World
Bank arrangements that allow operations in fragile environments can be effective if they are timely
and rapidly implemented. The preparation of an Interim Strategy Note (ISN) based on a sustained
dialogue with the key stakeholders in Mali and in the donor community, the overhaul of the country’s
portfolio, and the restructuring of the project all contributed to the success of this project. Past
experiences from operations completed in Mali and elsewhere should be fully captured to ensure
that new procedures tailored to the FCV context are adopted and become effective.

For activities to successfully contribute to the project objective, they should be highly
consistent with the borrower’s immediate needs and priorities. This project's performance in
building the transmission and distribution infrastructure was satisfactory because that activity was in
line with the Government’s plan to expand energy access. Despite political instability and changes in
the power utility management, all resources devoted to this activity were used to deliver the
expected output. Activities supporting the energy efficiency and innovation (loss reduction and solar-
powered energy) were less successful, because they were not on the priority plate of the borrower.
Activities to be supported by a World Bank project should be carefully researched and tested for
close strategic alignment with the Government’s key priorities before their selection as project
components.

Inadequate readiness impedes the timely launching of project implementation. Implementation
readiness means that the project implementing agency must have (i) all stakeholders on board at
approval, and (ii) the required expertise (including fiduciary management and safeguards) by the
time the project reaches effectiveness. In the case of this project, all stakeholders were not ready for
implementation, as EDM-SA became effectively operational after the creation of an implementation
unit three years after effectiveness (2002). Procurement expertise and technical experts were also
lacking until the recruitment of a private firm and competitive staff to assist EDM-SA to procure and
install transmission and distribution equipment.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well focused on providing evidence for the performance ratings. The Results Chain (Table 1) was
well prepared, although the critical assumptions missed one factor of performance related to adequate
operational readiness and implementation capacity. Indeed, the assumption that this was in place proved
erroneous, as weak institutional capacity led to many implementation delays. The ICR was sufficiently candid

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali Energy Support Project SIL (FY09) (P108440)



and analytical. Its structure and substance complied closely with the Bank's guidelines for ICR preparation.
However, it was overly detailed and had repetitious information, thus leading to 31 pages of the main text, or
double the length expected of ICRs. Many of the lessons were useful as they were broadly applicable and
replicable but a few lessons were specific just to this project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 15
