     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati (P128938)



                                                                                         Report Number: ICRR0021997

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                     Project Name
 P128938                                        Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati

 Country                                        Practice Area(Lead)
 Kiribati                                       Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)                   Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1050,IDA-H7420,TF-12678                  31-Dec-2016                                           33,323,608.84

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Dec-2011                                   30-Jun-2019

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                22,910,000.00                                      5,630,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                 35,640,000.00                                      5,630,000.00

 Actual                                             33,323,608.84                                      5,475,044.39




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Kavita Mathur                 Peter Nigel Freeman           Ramachandra Jammi                 IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Original Objective. The project development objective (PDO) was to improve the operational safety and
   oversight of international air transport infrastructure (Grant Agreement page 4 and Project Appraisal
   Document page 5).

   Revised Objective: The revised PDO was "to improve operational safety and oversight of international air
   transport infrastructure and associated infrastructure” (Grant Agreement page 6).


                                                                                                        Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati (P128938)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  16-Feb-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project was comprised of four components, as follows:

   Component A: International Airport Infrastructure Investments (appraisal cost US$17.2 million
   (including contingencies); actual cost US$24.6 million). This component was meant to finance the aviation
   infrastructure at the Kiribati‘s two international airports (Cassidy Airport and Bonriki Airport). This included:
   (i) replacement of the terminal at the Cassidy Airport and improvements to the terminal at the Bonriki
   Airport; (ii) construction of fire tender vehicle shelter and maintenance equipment building at the Cassidy
   Airport; (iii) resealing of the road from the Cassidy Airport to London; (iv) installation of new navigational
   aids, automatic weather monitoring, safety and security equipment at the Cassidy and the Bonriki airports;
   (v) upgrading of the Cassidy airport runway lights; (vi) provision of air traffic control equipment; (vii)
   provision of fire safety equipment; (viii) enhancing the power supply for the Cassidy Airport and the
   surrounding village; (ix) conducting a survey of obstacles infringing on the Cassidy Airport; (x) provision of
   the Pacific Aviation Safety Network at the Cassidy and the Bonriki airports; (xi) construction of a security
   fence for the Bonriki airport; (xii) completion of the seawall at the Bonriki airport; (xiii) provision of design
   and supervision consulting services required for implementation of the infrastructure investments.

   Component B: Sector Reform and Training (appraisal cost US$1.6 million (including contingencies),
   actual cost US$2.7 million). This component would provide technical assistance to the Ministry of
   Information, Communications, Transport and Tourism Development (MCTTD) and other Line Ministries for:
   (i) strengthening capacity for aviation sector management, policy, safety and security oversight; (ii)
   development and implementation of civil aviation technical regulations and manuals; (iii) international air
   transport sector review and policy development with measures for airport safety and security strengthening
   (through the preparation of proposed amendments to the penal code and implementation of a public
   awareness campaign), projections for air traffic demand, identification of sources of revenue, public service
   obligations and gap financing, policy roadmap for reorganization, strengthening and streamlining civil
   aviation oversight, and long-term airport master plans for the Bonriki and the Cassidy airports; (iv) training
   on aviation policy, management and operations; (v) carrying out of a baseline audit of the safety and
   security at the Cassidy and the Bonriki Airports and review progress in the implementation of the
   International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Corrective Action Plan by the Recipient; and, (vi) carrying
   out of safety and security oversight audits.



                                                                                                        Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati (P128938)



  Component C: Strengthening airport operations and management capacity (US$2.6 million (including
  contingencies), actual cost US$2.4 million). The component would finance technical assistance for the
  establishment of an independent public entity for the management and operation of Kiribati’s airports.

  Component D: Project Support (US$1.9 million (including contingencies), actual cost US$2.9 million).
  This component would provide funding for: (a) technical, advisory and administrative support to MCTTD,
  other Line Ministries and the Technical and Fiduciary Services Unit (TFSU); (b) office space and equipment;
  (c) services of financial auditors; and (d) operation of the Pacific Aviation Safety Network during Project
  implementation.

  Revised Components. The project components were not revised but the level 1 restructuring in 2016
  scaled up some activities (Project Paper pages 5 and 6):

        A larger terminal and more sophisticated screening facilities at the Cassidy Airport than originally
         anticipated to meet United States Federal Aviation Administration and United States Transportation
         Security Administration passenger screening requirements for flights between Hawaii and Kiritimati
         (Christmas Island).

        The completion of the construction of the seawall which was not finished under the Bank’s Kiribati
         Adaption Project. This would be done using improved standard of coastal protection which required
         a larger and more resilient rock armor design to protect the critical runway asset from coastal
         erosion and wave overtopping.

        Purchase of equipment because of more rapid deterioration due to harshness of the marine climate
         and inappropriate use. This was underestimated at appraisal.

        Procurement of three additional Aircraft Rescue Fire Fighting Vehicles.

        Remoteness premium because of isolation of Kiribati. The possible extent of this premium was
         difficult to assess at appraisal, as there were a very limited number of comparable contracts
         awarded prior to project.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The actual total project cost was US$38.9 million, significantly higher than the appraisal
  estimate of US$26.7 million. This was due to unforeseen cost increases during implementation and the
  scaling up of activities as discussed above in section 2d. There is a discrepancy in costs by financing
  source (table on page 2) which records actual disbursed amount as US$39.6, while the Annex 3 table (cost
  by component) shows US$38.9 million.

  Financing. At appraisal, IDA commitment was US$22.9 million. In February 2016, an additional grant of
  US$ 7.1 million was approved through a level 1 restructuring. This included an IDA Grant of US$1.2 million
  from the national IDA‐17 allocation and US$5.9 million from the Regional IDA allocation. The additional



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati (P128938)



   grant would address the funding shortfalls in the parent project and to scale up the project activities (Project
   Paper para 3) (see section 2d above). The actual disbursements were US$20.6 million.

   Cofinancing. Government of Australia through the Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility committed US$0.28
   million. The ICR does not provide the actual amount disbursed.

   Borrower contribution: The actual Borrower contribution was US$6.3 million, almost double the appraisal
   commitment of US$3.5 million. The project team clarified that the Borrower financed some works at the
   Cassidy airport such as conveyor belts for the terminal and beautification works.

   Dates. The project was approved on December 13, 2011 and became effective on February 15, 2012. It
   closed on June 30, 2019, after a delay of 2.5 years.

   Restructurings. The first restructuring (Level 1, February 16, 2016) extending the project by two years,
   until December 31, 2018 to allow for a two-year airport management contract to improve the operational
   efficiency and financial sustainability of Kiribati’s two international airports (Project Paper para 3).

   The second restructuring (Level 2, September 14, 2018) further extended the closing date to June 30, 2019,
   to allow for the full completion of all activities financed by the project and to ensure the achievement of the
   PDO.

   Split Rating Assessment. The PDO was revised through restructuring in February 2016 and a specific
   reference to "associated infrastructure" was added to: (a) make this project consistent with the other Pacific
   Aviation Investment Projects in other countries; and (b) accommodate the road works between Cassidy
   Airport and London on Kiritimati Island. The revision of the PDO statement was not substantive as it did not
   change the key project outcome "improve the operational safety and oversight of international air transport
   infrastructure." The PDO indicators were not revised, only the achievement date for the targets was
   extended to align with the new project closing date. Therefore, a split rating assessment will not be
   undertaken.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context. The Republic of Kiribati is one of the smallest, most remote, and geographically
dispersed countries in the world, with small population (approximately 116,000 people). It consists of 32 low
lying islands and one raised limestone island, all located in three main island groups (Gilbert, Line and
Phoenix) scattered over 3.5 million square km of the central and western Pacific Ocean.

Kiribati’s remoteness and small islands separated by vast oceans causes significant economic challenges
for development. At appraisal, it had one of the lowest per capita income in the region (gross national
income per capita was US$2,090) and one of the highest rates of poverty with 22 percent of the population
estimated to be in extreme poverty and a further 66 percent of the population estimated at risk of falling into
extreme poverty.



                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati (P128938)



Kiribati is dependent on tourism, which was growing at 2% per annum. In 2018, travel and tourism
contributed to 18% of the GDP (about US$39.2 million) (ICR page 42). Its principal exports are limited to
coconut products and marine products.

Sector Context. The aviation sector is very important as it provides the much-needed national, regional,
and international connectivity. It is essential for the import and export of high value and
emergency goods, as well as access for tourists. In addition, the country’s susceptibility to the effects of
climate change and in particular storm surges make airports a vital entry point for relief goods.

At appraisal, the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) had identified many safety and security
deficiencies at the two key international airports in Kiribati (Bonriki (TRW) and Cassidy (CXI) airports). The
runways were in increasingly poor condition and navigational aids were basic or missing. The failure to
comply with ICAO’s safety and security standards could potentially lead to the interruption or even
cessation of services from international airlines, causing major economic and social disruptions.

Alignment with strategy.

The Pacific island countries (PICs) face similar development challenges arising from their dispersion,
remoteness and small populations. As a group, these countries development priorities focus on two
strategic areas: (i) mitigating economic isolation by encouraging regional and global integration; and (ii)
building resilience against external shocks. Therefore, the aviation sector is critical as it provides vital
national and international connectivity. However, the specialized nature of aviation places a high burden on
small countries with limited human and financial resources.

The project “Pacific Aviation Investment Program” (PIAP) is part of a regional, horizontal Adaptable
Program Loan that consists of a series of projects designed to ensure that critical aviation infrastructure
meets operational safety requirements, as well as to strengthen regulatory compliance of international air
transport of the participating Pacific Island Countries. The PAIP supports the Bank’s Regional Engagement
Framework for Pacific Islands (FY2006‐2009) on mitigating the effects of economic isolation through,
among others, reduced barriers to trade and investment, promotion of tourism, human resource
development and mobility and improved environmental management (PAD para 14 and Regional
Engagement Framework para 106). The Project objectives are aligned with the current World Bank
Regional Partnership Framework (FY17‐FY21) – as reflected in objective 4.2 “increased access to basic
services and improved connective infrastructure.”

At the time of approval, the project was highly relevant to and consistent with the second strategic area
“Overcoming Isolation and Generating Opportunities from Greater Global and Regional Integration” laid out
in the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS FY2011‐2014) for Kiribati. Under this strategic area, the key issue
identified was the risk of stoppage of flights (that has already occurred at Tarawa for 2 weeks and Kiritimati
island for 12 months in 2009) if ICAO standards were not met. For example, from September 2008 to June
2010 jet services to Cassidy International Airport ceased due to the state of the runway. In 2009 air traffic
services were suspended for two weeks at, Bonriki International Airport, effectively isolating the country.
The consequence was a loss of connectivity and a complete halt to the development of tourism (ICR para 4
and 5).

The project objectives are aligned with the Government of Kiribati’s priorities articulated in the Kiribati
Development Plan 2008–11 which identified tourism sector among others as the backbone and mainstay of



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati (P128938)



               the national economy, and poor and inadequate transport as a key hindrance to growth on the outer
               islands. (PAD para 13).

               The Government of Australia provided co-financing and considered the objective of improving regional
               aviation safety and security as highly relevant for the preparation of a business plan for the Pacific Aviation
               Safety Office (PASO).

               The project is fully aligned with the Bank’s and Government’s strategy and address the key aviation sector
               issue – to improve operational safety and oversight of international air transport infrastructure so
               international flights can continue to operate in Kiribati. The relevance of objectives is rated high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the operational safety of international air transport infrastructure and associated infrastructure.

                             Rationale
                             The project's theory of change was based on the assumption that in order to improve the operational safety
                             of the international airport to ICAO standards, improvements in navigational aids, upgrading of terminal
                             buildings and runways, airfield maintenance, and security improvements through improved security
                             screening, were needed. This was a reasonable cause and effect results chain as without the project, the
                             country was at risk of seeing air services to the two airports suspended within five years due to safety
                             concerns.

                             Outputs

                                         The navigation and safety aids procured under the project are fully operational.

                                         Both international terminals were upgraded in line with the ICAO standards. The project supported
                                          terminal improvements that provide separation of arriving and departing passengers, as well as
                                          security controls for terminal access and management. The backup power supply upgrades at the
                                          terminal also provide the continuity of security services in case of power outage.

                                         The airfield perimeter fencing, and runway works at Bonriki Airport were completed, and a runway end
                                          safety area (RESA) was constructed. The seawall protecting the runway was completed in June 2019.




                                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati (P128938)




      Four Aircraft Rescue Fire Fighting Vehicles for the two airports were supplied.

      The road rehabilitation works were cancelled due to funding shortfall and change in government
       priorities and support (ICR para 26).

Outcomes

      At the Bonriki Airport, international flights increased from 2 flights per week (at appraisal) to 6 flights
       per week at completion (ICR para 25).

      The two airports have seen a substantial increase in passengers: the Bonriki Airport accommodated a
       total of 148,617 passengers in 2018 compared to 108,430 in 2017, a growth of 37%. The annual
       passengers in 2009 were 42,000. The Cassidy airport accommodated a total of 17,074 passengers in
       2018 compared to 13,132 in 2017, a growth of 30%. The annual passengers in 2009 were 2,500.

      The arriving and departing passengers are undergoing security screening as per ICAO standards.

      The target for Fire Safety Standards at the two airports was achieved. Four Aircraft Rescue Fire
       Fighting Vehicles for the two airports were supplied and commissioned in July (Bonriki Airport) and
       September (Cassidy Airport) 2017.

      The project successfully achieved the implementation of a regional safety and security levy to fund the
       maintenance and upgrading of safety and security equipment.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the operational oversight of international air transport infrastructure.

Rationale
The theory of change for the second objective was based on the premise that to improve oversight, timely
completion of technical studies covering pertinent sector reforms and implementation of recommendations as
well as completion of training activities of operators and regulators was needed. This would strengthen the
capacity of sector institutions to carry out regulatory oversight for meeting the necessary safety standards.
The ICAO requires regulators to have a level of independence from operators, to ensure that economic or
other interests do not compromise safety decisions.

Outputs

      The project financed an Air Transport Master Plan (for infrastructure) which was adopted in 2014.



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati (P128938)




                                   The project financed an Aviation Sector Strategy (for operations).

                                   The project financed the preparation of airport certification manuals and the development of
                                    certification policies and procedures for improving airport security.

                                   The project financed training activities and technical experts to strengthen the capacity of the Civil
                                    Aviation Authority Kiribati (CAAK) to become an effective and competent regulator. The airport
                                    management consultants carried out following training for the departmental staff and key management
                                    personnel on: (a) ACI‐DNA Aerodrome Certification Seminar (June 2017); AVSEC Training, New
                                    Zealand (Sept 2017); Airport In‐country training (Dec 2017), continuous in‐house training, mentoring
                                    and upskilling of airport staff from February 2017 until February 2019 (ICR para 28).

                            Outcomes

                                   The project contributed to the implementation of key sector reforms, such as the separation of
                                    operational and regulatory function within the aviation sector, which was approved by the cabinet in
                                    2015. Civil Aviation is now separated into Airport Services and the regulatory side (Directorate of Civil
                                    Aviation) as two Divisions under MICTTD to eliminate a conflict of interest in self‐regulating (ICR para
                                    27).

                                   Airport certification is now being undertaken by the CAAK in accordance with ICAO guidelines, with
                                    the support of Pacific Aviation Safety Office (PASO).

                                   The ICR (para 28) indicates that despite substantial progress with regards to the regulatory
                                    framework, policies and procedures, the two airports have not yet received certification of the
                                    aerodrome (Part 139) or security (Part 140). This was because the ICAO's Universal Safety Oversight
                                    Audit Program (USOAP) audit for Kiribati was postponed to early 2020 due to delays in the
                                    procurement of the institutional strengthening activities, such as sector studies, hiring of the Civil
                                    Aviation Advisor and airport management contract, which was reduced from originally three to two
                                    years, resulted in delays of reforms and training. (ICR para 32).



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project substantially improved the operational safety of the two international airports in Kiribati to ICAO
                            standards through the improvements in navigational aids, upgrading of terminal buildings and runways, and
                            improved security screening. The terminal improvements now provide separation of arriving and departing
                            passengers, as well as security controls for terminal access and management.



                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati (P128938)



  The project contributed to the implementation of key sector reforms, such as the separation of operational
  and regulatory function within the aviation sector. Training was provided to strengthen the capacity of the Civil
  Aviation Authority Kiribati (CAAK). The project played a significant role in the development of policies,
  regulatory framework and safety oversight compliant with ICAO standards. Despite this progress, the two
  airports have not yet received ICAO certification as the ICAO's audit for Kiribati was postponed due to delays
  in procurement of institutional activities.

  Overall, through the efforts of the project, Kiribati has improved the safety and security of critical airport
  infrastructure and built capacity within the Ministry of Information, Communications, Transport and Tourism
  Development and CAAK and provided for improved regulatory oversight.

  Overall, efficacy is rated substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

The economic analysis at appraisal focused only on the impact of the withdrawal of air services on travel
industry as air freight was minor (PAD page 49). Two scenarios were analyzed: (a) with-project case, the
airports and runways were upgraded as soon as possible, i.e. within two years of the commencement of the
project; and (b) without-project, no action is taken until forced to do so, i.e. when airlines withdraw direct jet
services. If the services were interrupted in 2014, the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) was estimated at 34%
and Net Present Value was US$5.7 million. If the services were interrupted in 2016, the ERR was estimated at
16% and NPV was US$2.0 million (PAD page 50).

An ex-post economic analysis was carried out using the appraisal methodology (ICR para 36). The ex-post ERR
was estimated at 20% with NPV of US$33.96 million (ICR para 37). While the ERR indicates sufficient economic
return on infrastructure investment, the actual return is lower than the ex-ante ERR of 34.0%. This may be
because of:

(a) Increase in costs due to rapid deterioration of the existing equipment; design changes of the two terminals;
procurement delays resulting in increased costs; increase in the location premium due to the country’s
remoteness (this was underestimated at appraisal);

(b) Limited institutional capacity;

(c) Shortfalls in activities due to increased regulatory and engineering requirements; and

(d) Lower benefits – the actual contribution of travel and tourism to GDP was lower that estimated during
appraisal.



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati (P128938)



Operational and Administrative Efficiency

The project experienced delays in the procurement of the institutional strengthening activities, such as sector
studies, hiring of the Civil Aviation Advisor and airport management contract, which was reduced from originally
three to two years, resulting in delays of reforms and trainings and consequently readiness for the USOAP audit
(ICR para 32). The project was extended twice to allow for the completion of project activities and closed after a
delay of 2.5 years.

While the ex-post ERR of 20% indicates sufficient economic return on infrastructure investment, the actual
return is much lower than the ex-ante ERR of 34.0%. The benefits were lower, and the costs higher, project was
extended by 2.5 years. The efficiency is rated modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     68.40
 Appraisal                                                 34.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     75.40
 ICR Estimate                                              20.10
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is rated high because the project is fully aligned with the Bank’s and Government’s
strategy and address the key aviation sector issue – to improve operational safety and oversight of international
air transport infrastructure so international flights can continue to operate in Kiribati. The efficacy is rated
substantial because through the efforts of the project, Kiribati has improved the safety and security of critical
airport infrastructure and built capacity within MICTTD to provide more effective regulatory oversight. The
efficiency is rated modest because the benefits were lower, the costs higher and the project was extended twice
to allow for the completion of project activities and closed after a delay of 2.5 years. The outcome rating for the
project is moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati (P128938)




Funding Risk. There is a substantial risk that the investments relating to the airport’s mechanical and
electrical assets would not be maintained due to lack of funding. With the support of Public‐Private
Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF), a multi‐year, multi‐airport mechanical and electrical assets
maintenance contract has been designed, but by project closure had not secured funding.

The ICR (para 65) indicates that some progress has been made in increasing sector revenues through the
introduction of the "safety and security levy" but there is uncertainty whether these revenues will be sufficient
and used as intended (i.e. for the replacement of small equipment).

Institutional Risk. A two year management contract was signed for the operation of international airports.
There is a negligible risk that the airports will not be operated as intended as the management contract
included local staff development and preparation of a transition plan in the last year of the contract. Also, this
requires that all local staff who have been trained will be retained by the airport authority.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At appraisal, the assessment of the aviation sector in the Pacific Island Countries found that many of the
  countries lacked proper policy, regulatory and infrastructure to comply with the ICAO requirements, which
  justified the need for safety and security improvements. The aviation modernization was consistent with
  the industry outlook and direction.

  This was the first project under the PIAP and allowed for scaling to national contexts. However, the PDO
  had to be amended to include “associated infrastructure” to make this project consistent across the entire
  program.

  The project design reflected the lessons from Kiribati Road Rehabilitation Project which included higher
  contingency premium due to remoteness, and thin technical capacity (ICR para 46). The project team
  clarified that the Bank was aware of “remoteness premium” but could not adequately assess it because
  there were so few comparable contracts. During implementation, the “remoteness premium” was much
  higher than anticipated and additional financing was required. This is a shortcoming, but not a major one.

  To mitigate insufficient capacity, the project included the creation of the Kiribati Fiduciary Services Unit in
  the Ministry of Finance (for Financial Management); and a regional Technical and Fiduciary Services Unit
  (TFSU) (to provide a combination of the procurement and contract management skills). As discussed in
  the quality of supervision section below, the Government of Kiribati questioned the quality and cost of
  TFSU services and suspended the service agreement. With Bank’s continued dialogue, Kiribati
  eventually conceded that they did require TFSU support and ended up renewing the agreement.

  Apart from the remoteness premium, there were other reasons for increased costs. Three of the four
  components were subject to cost overruns partly due to limited institutional capacity and design changes
  of the two terminals. There were some weaknesses in the M&E design (see section 9a).



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati (P128938)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (para 53) notes that the project team closely monitored project progress and proactively
 addressed problems. The team provided extended in‐country implementation support during the initial
 phases of the project and participated in regional steering committees. The team was flexible and
 processed Additional Grant. There was a low turn‐over of TTLs (two), throughout the project lifetime.
 Overall reporting in ISRs and Aide Memoires was candid.

 The team maintained continuous dialogue with the Project Support Team and the Government of Kiribati
 (GoK) to address various issues such as the suspension of the Program’s Technical and Fiduciary
 Services Unit (TFSU) service agreement. At the end of 2014, GoK questioned the quality and cost of TFSU
 services and requested an evaluation of the implementation arrangements. The government allowed the
 TFSU Service Agreement to lapse by holding off signing the required deed. This effectively stopped TFSU
 services for Kiribati and jeopardized the project by delaying the procurement of major civil works activities
 and affected the management of ongoing contracts. In July 2015, the Bank organized and chaired a
 workshop between TFSU and GoK. Through consultations, GoK acknowledged that TFSU offered the most
 efficient implementation arrangement for this project and agreed to continue using their services. The GOK
 signed a revised version of the Service Agreement in October 2015 (ICR para 50).

 The new government requested changes in the final terminal designs of the two airports with a view to
 improve the functionality of the two terminals. The World Bank team carried out project restructuring and
 processed additional financing to accommodate this request.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design was weak. The PDO indicator “regulatory certification of safety and security at project
 airports” was not clear and was revised to “ICAO certification of safety and security at project airports”.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati (P128938)



 Two PDO indicators (airport certification and ICAO USOAP audits) were dependent on external agencies
 outside of the project’s influence. If ICAO does not carry out the audit at the expected date, then the
 USOAP audit indicator will not be achieved.



b. M&E Implementation
  MICTTD, with assistance from TFSU, was responsible for collecting the data, monitoring progress and
  reporting required data for on the Results Framework to IDA. The ICR (para 55) reports that inputs from
  MICTTD experienced frequent delays.

  During restructuring, while the PDO was amended to include “associated infrastructure”, a separate
  indicator was not included in the results framework.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR indicates (para 56) that the project’s M&E was used to monitor implementation progress.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned a category B rating having triggered two Bank safeguards policies: Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   At appraisal, a program level Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared that
   explained the processes for preparation, consultations, approval and disclosure of each safeguard
   document. The Program ESMF was disclosed through the InfoShop on July 15, 2011. The ESMF intended
   to guide the preparation of safeguard documents for future phases. Each country was expected to prepare
   an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or Abbreviated
   Resettlement Plan (ARP).

   In Kiribati, since the project was also financing road rehabilitation in Kiritimati Island and the Resettlement
   Policy Framework (RPF) was expected to cover any potential impacts, such as loss of access that may be
   in the right-of-way (PAD pages 16 and 17).

   The ICR reports (para 58) that the project had an effective ESMF and RPF and that the project’s
   environmental and social safeguards management was satisfactory. All civil works sub-projects under
   Component A adhered to the EMP (dated July 11, 2011). Some of the safeguards issues that arose
   included compensation of trees that were cut down, a dwelling that was obstructing the obstacle limitation




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati (P128938)



   survey, asbestos to be removed and disposed of appropriately at TRW; and a land claim associated with
   the Bonriki Airport terminal. All of these were successfully resolved by project completion (ICR para 58).

   The project also monitored the occupational health and safety aspects during implementation. This included
   HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention measures for all civil works contracts in accordance with the World
   Bank’s toolkit based on the “Road to Good Health”. Also, contractors and consultants signed codes of
   conduct for preventing gender‐based violence and child abuse (ICR para 59).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The ICR (para 60) indicates that the project maintained sound financial
   management (FM) arrangements and complied with the Bank's reporting and accounting requirements.
   There were some issues regarding the completeness and accuracy of the commitments and the
   description of the purpose of payment in on the payment voucher. These were addressed during
   implementation. The ICR further reports that there were frequent coordination challenges between the
   Project Support Team (PST) and the accountant in the Kiribati Fiduciary Services Unit (KFSU). This
   resulted in delays in the preparation of the financing plan.

   Procurement. The Program adopted a “regional procurement approach” for all participating countries to
   mitigate the high risk of procurement in capacity‐constrained Pacific Island Countries. The regional
   approach was used for goods, works and services being delivered to multiple countries, therefore,
   benefitting from economy of scale (e.g., fire engines delivered to each of the airports in every countries
   participating in the Program).

   For goods, works and services being delivered to Kiribati, “national procurement rules” were used. The
   Program’s Technical and Fiduciary Services Unit (TFSU) handled most procurement with the local Project
   Support Team (PST) in setting specifications, reviewing documents, and evaluations; and supported the
   project with managing contractual issues with a dedicated international contracts specialist (ICR para 46).
   There were no instances of mis-procurement in the project and the Procurement Plan was kept up‐to‐date.
   There were delays in the procurement of institutional strengthening activities such as sector studies, hiring
   of the Civil Aviation Advisor and airport management contract.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati (P128938)



                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were adapted from the ICR:

      Regional projects can provide an opportunity to overcome the capacity constraints for
        implementing a project in a remote location with serious resource constraints. Given
        the technically complex and sizable civil works investments in a capacity constrained country
        like Kiribati, the regional approach to procurement has proved to be effective. Procurement
        delays and complications were minimized through the central procurement team.

      A central approach to procurement may be perceived as “foreign” and “expensive”.
        The government officials of Kiribati perceived the Technical and Fiduciary Services Unit
        (TFSU) services as foreign, and felt their interests were not properly defended by TFSU. The
        government complained about the cost of TFSU services and believed they were unfairly
        treated compared to other PAIP countries. Continuous consultation and engagement from
        the Bank helped showcase the benefits from using TFSU.

      Institutional strengthening and capacity development in isolated states requires more
        time than anticipated. Given the capacity constraints in financial management and
        procurement capacity as well as technical aviation and regulatory expertise. the five‐year
        project implementation timeline at appraisal was unrealistic. The project had to be extended
        by 2.5 years.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  Phase I of the Pacific Aviation Investment Program (PAIP) included projects in the Republic of Kiribati, the
  Kingdom of Tonga and Tuvalu in 2011. Samoa entered the program in March 2014 as Phase 2, the Republic
  of Vanuatu in May 2015 as Phase 3, and Solomon Islands in March 2018 as Phase 4. PAIP included projects
  in the Republic of Kiribati, the Kingdom of Tonga and Tuvalu in 2011. Samoa entered the program in March
  2014 as Phase 2, the Republic of Vanuatu in May 2015 as Phase 3, and Solomon Islands in March 2018 as

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati (P128938)



  Phase 4. Once all these projects are completed, it would be useful to conduct a regional field assessment to
  learn from implementation experience and consolidate lessons for these projects or even a wider analysis of
  infrastructure projects.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is results-oriented, clearly written, and is largely consistent with the guidelines except for the
length. With 30 pages, the ICR is too long (the ICR Guidelines recommend a maximum main text length of 15
pages). The analysis is evidence-based and the ICR provides a good description of the project’s activities and
implementation challenges. The lessons were derived from the project’s experience.

The ICR has a minor shortcoming: there is a discrepancy in costs by financing source (table on page 2) which
records actual disbursed amount as US$39.6, while the Annex 3 table (cost by component) shows US$38.9
million. The project team clarified that this may come from FOREX fluctuations across the life of the project and
also a bug in the Portal where disbursements are registered, and whose data the ICR author worked with.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 16
