     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs (P100530)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021987

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P100530                                  IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                    Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-10422,TF-97126                        31-Dec-2014                                         14,078,742.71

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 27-May-2010                              04-May-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          17,005,000.00                                   17,005,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           16,490,000.00                                   14,078,742.71

 Actual                                       14,078,742.71                                   14,078,742.71




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 John Redwood               J. W. van Holst             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) in the Global Environment Facility Grant Agreement were "to
   increase demand for energy efficient investments in target micro, small and medium enterprise (MSME)
   clusters and to build their capacity to access commercial finance" (Schedule 1).

   For purposes of assessing the extent to which the PDO was achieved in Section 4 of this review the PDO has
   been parsed into two objectives as follows:


                                                                                                Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs (P100530)



   Objective 1: Increase demand for energy efficient investments in target micro, small, and medium enterprise
   (MSME) clusters.

   Objective 2: Build the capacity of MSMEs to access commercial finance.

   According to the ICR (footnote 5, pp. 8-9), in this project, a cluster was defined as "a group of end-users who
   share similar energy use characteristics" (and) "includes both a sector specific and a technology focus and a
   geographic focus for grouping enterprises and may include several industrial categories which share similar
   potentials for specific technical interventions." The ICR also indicated (footnote 4, pg. 8) that "selection criteria
   included number of MSMEs, energy usage and intensity, energy efficiency (EE) potential and availability of
   EE technologies, MSME financial health and ability to access finance, strength of potential apex
   organizations, and replication potential. These represented four major categories of industries --chemical,
   forging, foundry, and lime kilns -- in addition to mixed clusters."

   The Global Environment Objective (GEO), as indicated in the PAD (para. 26) was to help stabilize
   atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases (GHGs) through an increase in energy efficient (EE)
   investments and resulting energy savings.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Activities to Build Capacity and Awareness for Energy Efficiency (EE) (Appraisal
   cost:US$3.909 million from the Global Environment Facility (GEF) grant; Actual cost: US$2.909 million).
   This component would focus on increasing awareness of EE at the cluster and plant level on a large scale
   through the implementation of outreach and mobilization efforts, dissemination of information on successful
   projects and packaging potential investment proposals in EE for financing by local banks or other sources in
   five designated clusters (Kolhapur Foundary -- 350 units; Pune Forging -- 160 units; Tirunelveli Lime kilns --
   100 units; Alkleshwar -- 1,200 units; and Faridabad Mixed -- 2,000 units). This component would also
   include the provision of customized support to local banks for scaling up demand for existing schemes for
   EE financing, national and local marketing support to increase awareness of current schemes and loan
   offerings, detailed training support through Indian Bank Training Institutes of local branch offices and head
   units to identify and appraise EE projects, and widespread dissemination of success stories and impacts of
   EE project implementation. It would likewise support uptake of existing risk management instruments such
   as guarantees which were currently available in the Indian market.

   Component 2: Activities to Increase Investment in EE (Appraisal cost: US$51.868 million, of
   which US 46.000 million was expected to be private sector finance mobilized by MSMEs and US$5.868
   million from the GEF grant; Actual cost: US$62.851, of which )based on the ICR, page 2) US$51,933 million
   mobilized from the private sector and US$10.918 million from the GEF grant including the Additional

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs (P100530)



  Financing of US$5.19 million approved in December 2016). This component would provide grant support to
  cover the "soft costs" of an initial pipeline of approximately 500 projects, including at least 1,000 initial
  project assessments, and funding for a limited number of incentives for demonstration projects/early
  adopters of appropriate EE technologies where required.

  Component 3: Program Knowledge Management:(Appraisal cost: US$1.0 million from the GEF grant;
  Actual cost: US$1.625 million). This component would consist of a broad Programmatic Knowledge
  Management effort, explicitly requested by the Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) for monitoring and
  evaluation (M&E), collection of best practice examples, dissemination, and policy development functions
  with the goal of ensuring effective implementation and replication of this project and BEE's entire EE effort
  implemented with GEF support. It was expected to provide key cross-cutting inputs to help better inform
  Government of India (GoI) policy making and implementation of the entire GEF programmatic effort on
  improving EE in India.

  Component 4: Project Management (Appraisal cost: US$0.523 million from the GEF grant; Actual cost:
  US$1.038 million). This component would provide support for the two Project Management Units (PMUs) --
  a new one at BEE and the other in the existing Project Management Department (PMD) at the Small
  Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) to implement the cluster-focused activities -- that would jointly
  implement the project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: Total project cost was anticipated in the PAD to be on the order of US$57.563 million, of
  which US$46.0 million would be mobilized by participating MSMEs. Actual total cost according to Annex 3 in
  the ICR and confirmed by the Bank task team was US$68.423 million or 120 percent of the appraisal
  amount, including US$51.933 million provided by the country's financial intermediaries, or 113 percent of
  the amount originally anticipated at appraisal.

  Financing:The initial GEF grant was for US$11.3 million and the PAD also mentions a DFID grant of
  US$63,300 to SIDBI for awareness and capacity building mobilized by this bank, but there is no mention of
  this in the ICR. In connection with the estimated US$46.0 million financing from the private sector the PAD
  also mentions that IBRD sources provided Additional Financing from the SME Financing and Development
  Project (P102767). However, apparently this did not occur.

  On the other hand, an Additional Financing from the GEF of US$5.19 million was provided in December
  2016 (ICR, para. 20, pg. 10), resulting from the reallocation of unused grant funds from the India Chiller
  Energy Efficiency Project, which had closed in December 2014. Of these additional resources, US$0.650
  million were allocated to Component 1, US$3.25 million to Component 2, US$0.890 million to Component 3,
  and US 0.400 million to Component 4.

  Total GEF funding approved for the project, therefore, was US$16.490 million, of which US$14,079
  million, or 86.4 percent, was disbursed according to the ICR Basic Data (pg. 2) or the entire grant
  commitment according to Annex 3. Thus, the ICR is internally inconsistent in this regard. The project team
  subsequently clarified to IEG that the figure in Annex 3 was correct one and, thus, that the GEF grant was
  fully disbursed.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs (P100530)



   Borrower Contribution: According to the PAD, at appraisal, the borrower contribution was expected to be
   US$200,000. However, although this was not mentioned in the ICR, in IEG's subsequent discussion and
   email exchange with the project team, it was affirmed that most likely the Small Industries Development
   Bank of India's (SIDBI's) and the Bureau of Energy's (BEE's) actual contribution through their awareness
   and communication activities was actually significantly higher than the US$200,000 estimated at appraisal
   but that there was no separate accounting by these two agencies of the amounts specifically spent from
   their own funds in relation to the project's 26 MSME clusters.

   Dates and Restructuring: The project was approved on May 2, 2010 and became effective on October 28,
   2010. The Mid-term Review (MTR) occurred in December 2013. The project was restructured in December
   2014 when the original closing date (December 31, 2014) was extended to December 30, 2016 and
   accrued savings of US$3.365 million went toward establishment of a revolving fund (RF) to further spur
   demand for high-value but high-impact investments in five additional clusters, and there was a geographical
   and numerical expansion of outreach of EE measures to more enterprises (ICR, para 19). As already noted
   above Additional Financing of US$5.19 million was provided in December 2016 which allowed the project's
   scope to be scaled-up to include: (i) adjustment of targets of results indicators committing to a higher
   reduction (nearly doubling the target) in potential cumulative lifetime GHG emissions as a result of the
   project; (ii) facilitating more EE investments (additional US$25 million) through private sector for which an
   additional US$2.5 million allocated to RF; and (iii) extending the loan closing date to May 4, 2019 to ensure
   synergy of results and meet the emerging EE investments demand from additional 16 MSME clusters (ICR,
   page 20). These changes raised the level of ambition of the project and hence there was no logical
   rationale for conducting a split evaluation on account of changes in the project's PDO indicators.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
This project's objective was stated as "to increase demand for energy efficient investments in target micro,
small, and medium enterprise (MSME) clusters and to build their capacity to access commercial
finance." Although the objective of increasing the demand for energy efficient investments on its own was
unambiguous, the target of a demand from 500 MSMEs was arguably a considerable task and quite
ambitious. The following text will indicate why this review considers that the relevance of this project's
objectives was High.

Prior analysis by the World Bank showed that energy consumption by MSMEs, of which there were an
estimated 36 million at the time the project was appraised, represented between 33 and 75 percent
(depending on the sub-sector) of total industrial energy consumption in energy intensive sub-sectors in
India and that large numbers of these MSMEs had inefficient and outmoded technologies. At the time the
project closed, it had responded to several of the priorities of India's Three Year Action Agenda for 2017-
2020, including demonstrating emission reductions from MSMEs and energy efficiency (EE) improvements
in the industrial sector, which is also was a key element in the country's Nationally Determined
Contributions (NDCs) for the December 2015 Paris Agreement of the United Nations Framework

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs (P100530)



               Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Its objectives are likewise very relevant in relation to the World
               Bank Group's most recent Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for India (for FY 2018-2022) by
               contributing to two of its three focus areas: (i) promoting resource-efficient growth; and (ii) enhancing
               competitiveness and job creation. More specifically, according to the ICR (para. 32), its objectives
               contributed to those of the CPF by, inter alia, leading to more resource efficient production in several MSME
               sectors, thereby increasing their competitiveness and creating a market for EE demands of the MSME
               sector, while also reducing GHG emissions due to MSME adoption of low-cost and replicable technologies.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase demand for energy efficiency investments in target micro, small, and medium enterprise (MSME)
                             clusters.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. This objective was expected to be achieved by convincing MSMEs that EE measures
                             would help their businesses to grow more rapidly and increase their profitability and by boosting their access
                             to commercial finance for EE investments by also demonstrating to national and local financial intermediaries
                             (FIs) that MSMEs seeking to introduce EE improvements would be viable clients. This goal would be
                             achieved through the provision of technical assistance (TA) both to targeted MSMEs in energy-intensive
                             industrial sectors (initially including foundries, forging, chemical, and lime kiln subsectors) and geographic
                             clusters, and later expanding this approach elsewhere, as well as to pertinent FIs. In the case of the MSMEs
                             this support would include undertaking energy audits and preparing investment grade detailed project reports
                             (IGDPRs) and by involving industry associations, certified energy auditors, and training MSMEs to understand
                             the value of energy audits and EE measures, training vendors of EE technologies, and adapting existing EE
                             technologies for larger enterprises to the specific needs of MSMEs to increase their demand for EE
                             investments.

                             Outputs (based on the ICR, paras. 37 to 46 and Annex 1)

                                        1,257 IGDPRs prepared for an equal number of MSMEs as part energy audits, compared with an
                                         initial target of 500 and a revised target (with Additional Financing) of 730.
                                        1,120 experts from 75 FIs and 750 energy auditors were trained to develop energy audit reports on
                                         the basis of which commercial finance could be sought.
                                        67 early adopters of EE interventions provided a one-time cash payment of up to INR 900,000 (US$
                                         19,270 equivalent) on 75% of the capital expenditure upon demonstration of achievement of actual



                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs (P100530)



         energy savings due to EE interventions contained in their IGDPRs through Performance Linked
         Grants (PLGs).
        A Revolving Fund (RF) was established by the first Level 2 project restructuring in December
         2014 provided an interest subsidy of 2.5 percent, later increased to 3.85 percent in April-May 2019, to
         facilitate MSMEs' possibility to take up high-cost EE measures.
        Measurement and Verification (M&E) services provided to 637 enterprises that implemented EE
         measures.
        Several knowledge products were generated (actual number not identified in the ICR)
         including establishment of a web-based portal to help promote further adoption of EE products and
         technologies, demonstration videos, good practice notes, information on human and technological
         resources, EE equipment suppliers and vendors, finance schemes and other support systems drawn
         from projects managed by the World Bank and other UN organizations under GEF's overall
         programmatic framework for Energy Efficiency in India, an Energy Savings Assessment tool for
         MSMEs, FIs, and EE service providers, among others, but there was no specific target established at
         appraisal.
        11 EE demonstration videos were developed, compared with a target of 6 at the time of the AF.
        14 vendor interfaces as opposed to a target of 19 at the time of the AF.

Outcomes (based on ICR, paras. 37 to 46 and Annex 1)

      INR 3,322 million (US$47.5 million) aggregate value of direct EE investments as the result of
         customized financial solutions by commercial banks to promote EE and Resource Efficiency and
         Cleaner Production (RECP) measures and increase the appetite of MSMEs to implement high cost
         investments, compared with an appraisal target of INR 2,148 million (US$30.5 million) and a formally
         revised target of INR 1,660 million at the time of the AF.
        INR 16,971 million (US$241 million) in estimated replicable investments by MSMEs implementing EE
         and RECP measures, compared with INR 611 million (US$8.7 million) at appraisal and a formally
         revised target of INR 3,900 million (US$55.4 million) with the AF.
        16.06 million tons of lifetime CO2 equivalent emission reductions (ERs) and 13.34 million tons of
         estimated potential and replicable CO2e lifetime emission reductions (ICR, para. 55). The former
         figure includes estimated lifetime ERs through direct investments of INR 3,222 million(US$45.8
         million) and the second potential cumulative lifetime carbon ERs that would result from estimated
         replicable investments of INR 16,971 million (US$241 million). These figures compare with targets of
         4.6 million tons and 3.6 million tons, respectively, at appraisal and 9.15 million tons and 6.6 million
         tons, respectively, with the AF.
        48 MSMEs implemented measures needed to achieve ISO50001 (International Standards
         Organization energy management performance framework), compared with a target of 40 added at
         the time of the AF.
        534 energy conservation awards granted, compared with a target of 140 added at the time of the AF.
        133 beneficiaries of on-job EE training as opposed to a target of 150 added at the time of AF.

For the vast majority of output and outcome indicators, the project significantly exceeded their targets and,
thus, succeeded in increasing demand for energy efficiency among its targeted MSMEs. Financial resource
savings had already permitted an expansion from 5 to 10 clusters prior to the Additional Financing, but the
additional resources made available to the project in December 2016, together with an extension of its closing



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs (P100530)



date until May 2019, allowed it to incorporate an additional 16 MSME clusters in various other parts of the
country.

Given the considerable increase in the demand (met by the AF) for energy efficiency investments in micro,
small, and medium enterprise clusters above the original target this review has rated the achievement of
Objective 1 as High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To build the capacity of MSMEs to access commercial finance.

Rationale
Theory of Change. In order to enable MSMEs to make investments to improve their energy efficiency
increased access to commercial finance would be necessary. This, in turn, required increased capacity on the
part of the MSMEs in question to access such finance. The project therefore would seek to boost that
capacity by providing technical assistance and training to MSMEs with respect to commercial bank
requirements in this regard and by helping them to undertake energy audits and to prepare investment grade
detailed project reports (IGDRPs).

Outputs (based on ICR, paras. 47 to 55 and Annex 1)

        5,226 activities promoting EE in MSMEs, compared with an appraisal target of 2,800. In addition to
         assistance in the preparation of IGDRPs, capacity building activities for MSME entrepreneurs and
         managers included their participation in business-to-business exhibitions, seminars and talks, one-to-
         one interactions, exposure visits, and orientation and training programs covering various aspects of
         EE interventions.
        750 energy auditors trained versus an appraisal target of 150 and a revised (with AF) target of 700.
        1,120 financial intermediary personnel trained, compared with an appraisal target of 1,000. Through
         36 training programs covering all of the target MSME clusters, the staff of 75 Financial Intermediaries
         (FIs), including a mix of national and local banks from the public and private sectors, received
         specialized training in understanding EE business and options and undertaking enhanced analyses of
         EE project applications from IGDPRs shared by MSMEs. This training was supplemented by a manual
         specifically that provided examples of of EE support schemes and typical EE projects for MSMEs,
         together with guidance on bankers' appraisal of EE projects at MSMEs and case studies.

Outcomes (based on ICR, paras. 47 to 55 and Annex 1)

        9,167 MSME entrepreneurs trained, compared with an appraisal target of 400 and a revised target
         (with AF) of 1,800. Through its capacity building activities the project sought to address the practical
         gaps that discouraged MSMEs from spending on EE investments and/or placed barriers for them to
         access commercial finance. According to the ICR (para 47), "extensive consultations with MSMEs, EE


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs (P100530)



                                     service providers, and FIs led to creation of an optimal set of tools and strategic approaches that
                                     broke down these barriers, including the myth among MSMEs that EE investments were for the sole
                                     purpose of meeting regulatory compliances (sic) rather being actually good for business."
                                    Based on this training, the project successfully enhanced the capacity of its targeted MSMEs to
                                     access commercial finance by using a combination of technical assistance, training, and, in some
                                     cases, financial incentives (ICR, para 48).
                                    The project's specialized training and support for the staff of 75 FIs enabled them to expand their
                                     outreach to a larger number of MSMEs and to support more financially feasible EE investments in the
                                     increased number of MSME clusters (ICR, para 49).
                                    The results achieved were reflected in the 1,257 investment grade detailed project reports (IGDPRs)
                                     prepared (as noted under "Outputs") and in the increased number of MSMEs and MSME clusters that
                                     were successfully able to implement EE investments through improved access to commercial support
                                     (both on the demand and supply sides) as a result of project support.(ICR, para 52)

                            For the reasons indicated above, this review also assesses achievement of its capacity building objective as
                            High.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project development objectives -- i.e. increasing demand for energy efficiency(EE) improvements
                            and enhancing the capacity of targeted MSMEs to access commercial finance for this purpose -- were both
                            successfully achieved. Most associated targets were surpassed even after they had been (in some cases
                            substantially) increased in response to the additional US$5.19 million of reallocated GEF grant resources
                            through Additional Financing in December 2016. The project also exceeded its target in terms of GHG
                            emissions reductions as a result of the EE improvements in the significantly increased targeted number of
                            MSME clusters that it was able to support. This target was included in the project to assess its performance in
                            relation to its Global Environmental Objective (GEO), which was to contribute to the stabilization of
                            atmospheric concentrations of GHG through an increase in EE investments and resulting energy savings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



          5. Efficiency



                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs (P100530)



Economic efficiency. The PAD did not undertake an economic analysis per se although it did present financial
and incremental cost analyses. It stated (para. 62), however, that the project would support "MSME renovation
and rehabilitation projects whose primary financial benefit will be derived from energy savings" and that
"analysis shows that the majority of EE investments identified in the energy audit reports are financially justified,
especially at current energy prices which are expected to prevail or increase in the medium-term." The PAD also
argued that "as coal, fuel oil or primarily coal-based grid power are the dominant energy sources for the target
industry units, the economic justification for energy efficiency investment is even stronger because of the
significant environmental benefits expected from EE investments, resulting in economic internal rates of return
(EIRRs) that are higher than the estimated financial internal rates of return (FIRRs)." It likewise added (para. 63)
that "Based on analysis carried out during the market assessment and on the results of investments previously
financed by IREDA (Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency) and other financial institutions, EE
investments in SMEs routinely achieve FIRRs of 30% and above."

Based on the appraisal assumptions that the project would catalyze an additional EE investment valued at
US$90 million during the project's lifetime and avoid 7.3 million tons of CO2 emissions over the lifetime of the
project's interventions resulting in energy savings of approximately US$72 million, the ICR (para. 71)
"reconstructed" an estimated economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 16.8 percent.

At project completion based on actual project costs, which included the GEF grant and the leveraged
commercial bank loans and MSME self-finance for EE investments, the ICR estimated an ex-post financial
internal rate of return (FIRR) of 33.3 percent and a net financial present value for the project of INR13.681
million (US$194.28 million), as detailed in Annex 4, Table 4.2. Likewise including all project costs, the
ICR calculated an economic benefit-cost ratio of 6.15, an EIRR of 68.13 percent, and a net present value of
INR158,855 million or US$2,255.92 million (Annex 4, Table 4.3). Thus, the actual economic rate of
return substantially exceeded the reconstructed estimate based on the appraisal assumptions.

Implementation efficiency. The project's nine year implementation period was justified given the Additional
Financing approved in December 2016. However, it did face initial implementation delays due in part to a
general downturn in the national economy which hindered increased demand for financing to adopt energy
efficiency improvements. As a result, at the time of the first Level 2 restructuring on December 30, 2014, just
one day before the project was originally scheduled to close, only 38.1 percent of the original GEF grant had
been disbursed and on October 12, 2016 when the second Level 2 restructuring was approved only 67.7
percent of the original grant had been disbursed although it was reduced to 46.4 percent when the Additional
Financing of US$5.19 million (one of the main justifications for a further 30 month extension of the closing date)
was approved. From then on the disbursement percentage improved.

On the basis of collective achievements mentioned above the project's efficiency is rated Substantial.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs (P100530)




                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   100.00
ICR Estimate                                              68.13
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

As Relevance of Objectives and Efficacy are rated High and Efficiency is rated Substantial, in accordance with
IEG guidelines, overall outcome of the project is rated Highly Satisfactory. The project achieved its development
objectives and significantly surpassed many of its performance targets, while also positively contributing to
the achievement of its Global Environment Objective.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcome is low because the vast majority of the participating MSMEs are benefiting
financially from the more energy efficient and other resource-conserving technologies they have incorporated
in their production processes due to the project. As the ICR points out (para. 133), moreover, adequate
capacity and information has been absorbed by the MSMEs in the targeted clusters, a pool of local EE
experts and equipment vendors has been established, market-based mechanisms for EE interventions have
been created, both BEE and SIDBI have internalized the approaches and models for EE and RECP
introduced by the project over the past decade in their future work plans. As the ICR states "These
developments will ensure that the process of adoption of EE and RECP measures by FEEMP will continue
beyond the project period and the market size and the initiatives are expected to rise in the coming years"
(para. 64). At the time the project closed there was a robust pipeline of additional EE investments estimated
to result in a further 13.34 million tons of GHG emission reductions beyond the project period.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design represented an innovative approach to promoting the adoption of EE technologies in
  selected MSME clusters in various parts of the country. The ICR (para. 126) attributes this design to the
  Bank team in consultation with BEE and SIDBI "to cover the risks associated with working with MSMEs."
  However, it does not provide more specific information in this regard. Nor does it identify the staff and


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs (P100530)



  consultants that participated in project preparation. In addition, as will be further discussed in the section
  on safeguards below, it does not appear that project preparation and appraisal were entirely adequate
  with respect to this mattter. This possible shortcoming notwithstanding and considering that no major
  changes in project design were required during implementation, quality at entry is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Similarly, the ICR (para 127) observes that Bank supervision involved "close coordination" with BEE and
 SIDBI and provided the needed support for procurement and financial management, while also responding
 "to the concerns from the field from participating in the marketing outreach efforts to provide thrust to
 investments to reconditioning the selection criteria of MSMEs." Supervision missions included field visits
 and focused on building partnerships with project stakeholders, both on the service provision side and in
 the beneficiary MSME clusters. The two Level 2 restructurings -- although the first occurred just one day
 before the original closing date -- together extended the project for four and a half years, thereby allowing
 both the activities under the original GEF grant and the Additional Financing issued in December 2016 to
 be achieved, expanding its geographic coverage through the provision of support to 16 additional MSME
 clusters, including in other parts of the country, and introducing a Revolving Fund that allowed project
 resources to be recycled as the result of repayments from MSMEs that have received financing from it. The
 quality of Bank supervision is thus also rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E arrangements were generally adequate with the BEE and SIDBI PMUs sharing this responsibility for
 data collection and reporting. However, the ICR (para. 111) identified several ways in which the Results
 Framework could have been improved in order to better quantify energy savings and reduction of pollutants
 and by including indicators with respect to cleaner production and reduction of non-energy inputs and
 waste. The ICR added that with limited baseline data at appraisal, targets for estimated and potential
 lifetime carbon emissions reductions were based on small scale energy intensive industries using furnace,
 oil, coal and thermal power generated electricity only. Also, since the project established that energy
 efficiency cannot be maximized without reductions in input materials and wastages, inclusion of indicators



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs (P100530)



 like the use of water, metals, chemicals, etc., at restructuring could have improved the M&E framework to
 assess the project's impact on the resource efficiency and cleaner production (RECP) agenda.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR, project implementation included regular monitoring of the potential of investments
  and emissions reductions together with the awareness and capacity building activities for MSME
  beneficiaries and other stakeholders. It also involved use of the Measurement and Verification (M&V)
  system and reporting on the results of EE activities and the utilization of the Revolving Fund (RF) and
  other resources mobilized for this purpose (para. 112).



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data were utilized for regular project progress reporting and assessment of its results (ICR, para.
  113). They also helped to provide the basis for its restructuring which entailed expanding project
  interventions and targets and extending its life and, thus, its ultimate effectiveness through the use of
  Additional Financing.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified in Category B at the time of appraisal and triggered OP 4.01 (Environmental
   Assessment). No social safeguards were triggered. According to the PAD (Annex 10), as concerns
   environmental compliance, "interventions to address potential environmental liability issues in the project
   will be undertaken at the project stage of initial assessment and during preparation of investment grade
   proposals [and initial walk through audits] will form one of the essential criteria for selection of SMEs for
   conducting unit level EE audits [and] preparation of investment proposals." In relation to project
   implementation, however, it states (pg. 87) that "the financing choice of selecting EE options will rest with
   the SME units and as a result the Bank has no implementation supervision responsibility or requirement as
   much of the investment will be financed from non-IBRD sources. However, as part of the proposed project
   component on capacity building, efforts will be made to sensitize the SMEs on energy and environment co-
   benefits of the project. Further, efforts will be made to sensitize banks/FIs to integrate environmental
   compliance as part of SME loan processing and appraisal. Such effort will draw from SIDBI's loan appraisal
   mechanism of using Environmental and Social Risk Management Framework (ESMF) for Bank funded
   project 'P102767 -- SME Financing and Development -- Additional Financing."

   Furthermore, the PAD also states (pp. 87-88), "The institutional capacity for safeguards management was
   assessed at two levels: (i) TA implementing agencies -- BEE and SIDBI; and (ii) SMEs and their
   associations. As part of project implementation, BEE and SIDBI will establish Project Management Units
   with necessary staff resources with domain expertise on energy and environment. In the case of SIDBI,

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs (P100530)



  institutional mechanisms are well established under Bank financed SME Financing and Development
  Project. With regard to BEE, the safeguards inputs will be limited to capacity building activities. In the case
  of SME associations and the SME units, the institutional capacity would be limited to regulatory compliance.

  These statements in the PAD raise a number of questions and suggest that no specific ESMF may have
  been prepared for this project, which included micro as well as small and medium enterprises (i.e., MSMEs)
  and not just SMEs, which presumably have less capacity to implement environmental and social mitigation
  measures, including workers health and safety measures. At least there is no mention either in the PAD or
  the ICR that such an ESMF was developed. In addition, as the external financing and self-financing by
  MSMEs of EE interventions was considered part of the project as presented in the PAD and essential for
  achieving project objectives, the environmental impacts associated with the interventions so financed
  should have been required to comply with World Bank environmental safeguards as well as Indian
  Government regulations and been supervised by the Bank. In addition, according to the ICR (Annex 4,
  Tables 4.2 and 4.3), most of the EE investments associated with the project were self-financed by the
  participating MSMEs themselves and some were financed by sources other than SIBDI, which by itself
  accounted for only 47.2 percent of total external and self-financing for these interventions.

  The ICR (para. 116) nevertheless claims that "the risks envisaged were well addressed systematically since
  they were factored in the project implementation cycle from the beginning [and] efforts were made to
  sensitize FIs to integrate environmental compliance as part of SME loan processing and appraisal." It then
  affirms in paragraph 118 that "the impacts of safeguards compliance are embedded in the web portal
  (http://indiasavesenergy.in/) developed as part of [the] knowledge management product and it concludes
  that "overall, the safeguards performance of the project is 'Highly Satisfactory." However, when visiting this
  website no information about environmental safeguard compliance could be readily found. Thus, the ICR is
  not clear whether either the extent to which compliance with Bank safeguard requirements in relation to the
  EE interventions in MSMEs supported by the project was, in fact, adequately supervised by the Bank or
  if there had been any issues during implementation in this regard, and, if so, how they were handled.

  The Bank project team subsequently provided satisfactory additional information to IEG regarding the way
  compliance with environmental safeguards was verified and supervised during project implementation so as
  to ensure that all participating MSMEs adequately complied with government environmental regulations.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement. The ICR (para 122) states that the "bidding and selection process were (sic) conducted in a
  fair and transparent manner without any significant complaints on the procurement cycle
  management." However, it also acknowledges that some procurement delays were experienced in BEE
  during the later stages of the project due to "frequent change of procurement expert" and that "contracts
  management potential was an issue in BEE that contributed time overruns in several cases," while
  payment delays were also observed in several project progress reports. Elsewhere, however, (para. 125),
  the ICR attributes the procurement delays during the last two years of implementation to "change in
  management of BEE which was responsible for decision making" together with "low supervision by BEE

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs (P100530)



  management," so the ICR is somewhat inconsistent in this regard. On the other hand, no such problems
  were registered in relation to procurement activities by SIDBI, which made up most of the activities of the
  project.

  Financial Management. Similarly, the ICR (paras. 119-121) affirms satisfactory FM performance
  throughout project implementation during which no significant issues were encountered. This positive
  experience is attributed primarily to: (i) simplified FM arrangements; (ii) use of the government's
  mainstream treasury systems by BEE; (iii) sustained availability of experienced and qualified accounting
  staff in both BEE and SIDBI; and (iv) effective oversight and control by both agencies. Overall, submission
  of quarterly interim financial reports, disbursement claims, and internal and external audit reports was
  timely and the ICR reports no irregularities or qualifications, although it also acknowledges that "Grant
  disbursements were very slow during initial period and following the restructuring with additional financing,
  the disbursements marginally increased over a period."




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
  Gender. The project "could show some progress in mainstreaming gender in the MSME sector," according
  to the ICR (para. 77) even though "project design did not include gender as a concern, possibly because
  the women are not seen as mainstay participants in energy-intensive MSME units/clusters." This
  notwithstanding, the project is reported to have trained 216 women staff of FIs and 45 women energy
  auditors, "who have entered the profession not traditionally known to employ women," and supported 112
  enterprises partly or fully owned by women. It likewise "supported general awareness about basic amenities
  such as provision of separate toilets for women, designated space for resting and personal hygiene, and
  focused campaigns on safe and respectable work space." Women workers were also reportedly particularly
  benefited by RECP (Resource Efficiency and Clean Production) measures taken by some participating
  MSMEs including reduction in exposure to radiation heat, prevention of exposure to safety hazards in
  cutting and polishing of plastic products, elimination of exposure to fine dust and acid fumes in printed
  circuit boards, adoption of safe stitching methods, and fabric dust free environments in the garment
  industry, among others.

  Institutional Strengthening. The project enabled and strengthened the capacity of BEE an SIDBI to work
  together toward an outcome-oriented approach and both agencies are reported (ICR, para 81) to have used
  this enhanced capacity and the tools developed during project implementation to expand their outreach and
  business in EE. SIDBI, for example, established Green Climate and Sustainable Development Initiatives in
  2018 to promote EE and cleaner production among MSMEs through green financing and has introduced the
  "4 E" (End-to-End Energy Efficiency) solutions program introduced under the project to MSMEs throughout
  India using its own financing. Thus, the project was instrumental in introducing the concepts of lean, clean,
  green, and resource efficiency (RE) in SIDBI's lending approach. It likewise reportedly (ICR, para. 85)
  "streamlined the process of improving efficiencies at MSMEs by developing IGDPRs (Investment Grade
  Detailed Project Reports) in place of regular detailed energy audit (including information on resource
  assessments as well) reports," and developed a free mobile application for Resource Efficiency
  Assessment (REA), called SIDBIREA, which "reduced REA time at MSMEs by half while still maintaining
  the standards of being investor/financier friendly." This tool was used during the AF phase of the project. In


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs (P100530)



   addition, the project launched a web-based portal (http;//indiasavesenergy.in/) as a knowledge product and
   a web-based Energy Savings Assessment tool (http://eetool.istsl.in) to create awareness regarding the
   importance of EE and to enable stakeholders to assess business opportunities. Thus, these contributions
   may have been among the project's most significant outputs.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                 Both quality at entry and quality
                                                                                 of supervision were of generally
                                                                                 good quality but the ICR does
Bank Performance                Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory
                                                                                 not provide sufficient information
                                                                                 to justify a Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                 rating
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR proposes several lessons. Among the most important with general application to similar
projects were the following:

1. Given a well designed and implemented project, it is possible to show that "good
environment is good business too." In fact, the key to convincing entrepreneurs, independently
of the size of their establishments, to adopt EE and other environmentally-friendly technologies and
practices is to be able to demonstrate that this will result in reduced costs and greater profits in the
future. The lesson is that this project was successfully able to do this for key energy-intensive MSME
clusters.

2. The model of a partnership between a financial institution (such as SIDBI) and a technical
organization (such as BEE) provides an effective environment for larger interventions in
MSMEs across the country and in multiple sectors. In the present project, this partnership
proved to be an effective way of first piloting then expanding an innovative approach to working with
MSMEs in various parts of India and then possibly scaling up these interventions and creating a
market for EE improvements in various industrial subsectors. The lesson is that institutions with
different roles but common objectives can collaborate on complex development challenges.

3. Financial incentives along with ensuring a financial stake of MSMEs at the initial stage can
spur an effective EE market. Experience under this project revealed that the greater the financial
stake that an MSME has in implementing EE improvement and other clean production measures,
the more likely is its commitment to complete the required investments in a meaningful way. The


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs (P100530)



lesson is that well designed financial incentives can stimulate environmentally beneficial
investments.

4. Intermediaries such as Industry Associations and local leaders can play a key role in
building trust among MSMEs that need or seek EE and/or clean production solutions and
service providers. Here too, this project's experience showed that the role of such intermediaries
was important also in helping the implementing agencies and the Bank to understand the nature of
the problems and barriers faced by MSMEs that needed to be overcome and to identify "first-
movers" and communicate positive results of pilot projects to their member MSMEs. The lesson is
that engaging appropriate intermediaries can enhance a project's outcomes by helping all
stakeholders (i.e., the ultimate beneficiaries, implementing agencies, and the Bank) to better
understand and address key obstacles to their achievement.

IEG suggests another lesson.

5. Timely Additional Financing can play an essential role both in increasing the outputs and
enhancing the outcomes of a project and extending its life and, thus, its effective use of the
available external and domestic resources in pursuit of its objectives. In the present case, it
should be recalled that only 38 percent of the original GEF grant had been disbursed by the time of
the original closing date and 67 percent was disbursed by the time of the second two years
later. The AF permitted the addition of another two and a half years to the life of the project as well
as more resources, thereby permitting its geographic expansion and greater ultimate use of a larger
volume of grant resources. The lesson is that strategic additional financing providing more time for
the use of existing resources as well as additional resources can have exponential benefits for a
well-managed project.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and of generally good quality. However,there were also a few shortcomings. The
ICR did not provide sufficient justification to support the proposed Highly Satisfactory rating for Bank
performance and actual project cost information was incomplete and not broken down by component. This was
subsequently clarified for IEG in writing by the Bank's task team as reflected in Section 2 of this review.
In addition, the ICR failed to identify the staff and consultants involved in project preparation, reportedly due to
"problems with the system." On the other hand, the ICR provided a comprehensive discussion of project
outputs and outcomes, including not only in relation to its PDO and intermediate outcome indicators, whose
targets were appropriately adjusted upwards during implementation to reflect the Additional Financing provided
in December 2016, but also, inter alia, with respect to gender and institutional strengthening.



                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  IN: Egy Effcy at MSMEs (P100530)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                    Page 17 of 17
