     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0021738

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P100047                                     EG-Ain Sokhna Power

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Egypt, Arab Republic of                     Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-76330                                  31-Dec-2015                                           488,253,178.20

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Jan-2009                                 31-Dec-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            600,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Revised Commitment                             600,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Actual                                         488,422,430.88                                                  0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan           Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi                 IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (p.5) dated March 15, 2009, the project objectives were to (i) ensure
   continuous electricity supply to meet demand in a sustainable manner through investment in new generation
   capacity; and (ii) improve the sector’s financial sustainability through the provision of assistance to the Project
   Implementing Entity [Egyptian Electricity Holding Company-EEHC] to support sector revenue improvements.




                                                                                                       Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)



   In the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p.10), the project objective was defined with a minor a difference
   which read as "by providing technical assistance" instead of "through the provision of assistance" as was
   defined in the Loan Agreement.

   In this review, the project objectives will be parsed as follows:

   Objective 1: to ensure continuous electricity supply to meet electricity demand in a sustainable manner; and

   Objective 2: to improve the sector’s financial sustainability.

   The Ain Sokhna Power Plant to be constructed under this project was designed to run on both natural gas
   and heavy fuel oil to ensure continuous electricity generation should there be a problem with the supply of the
   primary fuel, i.e., natural gas. The power plant was to generate 6,000 GWh of electricity annually, which would
   contribute to meeting the electricity demand and eliminating blackouts and brownouts in Egypt. In other
   words, the wording “to ensure continuous electricity supply” implies the objective of achieving reliability in
   addition to meeting electricity supply in a sustainable manner.

   Technical assistance activities to achieve the second objective were financed by other donors separately from
   this project. This objective was not part of the project’s financing or activities or results framework and there is
   no concrete basis to reasonably hold this project accountable for the achievement of this objective. Therefore,
   this objective will not be rated (for a detailed explanation, please see section 4. Achievement of Objectives).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project originally had two components:

   A. The Ain Sokhna Power Plant. (Appraisal cost: US$1,956.60 million excluding US$50.2 million for
   physical and price contingencies and US$183 million for taxes and duties, International Bank for
   Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan financing US$600.00 million; actual cost:US$1,159.40 million
   excluding taxes and duties and the cost of the transmission lines, actual IBRD loan disbursement is not
   given in the ICR.)

   The East Delta Electricity Production Company (EDEPC), a subsidiary of Egyptian Electricity Holding
   Company (EEHC), was the implementing unit of this component. This component included civil works and
   provision of goods and consultants’ services for the construction of the Ain Sokhna power plant: (1) two 650
   MW steam turbine generators; (2) two steam generators (boilers); (3) electrical equipment including
   transformers and switchyard; (4) auxiliary mechanical equipment including pumps and drives, heat
   exchangers and de-aerators, critical piping and piping valves; (5) water and wastewater treatment systems
   and desalination plant; (6) the implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP),
   including environmental monitoring equipment; (7) distributed control systems and instrumentation; (8)
   engineering and project management services including design, procurement and construction supervision

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)



  as well as commissioning, testing and start-up; (9) civil works, yard tanks as well as medium and low
  voltage switchgear; (10) substations and transmission lines to interconnect to the national power grid; and
  (11) insurance.

  B. Support for the Energy Sector. (Appraisal cost: US$0.00 million, International Bank for Reconstruction
  and Development (IBRD) loan financing US$0.00 million; actual cost:1.47 million, actual IBRD loan
  disbursement US$1.47 million) *

  This component included technical assistance through grant funding facilitated by the Bank, consisting of
  implementation advice to the EEHC on its overall and ongoing efforts to improve sector revenues.

  * The Project Appraisal Document (PAD) did not allocate any funds to this component; technical assistance
  was to be given through ongoing studies funded by other donors and annual programmatic bank budget
  (PAD, p.11-12). Furthermore, according to the Loan Agreement (LA), the total loan amount was to be used
  for "works" (LA, p.8); there were no funds allocated for studies, consultancy services or training. However,
  the project paper for the first restructuring shows that US$1.47 million was allocated to this component, but
  there is no explanation why this amount was allocated and for which technical assistance activities.



  Revised Components

  At the first restructuring in November 2013, a third component was added to utilize the savings of US$179.5
  million from the IBRD loan, which materialized due to lower than estimated construction cost of the Ain
  Sokhna Power Plant.

  C. Generation Transmission Connection and Strengthening. (Estimated cost: US$190.00 million,
  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan financing US$179.50 million; cost at
  project closing: US$69.80 million but this cost is expected to be higher because investments under this
  component financed by the EEHC continued after the closure of the IBRD loan, actual IBRD loan
  disbursement is not given in the ICR)

  This component was to be implemented by the Egyptian Electric Transmission Company (EETC), a
  subsidiary of EEHC, and would finance the construction of new transmission lines and a substation to
  strengthen existing and new generation connections to the 500 kV network. The component involved new
  transmission lines and a substation to connect the new Helwan South power plant to the 500 kV
  transmission grid and to strengthen the network connection of Ain Sokhna and El-Tebbin power plants. As
  of project closing, all of these activities had not been completed. Therefore, the actual cost given above
  does not reflect the cost of these activities after completion.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$2,189.80 million including US$50.20
  million for physical and price contingencies and US$183.0 million for taxes and duties. Despite the addition
  of a third component in the amount of US$190.00 million in November 2013, the total project cost
  decreased to US$1,897.00 million, because of substantially lower actual construction cost of the power
  plant caused by the depreciation of the local currency and a sharp drop in the cost of power generation


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)



equipment. According to the ICR (p.35) the project closed in December2018 with a total cost of
US$1,230.67 million excluding the cost of the transmission lines connecting the power plant to the grid
(EDEPC Ain Sokhna Completion Report Implementation, November 2018, p.13) and the cost of ongoing
activities under Component C. The actual cost was 56.16 percent of the cost estimated at appraisal
including physical and price contingencies and taxes and duties. The African Development Bank Ain
Sokhna Project Evaluation Note (p.7) reports the actual cost of the power plant at US$1,440.00 million, and
states that the sizable reduction in the actual project cost was due to the conservative project cost estimate
at appraisal; since this project was the first of its kind in the region, there was no local or regional market
reference price for this type of investment, hence the appraisal cost was over estimated.

Financing: At appraisal, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan was
estimated at US$600.00 million. At project closing in December 2018, US$488.42 million or 81.40 percent
of the IBRD loan was disbursed. The ICR did not provide a breakdown of the IBRD disbursement by
component.

The estimated funding from other donors at appraisal and their actual contributions at project closing were
as follows: (i) the African Development Bank, US$550.00 million, actual US$387.15 million; (ii) Arab Fund
for Economic and Social Development US$208.50 million, actual US$165.21 million; and (iii) Kuwait Fund
for Arab Economic Development, which was secured at the time of first restructuring in November 2013,
US$104.00 million, actual US$83.50 million.

Borrower contribution: At appraisal, the borrower’s contribution was estimated at US$831.30 million. At
project closing, the borrower’s actual contribution was US$103.28 million.

Restructurings and Dates: There were two project restructurings.

      First Restructuring (November 20, 2013): The procurement for the construction of the Ain Sokhna
       Power Plant resulted in a saving of US$179.50 million IBRD loan. In order to utilize these savings, a
       third component was added to finance the construction of a transmission line to connect the Helwan
       South Power Plant to the grid and to strengthen the network connection of Ain Sokhna and El-
       Tebbin power plants. This restructuring was processed after the approval of the Helwan South
       Power Plant Project by the board of the World Bank. The Egyptian Electric Transmission Company
       (EETC) was designated as the implementing unit of this component. New intermediate results
       indicators were added to the results framework to measure the implementation of these new
       activities, along with a new project development objective level indicator, i.e., the ratio of average
       load shedding to peak demand, to capture the achievement in meeting electricity demand. The
       project closing date was extended by 18 months from December 31, 2015 to June 30, 2017 to allow
       the completion of the new activities under this component.
      Second Restructuring (March 27, 2017): The project closing date was extended by another 18
       months from June 30, 2017 to December 31, 2018 to allow the completion of the project activities
       under the third component. These activities were delayed because of the changing investment
       priorities of the EEHC and the EETC in response to the power outages in the summers of 2013 and
       2014. During this period emergency power plants took priority over the Helwan South Power Plant
       and the additional interconnection of Ain Sokhna. (Restructuring Paper, p.11).
      Dates: The project was approved on January 29, 2009 and became effective on August 13, 2009.
       The original project closing date was December 31, 2015, but it was extended by a total of 36



                                                                                                  Page 4 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)



          months; the reasons for these extensions have been outlined above (see: references to the first and
          second restructurings).The project closed on December 31, 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The relevance of the project objective "to ensure continuous electricity supply to meet demand in a
sustainable manner" to the country context in Egypt is substantial. The electricity demand had been
growing at a rate of 7.5 percent between 2003 and 2008. At the start of the project implementation, Egypt
was faced with blackouts and brownouts due to shortages in electricity generation in meeting electricity
demand, especially during peak hours. There were major issues with the reliability of power supply. After
the completion of the natural gas and heavy fuel oil-fired Ain Sokhna Power Plant and the El-Tebbin Power
Plant—also financed by the World Bank—there was no unscheduled power shortages in Egypt.

However, according to the 2030 Egypt Vision (p.12) of the Government of Egypt, the energy goal of the
country is to have "an energy sector meeting national sustainable development requirements and
maximizing the efficient use of various traditional and renewable resources contributing to economic
growth, competitiveness, achieving social justice, and preserving environment." In order to achieve this
goal, the share of oil and gas in electricity production will be decreased from its current 91 percent of the
fuel mix to 27 percent in 2030, while the share of renewable energy sources will increase from 1 percent to
30 percent, and coal from none to 29 percent. Therefore, having achieved sufficient power generation
capacity, Egypt’s focus has shifted from meeting rapidly increasing electricity demand to increasing energy
security through the use of renewable energy and other primary energy resources, such as imported coal.

The relevance of the second objective "to improve the sector’s financial sustainability through supporting
sector revenue improvements" is broadly relevant to the country context. The 2030 Egypt Vision does not
specifically include any target for the financial sustainability of the energy sector, but it could be argued that
in order to meet national sustainable development requirements, the energy sector should achieve financial
sustainability.

At project closing, both project objectives were substantially aligned with the Bank priorities as defined in
the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2015-2019. Under the second focus area of "Improved
opportunities for private sector job creation", Objective 2.2. is defined as "improved energy generation
capacity and energy efficiency." The goal of the Bank strategy was "to support the Egyptian government’s
effort to eliminate power outages by 2017 and to promote financial sustainability of the sector by 2019
through the increased participation of the private sector in new energy generation" (CPF, p.31). The CPF
did not include any specific measures to improve the financial sustainability of the sector through supporting
sector revenue improvements.

Before this project, the World Bank had already become an important development partner in the electricity
sector in Egypt following the approval of the El-Tebbin Power Project in February 2006. Since then, the
Bank has been active in the power and energy sector by supporting investment projects, such as the first
solar-thermal power project and the expansion of the natural gas infrastructure, and also through technical
assistance in energy pricing strategy, commercial framework for large-scale wind development and
development of a framework and risk allocation mechanism for re-engaging with the private sector (PAD,

                                                                                                        Page 5 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)



               p.8-9). Given the Bank’s prior experience in the power and energy sectors in Egypt, the objectives of the
               Ain Sokhna Power Project were adequately challenging.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To ensure continuous electricity supply to meet electricity demand in a sustainable manner.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change for the First Objective

                             Although the objective to meet electricity demand is clearly defined, it is not so obvious what "in a sustainable
                             manner" means; this part of the project objective was not defined in the project appraisal document. In order
                             to meet electricity demand, the project was to finance the construction of a 1,300 MW natural gas and heavy
                             fuel oil (HFO)-fired power plant. The dual fuel option was to ensure continuous electricity generation should
                             there be a problem with the supply of natural gas. The power plant was to generate 6,000 GWh of electricity
                             annually, which would contribute to meeting the electricity demand and eliminating blackouts and brownouts
                             in Egypt. In order words, this objective can be defined as to improve the reliability of electricity supply, which
                             is implied by the wording of “to ensure continuous electricity supply” in the objective. The project funds were
                             sufficient to construct such a power plant and there was a direct causal link between project activities, outputs
                             and the expected outcome. The original results framework included only one indicator measuring the annual
                             increase in electricity generation due to the construction of the power plant, which did not fully capture the
                             achievement of the objective to ensure continuous electricity supply to meet electricity demand. However, this
                             shortcoming was partially corrected at the second restructuring by adding a new indicator which measured
                             the ratio of average load shedding to peak demand. However, the theory of change did not address the
                             quality of electricity supply, i.e., voltage fluctuations, which is directly related to the reliability of supply. On
                             the other hand, measuring whether electricity demand has been met “in a sustainable manner” is not evident
                             from the two corresponding indicators: (i) maximum Ain Sokhna Power Plant capacity factor; and (ii) energy
                             conversion efficiency.

                             The addition of the third component to build new transmission lines and substations to strengthen the
                             connection of the Ain Sokhna Power Plant and the El-Tebbin Power Plant and to establish the connection of
                             South Helwan Power Plant to the grid directly contributes to the achievement of the first objective by ensuring
                             uninterrupted evacuation of power from these power plants through multiple transmission lines. Overall, the
                             theory of change for the first objective was broadly robust.

                             Outputs


                                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)



The construction of the 1,300 MW natural gas and HFO-fired Ain Sokhna Power Plant was completed on time
in 2015 and under budget. Furthermore, the construction of the Zahraa el Maadi substation and the
transmission line connecting this substation to Helwan South Power Plant was completed and handed over to
EETC in April 2019, four months after project closing date. Lastly, the new substation which would strengthen
the connection of Ain Sokhna Power Plant to grid was completed in the summer of 2019. The reason for the
delays was the initial lack of interest from bidders due to the 2016 devaluation of the local currency, which
resulted in rebidding of the major procurement package (ICR, p.13).

Outcomes

The Ain Sokhna Power Plant has been operational since 2015 and it generated 6,516 GWh of electricity in
2016 against a target of 6,000 GWh. The power plant is capable of generating up to 9,500 GWh of power
depending on the level of electricity demand. This increase in electricity supply from Ain Sokhna Power Plant
contributed to the elimination of load shedding in the country. The target was to decrease the ratio of average
load shedding to peak demand from four percent to zero, which has been achieved. Since 2015, there has
not been any nationwide blackouts or brownouts. However, this was not achieved only by the electricity
generation from Ain Sokhna Power Plant. In 2015, a total of 3,203 MW of new generation capacity was added
to the Egyptian power system, to which Ain Sokhna contributed 1,300 MW.

When Ain Sokhna Power Project closed in December 2018, the Helwan South Power Plant was still under
construction. Therefore, it was not possible to measure the contribution of the Zahraa el Maadi substation and
the transmission line connecting it to the Helwan South Power Plant to electricity supply in the country (the
substation and the transmission line were financed under the Ain Sokhna Power Project). However, according
to the information from the project team, the Helwan South Power Plant was commissioned in August 2019
and currently supplying electricity to the national grid through the Zahraa el Maadi substation, which is
estimated to be around the target set at 6,723 GWh per year.

As explained in the Theory of Change section above, it is not clear how the other two indicators capture the
achievement of meeting electricity demand "in a sustainable manner." The Ain Sokhna Power Plant achieved
a capacity factor of 75 percent, which was the target, and the power plant is capable of achieving higher
capacity factors should there be a need to increase electricity generation, but the causal link between high
capacity factors and sustainability is not evident because the latter was not clearly defined. Similarly, it is not
clear how the energy conversion efficiency of the power plant, which is 42 percent at normal load and 44
percent at full load, against the target of 40 percent, is causally related to the sustainability of meeting
electricity demand (ICR, p.12).

Overall, the project was substantially successful in meeting electricity demand through increased electricity
supply from the Ain Sokhna Power Plant.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the sector’s financial sustainability.

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)




                            Rationale
                            Outcomes only materialize when there are financial, institutional, human and other resources that are
                            expended as inputs, and implemented in such a way as to produce desired intermediate and final
                            outcomes—in a causal chain. In this project, despite the PAD’s statement of an objective “to improve the
                            sector’s financial sustainability,” there were no resources that were utilized, no activities that were
                            implemented, hence there is no logical justification to expect outcomes to materialize that can be measured
                            and rated in a causal chain. The technical assistance activities to achieve this objective listed under the
                            technical component were funded by other donors as separate activities, i.e., the Energy Pricing funded by
                            Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP), the Framework and Risk Allocation Mechanism
                            for Private Sector Engagement funded by Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) and the
                            Development of a Commercial Wind Framework funded by grants and PPIAF (PAD, p.42-43). In addition, a
                            budget of US$250,000 per year was allocated under programmatic technical assistance for three years to
                            enable continued rapid-response assistance and support, such as the implementation of a pilot time-of-use
                            tariff program, further tariff adjustment, and development of a national energy conversation plan (PAD, p.43).
                            These activities were to lead to two outputs: (i) achievement of cost reflective tariffs; and (ii) increased private
                            investment in electricity generation. It was expected that cost reflective tariffs would improve the financial
                            viability of EEHC and increased private sector investment would further reduce the investments the EEHC
                            would have to make in power generation, both of which would result in improving the sector’s financial
                            sustainability. There is reasonable causal chain between these activities and the achievement of the desired
                            outcome, but these cannot be attributed to this project.

                            Therefore, in the absence of inputs, outputs and outcomes that can be attributed to the project, there is no
                            concrete basis to reasonably hold this project accountable for the achievement of this objective; this objective
                            was not part of the project’s financing or activities or results framework. Hence, the efficacy of the
                            achievement of this objective cannot be rated.



                            Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project substantially achieved the objective of ensuring continuous electricity supply to meet electricity
                            demand through new generation. The construction of the Ain Sokhna Power Plant increased the installed
                            capacity by 1,300 MW and the power plant has been generating more than the original target of 6,000 GWh
                            per year contributing to the overall increase in the electricity generation in Egypt along with other new
                            investments. Yet, there was not sufficient evidence whether electricity demand has been met "in a sustainable
                            manner." Therefore, the achievement of the first objective is rated Substantial, whereas the achievement of
                            the second objective to improve the sector’s financial sustainability cannot be rated because it is not part of
                            the project’s financing or activities or results framework. Overall, the efficacy of the achievement of the project
                            development objective is rated Substantial.



                                                                                                                                  Page 8 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

Alternatives such as regional integration and electricity imports, renewables, and private investment were
rejected as their unit costs for electricity generation were above the long run marginal cost of power used by
EEHC in their calculations (PAD, p.64). It was decided that the construction of a dual-fuel-fired steam turbine
power plant, i.e., natural gas and heavy fuel oil (HFO), was the least cost option due to following reasons: (i) the
power plant could use HFO should there be a problem with natural gas supply; (ii) a steam turbine power plant
would require less maintenance than a combined cycle power plant; (iii) a combined cycle power plant would be
less efficient in the summer than a steam turbine power plant due to high temperatures; and (iv) a steam turbine
power plant would be more stable (ICR, p.36).

The assumptions used in cost-benefit analysis were typical for such a power plant investment. Since there is no
electricity market in Egypt, because the tariff is set by the government, the quantified benefits were taken as the
retail sales of additional electricity to the grid valued at weighted average of willingness-to-pay at US$0.12 per
kWh less transmission and distribution losses (PAD, p.21). Costs were taken as the construction cost, fuel cost,
cost of operation and maintenance (O&M), and the cost of an overhaul maintenance every other six years.
Electricity demand forecast was realistic. The benefits from new job creation were not included in the analysis.
The calculations resulted in an economic rate of return (ERR) of 23.6 percent and a net present value (NPV) of
US$1,748.97 million at a discount rate of 10 percent over a 25-year period.

A similar economic analysis was conducted at project closing. This time in addition to the willingness-to-pay
methodology used in the PAD, two modified approaches were used: (i) updated cost of diesel generation
obtained from the EEHC; and (ii) the willingness of consumers to pay which was used in the Giza North Power
Project. For all other assumptions actual project costs were used, such as the actual cost of the plant, and the
actual generation amount. The economic analysis at project closing based on the willingness-to-pay
methodology used in the PAD resulted in an ERR of 38.9 percent and an NPV of US$3,725 million, which are
higher than the calculations at appraisal. The economic analysis based on the willingness-to-pay derived from
the current cost of diesel generation resulted in a higher ERR and NPV: 47.4 percent and US$4,894 million,
respectively. On the other hand, the ERR and the NPV calculated based on the willingness-to-pay methodology
used in the Giza North Power Project were 17.8 percent and US$1,378 million, respectively, which are lower
than the appraisal figures; the reason for these lower figures is that the willingness-to-pay in the Giza North
Power project was derived from a demand function, which starts low and rises rapidly over time (The ICR (p.37)
notes that it is not clear how this demand function was calculated). The substantially lower actual construction
cost of the power plant, caused by the depreciation of the local currency, which lowered the cost of local
components, and a sharp drop in the cost of power generation equipment, was the main reason for high project
closing ERRs and NPVs.

If the transmission investments that were added in the first restructuring as a third component are included in the
economic analysis based on the willingness-to-pay methodology used in the PAD, project closing ERR drops

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)



from 38.9 percent to 36 percent; this is still substantially higher than the opportunity cost of capital of 10 percent
in Egypt (ICR, p.38). The ICR did not report an NPV for the inclusion of the transmission investments.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

The presence of the same task team leader in Cairo contributed to the efficient implementation of the project.
This was more evident when the country was in political instability between 2011 and 2013, during which the
dialogue with the project implementing units continued. Despite an initial delay in the construction of the Ain
Sokhna Power Plant and the political instability between 2011 and 2013, the power plant entered commercial
operation in the spring of 2015 before the original project closing date of December 31, 2015. The extension of
the project closing date was because of the third component for transmission investment which was added to
the project at first restructuring in December 2013 to utilize the savings occurred due to the lower than estimated
construction cost of the power plant. Although this extension did not adversely affect the operational and
administrative efficiency of the project, the project had to be extended by an additional 18 months to
compensate the complete procurement for the transmission component, which was delayed because of
understaffing and lack staff familiar with the Bank’s procurement guidelines (ICR, p.24).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        99.93
 Appraisal                                                   23.60
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        99.88
 ICR Estimate                                                36.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

At project closing, the relevance of objectives was substantially aligned with the country context and the Bank
strategy, because the focus of the Government of Egypt had shifted from meeting increasing electricity demand
to securing primary energy sources through investing in renewable energy and importing coal for power
generation. The project was substantially successful in achieving the first objective to meet electricity demand,
but it was not clear whether this was achieved in a sustainable manner or not. The achievement of the second
objective to improve the sector’s financial sustainability cannot be rated because it is not part of the project’s
financing or activities or results framework. Given the over-riding focus of the PDOs and the project’s activities
on adding to electricity supplies, the project’s overall efficacy in achieving the objectives is rated
Substantial. Lastly, given the economic rates of return and net present values achieved, the project’s efficiency



                                                                                                        Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)



is rated substantial, while noting that there were moderate shortcomings in terms of slow procurement that
adversely affected and delayed the implementation of the transmission component.

Overall, the outcome of the project is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

A worsening of the financial viability of the utility, i.e., the Egyptian Electric Holding Company-EEHC,
due to low tariffs that do not cover operational and maintenance costs, poses a moderate risk for the
sustainability of the development outcome. Tariffs are set by the government. Although it has been
steadily raising the tariffs, they have not yet reached the long-run cost recovery levels for EEHC (ICR, p.13).
If tariffs fail to cover the operation and maintenance costs, this might lead to a deterioration in the
performance of the power plant.

The development outcome can be adversely affected if the newly built combined cycle power plants,
which are more energy efficient, are given priority over the Ain Sokhna Power Plant in dispatching
electricity. The Ain Sokhna Power Plant is a dual-fuel supercritical power plant which is less efficient than
the newly built super critical power plants. (For reasons why dual-fuel super critical power plant was chosen
as the technology for Ain Sokhna, please see the efficiency section above.) Therefore, on a merit order
basis, those combined cycle power plants should be given priority in dispatching electricity. However, the
dispatch center in Egypt does not dispatch on a purely merit order basis. They take transmission congestion
into consideration when dispatching and try to rotate the load. Furthermore, according to the EEHC, the Ain
Sokhna Power Plant is more reliable than combined cycle plants (ICR, p.24-25). This merit order issue poses
a moderate risk to the development outcome.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The objectives are strategically relevant to the country conditions, and the achievement of the first
  objective to meet electricity demand was adequately supported by the theory of change. The project
  design was simple since the major project activity was the construction of the Ain Sokhna Power Plant.
  However, the second objective to improve the sector’s financial sustainability was not part of the project’s
  financing or activities or results framework; technical assistance activities to achieve this objective were
  to be financed by other donors outside of the Ain Sokhna Power Project, and the theory of change was
  not presented comprehensively by showing explicitly the causal chain of those interventions leading to
  the achievement of the second objective. As the ICR (p.23) states the whole project was designed with a
  focus on the achievement of the first objective "with little attention paid to the second objective."
  Furthermore, the original results framework did not include any indicators fully capturing the achievement


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)



  in meeting the electricity demand; the indicator measuring the ratio of average load shedding to peak
  demand was added at the second restructuring.

  Technical aspects of the project were strong; the project considered other alternatives, such as combined
  cycle power plant and renewables, but given other considerations, i.e., the security of fuel supply, the
  dual-fuel steam turbine option was decided as the best technical and the least cost option. The economic
  analysis was robust, but the total cost estimate at appraisal was much higher than the actual cost of the
  power plant; it was estimated that the power plant would cost US$2.14 million, excluding around US$50
  million for physical and price contingencies, but the actual cost of the power plant was realized at
  US$1.16 million. Adequate project implementation arrangements were in place which benefited from the
  El-Tebbin Project experience (PAD, p.15); the EEHC, as the holding company, was responsible for
  planning and designing projects, whereas the operational affiliates, in this project the EDEPC and, after
  the addition of the third component, EETC, were responsible for the implementation and supervision of
  projects. The financial management of the project was to be overseen by a financial management unit to
  be established at the EDEPC. During appraisal, arrangements took place for the transfer of knowledge
  on financial management from the Cairo Electricity Production Company, the staff of which had
  successfully supported the El-Tebbin Project, to the staff of EDEPC (PAD, p.25). The procurement
  arrangements were also in place; procurement specialists with strong knowledge of the Bank
  procurement were already identified during appraisal (PAD, p.26). The environmental and social aspects
  of the project were defined in detail. The project was classified as Category A according to Environmental
  Assessment (OP 4.01). A full Environmental and Social Impact Assessment report, including an
  environmental and social management plan with adequate and detailed institutional settings, mitigation
  measures, and monitoring plan for potential effect of the project during construction and operation, was
  prepared by an independent consulting firm (PAD, p.27-28). Project risks and mitigation measures were
  adequately identified during appraisal (PAD, p.17-19).

  Overall, the Bank adequately identified, facilitated the preparation of, and appraised the project in order to
  achieve the planned development outcome, but the focus was solely on the achievement of the first
  objective through the construction of the Ain Sokhna Power Plant, and the project design did not support
  the achievement of the second objective.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank’s Task Team Leader was stationed in Egypt during project implementation, which resulted in a
 close relationship and cooperation with the EEHC and project implementing units. This helped both sides
 continue with project implementation, although at a slower pace, during the political crisis between 2011
 and 2013. As a result of the project’s team’s focus on project implementation and the development
 outcome, the Ain Sokhna Power Plant was commissioned in the spring of 2015 before the original project
 closing date. The project team’s supervision of safeguard aspects was adequate; as a result of proper
 implementation of the safeguard policies, the construction was completed without any fatalities or damage
 to the environment. There were no financial management issues reported other than occasional delays in
 the submission of audit reports.


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)



 The project team was proactive in restructuring the project to utilize large savings which occurred due to
 lower than estimated construction cost of the Ain Sokhna Power Plant, for the construction of new
 substations, renovation of one substation and new transmission lines. In the same restructuring, the new
 indicators were added to improve the quality of the results framework and the monitoring and evaluation
 (M&E) design; these efforts focused mostly on capturing the achievement of the first objective.

 Overall, the quality of Bank supervision is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change for the first objective to ensure continuous electricity supply to meet electricity
 demand in a sustainable manner was generally robust. The original results framework included only one
 indicator capturing the increase in electricity generated, which can at best be classified as an intermediate
 outcome. The original monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework did not include an indicator to fully
 capture the project’s success in meeting electricity demand. Although indicators measuring EEHC’s current
 ratio and debt service coverage were relevant, their achievement was not attributable to the project or to
 the Bank’s involvement, since the project and the Bank’s funds did not support the corresponding technical
 assistance activities, which were financed by other donors instead. The intermediate result indicator
 measuring the construction of the Ain Sokhna Power Plant was adequate to capture the achievement of
 this project output. The outcome and intermediate results indicator related to the first objective were
 relevant, measurable, achievable and time-bound. Although pursuing the second objective was financed by
 other donors, the PAD should have at least indicated the M&E design for assessing performance toward
 the achievement of that objective, within the context of a comprehensive theory of change.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E framework was substantially revised at the first restructuring in December 2013 to align the
  indicators to capture the achievement of the project objectives and to measure the output and outcome of
  the newly added third component for transmission investments. Even after the revision, the M&E
  framework did not fully capture the project’s achievement in ensuring continuous supply to meet
  electricity demand; the focus was on measuring the increase in electricity generation. It was only in the
  second restructuring in May 2017 that the indicator of "ratio of average load shedding to peak demand"
  was added to monitor the achievement of the first objective to meet electricity demand.

  As their names suggest, the two of the seven new outcome indicators, i.e., "in a sustainable manner:
  minimum Ain Sokhna power plant capacity factor" and "in a sustainable manner: minimum thermal

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)



  energy conversion efficiency," were added to the results framework at the first restructuring to measure
  the achievement in meeting electricity demand "in a sustainable manner," but it is not possible to
  establish a direct relationship between these two indicators and how they would capture sustainability.
  The other new outcome indicator—financial sustainability: electricity average tariff—was added to capture
  the achievement of the second objective; this was a relevant indicator, but its achievement was not
  attributable to the project, since the project funds did not support the corresponding technical assistance
  activities.

  Data for the construction works were regularly collected. Once the Ain Sokhna Power Plant was
  operational, indicators of "increase in electricity generation" and "the ratio of average load shedding to
  peak demand" were regularly monitored. The EEHC and its affiliates have the capacity to sustain the
  M&E functions and processes after project closing.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were regularly communicated to the government authorities and the project team. Due
  to the nature of the project, the focus was mostly on the implementation of the investment activities.
  Once the construction of the Ain Sokhna Power Plant was completed, the focus shifted to monitoring the
  achievement of the outcomes and the first objective. There was no strategic redirection that can be
  attributed to the M&E findings; the project was restructured in December 2013 to utilize the large savings
  achieved due to the lower than estimated construction cost of the power plant. The M&E data was used
  to provide evidence for the achievement of the first objective.

  Overall, due to the major shortcomings in the M&E design and implementation, especially with respect to
  the monitoring the achievement of the second objective, for which there was no project-financed activity,
  the M&E quality is rated Modest. However, the M&E framework was sufficient to assess the
  achievement of the first objective to meet electricity demand and test the links in the results chain.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category A under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and triggered
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): As a Category A project, a full Environmental and Social
   Impact Assessment (ESIA) report was prepared, which included an environmental and social management
   plan (ESMP) detailing institutional settings, mitigation measures, and monitoring plan for the potential
   effects expected during the construction and operation of the power plant (PAD, p.27). The ESIA was
   disclosed at the World Bank’s Infoshop on September 11, 2008, and in Egypt on September 14, 2008.




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)



  The environmental impacts of the power plant construction were expected as (i) increased dust, noise, and
  vibration; (ii) impact on physical aquagraphy, water quality, and aquatic habitats due to the construction of
  the water intake and discharge structures along the Gulf of Suez; and (iii) increased congestion on the main
  roads around the contrition site (PAD, p.28) The main environmental impacts of the power plant during
  operation were listed as (i) air quality from stack emission; (ii) aquatic impact from cooling water withdrawal
  and discharge; and (iii) noise impact from the plant operation. In addition, because of the construction of the
  transmission lines and substations, it was expected that there might be avian and aircraft hazards, induced
  effects from electromagnetic damages, habitat loss, and contamination from chemical maintenance
  techniques.

  The project complied with the environmental safeguard policy. All construction wastes, including hazardous
  waste, were disposed by licensed and specialized contractors. The water quality was not adversely affected
  by the construction and operation of the power plant. An investigation carried out because of the traces of
  heavy metal found in the shoreline sediment showed that the likely source was the adjacent port and the
  heavy maritime traffic in the Gulf of Suez rather the power plant construction or operation. Cooling water is
  discharged back to the Gulf without causing any environmental damage. Since the power plant is now
  operated using natural gas only, it meets the World Bank and Egyptian Emission and Ambient Air Quality
  Standards. The power plant has adequate desulfurization unit to remove almost all of the sulfur, which is the
  main pollutant, from the emissions. Therefore, should the power plant be operated by heavy fuel oil, it would
  still comply with the relevant regulations. The power plant’s emissions are monitored in real time and the
  measurements are regularly shared with the Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency. Lastly, the project
  closed without any fatalities or major occupational incidents (ICR, p.21-22).

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): This safeguard policy was triggered because of the 130
  kilometers of proposed new transmission lines. Although most of the land on which the transmission lines
  were to be built was desert and belonged to the government, the exact location of the sections of the
  transmission line was not known during appraisal. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared
  and disclosed on the World Bank’s Infoshop and in country along with the ESIA.

  There was no land acquisition required for the transmission lines proposed at appraisal. However, after the
  addition of the construction of the transmission line between the Zahraa El Maadi Substation and the
  Helwan South Power Plant, eight transmission towers were built on land allocated to an agricultural
  cooperative, which was later transferred to individual members of the cooperative. Six landowners were
  affected by the construction of the transmission line towers, and one of them refused to accept the
  compensation for the construction of one tower on his land. The Egyptian Electricity Transmission Company
  (EETC) obtained the required permission from the authorities to access the site and construct the tower.
  The compensation is kept in an escrow account because the landowner’s whereabouts is not known. For
  this acquisition, an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan acceptable to the Bank was prepared by the
  EETC (ICR, p.22).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management
  The project’s financial management arrangements benefited from the experience gained during the
  implementation of the El-Tebbin Project. Within the project management unit, a separate unit was
  established to oversee the financial management of the project. The accounts of the holding company

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)



   EEHC, and the project implementing units of EDEPC and EETC were regularly audited. The project
   accounts were audited by an independent auditor and the audit reports were unqualified. However, some
   audits were delayed (ICR, p.23). The financial management of the project was found satisfactory during
   project implementation. According to the information from the project team,. at the time of the writing of this
   review, US$0.17 million from the IBRD loan was still to be refunded by the borrower.

   Procurement
   Project procurement complied with the World Bank’s guidelines. After the end of the political instability in
   2013, procurement was smooth and effective. As a result of a successful procurement process, the
   construction of the Ain Sokhna Power Plant was completed at a much lower cost than was estimated at
   appraisal. On the other hand, the procurement of the transmission component by EETC was slow because
   of understaffing and lack of personnel familiar with the World Bank procurement guidelines (ICR, p.23).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Modest


12. Lessons

In times of political instability, keeping a dialogue, to the extent possible, with project
implementing agencies may result in a faster and smoother resumption of project activities
once the political situation stabilizes. During the political instability in Egypt between 2011 and
2013, the Bank’s project team and the project implementing agencies of EEHC and EDEPC
continued working on the project preparation and implementation through dialogue. The presence of
the Bank’s Task Team Leader in Cairo was critical in that process. Once the political situation



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)



stabilized in 2013, the project implementation resumed without significant delay and the power plant
construction was completed before the original project closing time.

A large expansion of the project scope to utilize project cost savings may adversely affect
overall project implementation. The project scope was expanded by including a large
transmission component in 2013, four years into project implementation, to utilize the savings that
materialized due to the lower cost of the power plant construction than the cost estimated at
appraisal. When the project scope was expanded, the power plant construction was nearing
completion. The project closing date had to be extended. Furthermore, the transmission component
implementing unit was different than that of the original project; this resulted in delays in
procurement because the project implementing agency did not have staff experienced in Bank’s
procurement procedures. Assuming that there is room for increasing the development impact of a
project, using savings to finance new project activities—hence expanding the project scope—might
be the right decision, but, proper measures should be taken to minimize the impact of such scope
expansion on the overall project implementation.

Recruiting people with experience in the Bank’s procurement guidelines, rather than trying to
train existing staff in Bank’s procurement procedures, can result in a faster and smoother
procurement process. Even though the existing staff of the project implementing agency were
given training in how to apply the Bank’s procurement procedures, they might find it difficult to shift
away from using the local procurement systems and procedures. This was what EEHC experienced
in other projects. Therefore, the Bank’s project team agreed to the EEHC’s request and new
employees experienced in Bank’s procedures were hired for the procurement of the Ain Sokhna
Power Plant. The procurement of the power plant component was completed without any significant
problems, whereas the transmission component faced delays because the EETC staff in charge of
the procurement of this component did not have sufficient experience in Bank procedures (ICR,
p.24).



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise and the narrative is internally consistent. It is candid about the shortcomings of the project
design and the results framework. It mostly follows the Bank guidance. Economic analysis is detailed and
sufficiently comparable to the analysis conducted at appraisal. The safeguards section adequately explains the
implementation of safeguard policies for this Category A project under environmental assessment.

On the other hand, despite being consistent, the ICR’s self-assessment narrative does not adequately support
the ratings. The efficacy analysis does not clearly explain the causal chain from project inputs to project
activities, outputs and outcomes; the analysis is restricted to the achievement of the indicators’ targets, even
though some indicators do not support the achievement of the project outcomes. The ICR does not explain
what technical assistance activities were implemented to achieve the second objective to improve the sector’s
financial sustainability; this shortcoming must be a result of the project design which did not include any

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EG-Ain Sokhna Power (P100047)



technical assistance activity funded by the project—the Key Outputs By Component table (p.32) does not
include any technical assistance activity implemented by the project. However, while the second objective was
funded by other donors, the ICR does not address the implementation aspects and monitoring of results. The
discussion on quality of Bank’s supervision is weak; it is a repetition of some aspects of project implementation,
rather than an explanation of the extent to which the Bank proactively identified and resolved threats to the
achievement of the development outcomes and the Bank’s fiduciary role, as defined in the Bank guidance. The
ICR’s lessons are generally useful and based on evidence outlined in the ICR, but they are mostly generic. The
value of the second lesson is weak, since partial loan closings are possible. The third lesson does not
adequately capture the difficult trade-offs between accelerating procurement processes for short-term gains
versus developing local institutional capacity over the long term. The breakdown of the IBRD loan disbursement
by component is not reported in the ICR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 18
