     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021986

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P120830                                   BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL)

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                    Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-81550                                30-Jun-2017                                        475,607,299.49

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 01-May-2012                               31-May-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          480,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           480,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       476,264,677.42                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo         Fernando Manibog             Christopher David Nelson       IEGFP (Unit 3)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the project is "to support and improve the planning and implementation of public investments
   by strengthening the capacity of the Borrower's planning agency and selected sector secretariats of the
   Borrower [Loan Agreement (LA), p.6)]". The statement of the project's objective in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD) on page 4 is identical, and it remained unchanged during the entire period of project
   implementation.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)



   Because of the compound nature of the above project development objective (PDO), and the ICR's
   approach in assessing the project performance focusing on the results areas, this review will align with the
   core element of the PDO (to support and improve the planning and implementation of public investments), but
   will unpack the latter objective into the results areas that will be assessed as sub-objectives (see Section 4 for
   the sub-objectives). The overall project efficacy will be based on the sub-ratings for the results achieved in the
   four areas of project support or sub-objectives.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Technical Assistance on Public Sector Management (Cost at appraisal of US$55.3
   million, with unknown actual cost)

   The project was to provide technical assistance aimed to strengthen the Borrower's capacity to design,
   implement, monitor and evaluate public investment. The two main activities under this componet consisted
   in (i) the support to investment and human resource planning, contract and public asset management, and
   (ii) the support to monitoring and impact assessment. Specific activities were as follows: (i) the setting up of
   a multi-channel system for public service evaluation; (ii) the provision of training in firm-level benchmarking
   methodology, (iii) the provision of expertise to oversee environmental and disaster risk management, (iv)
   the support to conduct public-private consultation, and finally (v) the support to other diverse technical
   assistance (see more detail in the LA on p.6-7)

   Component 2: Eligible Expenditure Program (EEP), (cost at appraisal of US$423.5 million, with
   unknown actual cost)

   Under this component, the project intended to support the implementation of the Eligible Expenditure
   Programs (EEP) through investments in public sector management, transport, education, and private sector
   development for small and medium-sized enterprises (see for detail in the PAD on p.6, and in the LA on p.7)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost: Total cost at appraisal was estimated at US$847.1 million, with IBRD contribution set at US$480.0
   million. Total actual cost was not provided by the ICR team, but the total IBRD disbursement amounted to
   US$476.3 million or 99.2 percent of the approved amount.



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)



   Financing: The project was financed by an IBRD loan in the amount of US$480.0 million, with
   other contributions totaling US$367.1 million, including the Borrower contribution.

   Borrower Contribution: The ICR team did not provide the detail related to budgeted and actual
   contribution of the Borrower.

   Dates: The project was approved on May 01, 2012, and made effective on October 01, 2012. The project
   was restructured three times : (i) on January 18, 2016 to make changes in one of the implementing
   agencies, in the results framework, in the loan closing date, and in the procurement system of the project;
   (ii) on November 23, 2017 to make further changes in the results framework, and finally (iii) on February 26,
   2019, to extend the loan closing date until May 31, 2019. The project was closed on May 31, 2019, after
   closing date extensions totaling almost two yeras.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project's objectives were in line with the Borrower's priorities.The ICR reported on page 14 that
all project's activities and result areas were consistent with the priorities established by the Government
within the Multiyear Plan 2012–2015, which aimed to strengthen the State's capacity in planning and
executing public investment projects in the selected sectors. The chief goal of the Rio Grande de Sul (RGS)
Government was to stimulate the resumption of economic growth in a tight fiscal environment and to
improve the quality of public services. The Government's strategy had four objectives: "(i) to raise the rate
of growth of investment, incomes and employment; (ii) to promote regional development; (iii) to eliminate
extreme poverty; and (iv) to strengthen civic participation" (PAD, p.2). All the project's areas of focus and
activities were derived from the above key national priorities.

The project's objectives were consistent with the World Bank Group’s strategies at appraisal and at
closing. The World Bank Group's Country Partnership Strategy 2012-2015 (Report #63731-BR) approved
in November, 2011 emphasized four strategic objectives: (i) to increase the volume and productivity of
public and private investments; (ii) to improve the quality and expand the provision of public services for low
income households; (iii) to promote regional economic development; and (iv) to improve natural resource
management and climate resilience. The World Bank’s CPF at the closing date (2018–2023) centers on the
following three pillars, all of which were reflected in the project: (a) fiscal sustainability and improved service
delivery, (b) productivity growth and investments by the private sector, and (c) inclusive and sustainable
development. In addition to these objectives, the TA component intended to strengthen the quality of
service delivery by building technical capacity for informed decision and policy making.

In hindsight, the statement of the PDO lacked a clear scope and delimitation, and ended up being too
complex and partially incongruent with certain activities selected under the project. More specifically, it was
not possible to sustainably achieve the economic development and fiscal responsibility goals without having
specific activities that would contribute to those goals in the short to medium terms. Also, some of the
activities and their accomplishments were not properly covered in the results framework. For instance,
many improvements in data management and governance were accomplished, but were not reflected in the
PDO. Overall, the PDO was both overambitious, yet partially unclear.


                                                                                                        Page 3 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)



               Relevance of objectives and assessment of the project efficacy: Because of the complexity of this
               project both regarding the statement of the PDO and the presentation of the achieved results in the ICR, the
               review of the project efficacy will use the advice provided by both IEG and OPCS regarding the assessment
               of the performance of broad or unclearly worded objectives. While this review will maintain the core wording
               of the PDO (to support and improve the planning and implementation of public investments) as
               the overarching objective, the efficacy assessment will unpack the PDO in key areas of project support that
               will be treated as sub-objectives, imitating in this the ICR's approach. This approach allows (i) the
               discussion of the theory of change that is relevant and specific to each sector of project intervention, and (ii)
               the assessment and rating of achieved results in each area of project intervention or sub-objective.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To Support and Improve the Planning And Implementation of Public Investments in The Infrastructure Sector
                             (Transport)

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             There was no theory of change in the PAD, but the ICR constructed a theory of change presented on
                             pages 8-9 and summarized in this review prior to the presentation of efficacy achieved under each sub-
                             objective. Under the first sub-objective, the constructed theory of change was that improving public
                             investment planning and implementation through strengthening capacity in the transport sector and in the
                             respective implementing agency would result in enhanced capacity of the Government to plan and execute
                             public investments in infrastructure (primarily transport), while preserving fiscal discipline. Increased and
                             diversified efficient investments in the critical sector of transport and infrastructure would finally lead to
                             sustainable and equitable socio-economic development of RGS. Overall, the constructed theory of change in
                             the transport sector was sound, as the activities of supporting the State's paved highway rehabilitation and
                             maintenance triggered the creation of a road pavement management system, which led to improved
                             infrastructure through road repair, the latter contributing in the long-run to private sector competitiveness and
                             economic and social development.

                             Efficacy

                             Results achieved under the first objective related to the infrastructure sector (transport) are detailed below:


                                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)




      The technical assistance (TA) component supported capacity development through trainings on works
         and quality maintenance involving over 100 engineers and fiscal authorities;
        The IT system financed by the project to modernize and upgrade the pavement management
         system of the Rio Grande do Sul (RGS) road agency was adopted by the project's closing date
         and laid the groundwork for substantial productivity gains, road quality improvements, and capacity
         building through more efficient contract management;
        The use of CREMAs (five-year management contracts) and the software purchased under the project
         included measures for a more objective assessment of road projects replacing the politicized process
         that had previously driven program selection;
        Almost 1,200 km of the state’s paved roads were managed under CREMAs by the end of the project;
         and
        The project financed the rehabilitation of 1,557 km of pavement, surpassing the revised target of 1,500
         km, and the management system has now been adopted, enhancing both the quality and productivity
         of road management.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To Support and Improve the Planning and Implementation of Public Investments in the Education Sector

Rationale
Theory of Change

Under this objective, the constructed theory of change was that improving public investment planning and
implementation in the education sector and in the respective implementing agency would result in increased
capacity of the Government to plan and execute public investments in education, while preserving fiscal
discipline. Increased and diversified efficient investments in the education sector would finally lead to higher
socio-economic development. The constructed theory of change was sound, as the key activity under this
objective was to modernize and expand the use of information and communication technology (ICT) in
education. Expected output consisted in implementing a system for assessing learning at primary and
secondary levels, toward the outcome of increasing the technical capacity of selected state agencies for
planning and investment, and enhancing the efficiency of related public investments. The long-term goal was
a contribution to the reduction of poverty and inequality.

Efficacy

Achievements completed under the second sub-objective aimed at supporting the education sector are listed
below:




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)




      Enhanced governance and informed policy-making allowed the State Department of Education
         (SEDUC) to analyze and prioritize policy based on expected results;
        Improved participatory evaluation helped instituting an evaluation system and a systematic data
         collection;
        Technical assistance in the form of third-party consultancies was provided to SEDUC to conduct a
         human resources (HR) diagnostic to improve information flows and automatization of inefficient and
         manual processes;
        The project contributed to creating a virtual continued-education platform, made possible with the
         technological advances, improved staff capacity, and new equipment supported by the project;
        The school and IT modernization focused on acquisition of equipment, including computer lab
         improvements, increasing Internet access, as well as a one-computer-per-child program pilot;
        Rehabilitation of 65 schools that were a priority and included some indigenous schools;
        Socially vulnerable schools were given priority through the creation of 30 nuclei with teacher capacity
         building and the purchase of 2,300 tablets and other digital equipment, such as routers and projectors
         in over 300 schools, and over 60,000 students benefited from the program;
        Improvements in data processing led to improvements in governance and the quality of results in
         learning, with a 3.9 percent increase in Portuguese ratings and 3.2 percent in Math in Grade 6, as well
         as 7.8 percent in Portuguese and 5.2 percent in Math in the first year of high school, results that
         surpassed the revised goal by 10 percent;
        The project contributed to the repair of some of the most vulnerable schools, enhancing their security
         and contributing to improved quality and governance with a new decree for governance since
         2017. These repairs and the improvements in evaluation scores resulted in important improvements
         in the quality of educational infrastructure. There was a 67 percent reduction in schools’ self-rating as
         1 in quality (1 being the worst rating on a scale of 1–5). This result surpassed the revised goal of 40
         percent improvement, which was at 20 percent before restructuring;
        The cumulative number of constructed and refurbished schools projects undertaken showed a marked
         progress with 387 projects being completed, 27 percent higher than the revised target;
        However, contracts in this sector were poorly managed with an exaggerated number of schools per
         contract, leading to poor quality and delays in the completion of works, as most of the works under this
         category were launched with delay and not procured as originally planned, leading to a reallocation of
         over US$50 million to other sectors. Similarly, systematic and institutional improvements in areas such
         as human resources and contract management were delayed.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To Support and Improve the Planning and Implementation of Public Investments in the Science and
Technology Sector

Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)



Theory of change

The constructed theory of change assumed that improving public investment planning and implementation for
the State through strengthening capacity in the specific sector of the science and technology, and in the
respective implementing agency would result in increased capacity of the Government to plan and execute
public investments supporting the private sector, while preserving fiscal discipline and improving
environmental and natural resource management. Increased and diversified efficient investments in the
critical sector of science and technology would finally lead to the expansion of the private sector, and to its
contribution to equitable socio-economic development. Overall, the constructed theory of change was sound,
as the activity of supporting the building and maintenance of science and technological parks and innovation
networks, allowed the launching of (a) economic cluster programs, (b) industrial extension services, and (c)
expansion of science parks and innovation networks. Expected outcomes included (i) the improvement of
governance mechanisms for productive sector development policy, and (ii) the enhancement of private sector
competitiveness.

Efficacy

Achievements completed under the third sub-objective aimed at supporting the private sector are listed
below:

      The project focused on the responsiveness of services offered to meet private sector demands,
       strengthening internal management and external monitoring of cluster programs, and improving
       cooperation between the private and public sectors;

      The program enabled the construction of several technological parks, along with strengthening 3
       innovation networks and supporting the creation of 15 incubators with both enterprise and individual
       beneficiaries (detailed in table 3 of the ICR);

      The impact evaluation unit that carried out the evaluation was finally set up and contributed to the
       institutionalization of an M&E culture, and the unit produced an evaluation of results of this program
       area from the second half of project implementation;

      The project financed three new technology parks and supported several others in strengthening their
       competitive advantage. Almost 20,000 new jobs were generated as a result of the three consolidated
       parks. This was 30 percent more than the target of 15,000, even after the upward revision from the
       original target of 10,000 and more than double the baseline of 8,200;

      The program also supported improved governance and monitoring of economic clusters. Five pilot
       clusters were selected, and for each cluster, the program supported a strategic plan to address
       necessary improvements in governance, capacity building, technology and innovation, sustainability,
       and market development. The program targets were met with 20 agreements signed with the Local
       Production Arrangements, and a 56 percent increase in the number of collective actions among
       cluster participants;

      The program conducted over 7,000 consultations with a renewed methodology across 380
       municipalities on benchmarking, strategic planning, loss reduction, and innovation and sustainable
       production. After being revised downward from the original goal of 20, the program surpassed the goal

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)



       to sign and renew at least nine agreements with extension services by signing 10 agreements. The
       quality of services offered, measured by percentage of firms subsequently contracting other upgrading
       services was partially achieved with a 21 percent increase, falling short of the revised goal of a 30
       percent increase. The impact evaluation for this activity showed a 5 percent increase in income, 70
       percent increase in firm survival, and 4 percent increase in links for participating companies, along
       with the creation of almost 4,000 new jobs.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To Support and Improve the Planning and Implementation of Public Investments in the Public Sector, Fiscal
and Economic Management

Rationale
Theory of change

The constructed theory of change was that improving the planning and implementation of public investment in
the fiscal and economic management through strengthening capacity of the State would result in increased
capacity of the Government to promote development in general, while preserving fiscal discipline. Diversified
and efficient investments in the public sector and fiscal management in general would finally lead to equitable
socio-economic development. Overall, the constructed theory of change was unclear under this objective.
There was room for refining the theory of change under this sub-objective and ensure that there are specific
activities leading to corresponding outcomes. Although there were significant achievements related to
economic and public sector-wide management in general, the results chain linking those results to project
activities was unclear.

Efficacy

Results achieved under this objective are also indirectly linked to the three objectives discussed above and
are summarized below:

      Overall, the project provided TA investments to achieve results in capacity building and HR
       planning, asset, contract, risk, data and environment management, as well as fiscal and economic
       management;

      Capacity Building: The project addressed the goal of strengthening investment planning and HR
       management through the organization of 80 hours of in-company trainings in HR management, high
       impact leadership, and public project and process management. The project also
       supported exchanges and educational trips to improve benchmarking, built a project database,
       created a methodology for investments, and developed the ability to analyze the socio-economic
       viability of future projects. Finally, the project financed the purchase of strategic equipment to improve
       planning capacity, reduce inefficiencies, and allow for effective acquisition;


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)




  Public Contract Management: The project funded activities to improve public contract management,
   including (i) the acquisition of the management data system which is now fully operational and has
   resulted in improvements in data processing, increased productivity of acquisitions, and allowed for
   cross-data analysis and reducing irregularities, and (ii) the organization of six capacity-building training
   sessions for staff, along with the construction of a dedicated training room.

  Public Asset Management: Achievements aimed to yield gradual long-term improvements in
   economic development, such as (i) strengthened asset management and capacity building for public
   investment; (ii) improvements in planning and implementation of public investments aimed to improve
   the management of public assets through a new system for managing and disposing of public real and
   non-real estate assets; and the purchase of a software and contracting of an IT company to analyze
   and cross-check the inventory. The above achievements resulted in the cumulative number of real
   estate assets in inventory reaching 5,844 assets, just short of the revised 8,000 goal. The
   project improved efficiency in the purchase and sale of assets, communication between state
   agencies, and gains in productivity and time savings. An updated database is fully operational and
   institutionalized with the successful submission of a draft public asset management law to the
   legislative assembly. The sustainability of this process was strengthened by the creation of the Sub-
   Secretary of Patrimony within the Department of Planning and Management (SEPLAG), with capacity-
   building training sessions completed for over 100 staff;

  Improved Administration of Pensions: This operation supported the strengthening of the State
   administration of pensions, the largest state expenditure, while improving investment capacity within
   SEPLAG. Key reforms included the reduction of the number of administrative staff, and automating
   the processes related to pension administration. These automations led to the digitalization and the
   purchase of equipment. Legislative changes to facilitate investments in the private market helped
   improve the overall administration of funds. Finally, TA helped to turn PROGESTÂO into the largest
   investment fund in the state, now considered a best practice in the country due to efficiency gains in
   investment management;

  Public sector coordination: Intersectoral coordination across and within each sector was in large
   part successfully implemented with the supervision of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU).
   Adherence to the SWAp instrument strengthened governance and communication between
   government agencies, creating incentives for results-based informed policy making and strengthening
   data management;

  Environment and Disaster Risk Management: Key achievements were as follows: (i) setting up an
   environmental licensing and public communication system, which contributed to reducing the average
   time for the request for environmental regulation from 826 days to 421 days, almost double the target
   of 620 days, (ii) automating previously manual processes for the purchase of equipment, along with
   increased process digitalization, resulted in gains in productivity and transparency;(iii) developing an
   ecological-economic zoning system and completing a survey of environmental, socioeconomic, and
   institutional data as part of a diagnostic study led to strategic guidelines for influencing policy making
   and corporate actions that have a potential impact on the specific environmental zone, (iv) the
   information obtained was used to feed rich data into the new software that is currently available online
   and has already influenced policy making, such as in mapping out new indigenous and family fishery
   areas, and (v) toward creating a disaster risk monitoring system and situation room, the project
   supported improvements in disaster risk management, which was in a large part accomplished with

                                                                                                Page 9 of 20
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)



                                   the formulation of a disaster risk policy. At the same time, communication and joint decision making
                                   between the actors have improved and the state’s environmental policy and response to disaster have
                                   permitted better risk prevention and effective management.

                                  Data Management: The project enhanced effectiveness of data management and contributed to
                                   informed policy making and transparency. In partnership with the army, the proejct supported
                                   systematic updates to imaging and cartography, which were then fed to an online system that
                                   currently integrates geopolitical, social, health, education, transport, and environmental data. This
                                   database and software allow for inputting raw data from all the participating secretaries and cross-
                                   referencing it with large amounts of data, creating a visually appealing dashboard, providing
                                   transparency, and strengthening communication and policy making across agencies. Over 100 people
                                   from across the state and different sectors were trained in the use of the software. The recently
                                   inaugurated system already had access from around the world with more than 7,000 users per month.

                                  Fiscal Management and Economic Development: The key DPO indicators in this area of support -
                                   the primary fiscal balance, the investment expenditure evolution, and the revenue from Tax on
                                   Circulation of Goods and Services- were defined during a period of strong economic growth, but could
                                   not reach their initial goals and were directly influenced by the 2015 deep recession. The first indicator
                                   had to be reduced, anchoring the goals into the Action Plan negotiated with the Federal Government.
                                   The project redefined the targets for the latter two indicators and adjusted their calculation to became
                                   cumulative during the FY2017 restructuring. These adjustments allowed for the completion of both
                                   goals: R$4,862 million in investment from the R$1,047 million baseline, and R$150,138 million in
                                   revenues in tax on circulation of goods and services (ICMS tax) from the R$22,500 million baseline.

                                  The performance in the area of fiscal management and economic development was negligible,
                                   because there were neither specific activities devoted toward the achieved outcome nor some
                                   discussion of the attribution the outcome achieved in this sub-area. Given that no specific activities
                                   were identified in the project to directly address de achieve outcome in the fiscal and economic
                                   developments, the above achievements cannot be attributed only to this project. Because of the
                                   importance of this sub-area of results, it impacted negatively on the efficacy under this sub-objective.




                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Project's efficacy can be summarized as follows:


                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)




         In support to the infrastructure sector (transport), the project surpassed targets in rehabilitating
          the State’s paved roads, improved the sector management systems, and enhanced both the quality
          and productivity of road management.
         Results arising from improved planning and implementation of public investments in the education
          sector were: (i) rehabilitated schools, including some indigenous schools and socially vulnerable
          schools, which resulted in an increase of the cumulative number of constructed and refurbished
          schools, and in important improvements in the quality of educational infrastructure, and (ii)
          improved data processing leading to enhanced governance and quality of results in learning.
         In support to the planning and implementation in the science and technology in favor of the private
          sector, the following results were achieved: the project (i) enabled the construction of several
          technological parks and the creation of incubators with both enterprise and individual
          beneficiaries, and strengthened their competitive advantage; (ii) contributed in the institutionalization
          of an M&E culture; (iii) contributed to the creation of new jobs; (iv) improved governance and
          monitoring of economic clusters; and (v) supported improvements in governance, capacity building,
          technology and innovation, sustainability, and market development.
         Toward improving the planning and implementation of public investment in the fiscal and economic
          management, results were achieved in the areas of capacity building, public contract and asset
          management, public sector coordination, environment and disaster risk management, and data
          management. Some limited results were achieved in the fiscal management and monitoring, but they
          cannot be attributed to this project, as there were no specific activities devoted to their achievement.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency: At appraisal, an economic and financial analysis was conducted and covered the
following: (i) the economic analysis was run only for the transport sector, and the results of the internal rate of
return and the net present value (NPV) for transport investments were estimated at 36% and US$260 million
respectively, (ii) the PAD made fiscal projections during the period of project implementation as follows: (a)
current revenues were expected to be affected by proposed changes to the sharing rule determining State
specific transfers, and those related to the allocation formula for royalties that could offset potential revenue
losses from transfers and tax reform. Overall, any reforms contemplated during the project implementation
would be gradual, minimizing the total net effects on revenue collection and allowing for adjustment in the
meantime. The projections in the PAD indicated that the sustainability of the fiscal and debt trajectories over
2010-20 was to remain robust despite the changes expected to occur during project implementation.

The ICR's economic analysis was limited to transport investments, and the NPV was estimated at US$254.6
million at a 15 percent discount rate with an Economic Rate of Return (ERR) of 33 percent for the full program
implementation period. This analysis is based on improved road access for populations along rehabilitated roads
and cost savings due to CREMAs. The ICR collected limited details on the impact of the project areas
of education and private sector development, and it was not possible to estimate the ERR for these project
areas. The program design was not focused on short-term economic return, but was centered on public sector
efficiency gains in terms of improved planning and greater efficiency in administering public investments. Such

                                                                                                        Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)



investments are likely to have considerable long-term impacts but are difficult to quantify in the short term.
Finally, while performance indicators related to fiscal developments were provided, there was no assessment or
evidence regarding the program impact on the public finance developments in RGS at closure, as was the
case at appraisal.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: The ICR did not discuss this aspect of project implementation
under this heading. At project's effectiveness, there was limited institutional capacity across all implementing
agencies, and this had serious implications on the project's launch and implementation performance during the
first years. Furthermore, there were disagreements and dysfunctional channels of communication among many
of the government implementation agencies. Some secretariats went through more than three restructurings,
while other secretariats and departments were incorporated into its a larger structure, leading to shifts in
teams, and strategy, budget and process changes. Moreover, many of the implementing teams were not formed
at the onset of the project and changed on several occasions, creating a lack of ownership, continuity, and
changes in the direction of activities. Despite these challenges, the World Bank team was actively engaged with
a highly proactive PIU, offsetting some of the exogenous factors and contributing to the successful
implementation of most of the project activities.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   46.00
 Appraisal                                                36.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   46.00
 ICR Estimate                                             33.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the project's objective was substantial. While all areas of focus were consistent with the
borrower's priorities and in line with the World Bank's strategies until the project's closure, the project
development objective was unclear on how to achieve some outcomes, and the project scope was
overambitious. The project's efficacy was also substantial, reflecting the significant results in the sectors
of transport, education, private sector support, and public sector management, despite the limited achievements
in the area of fiscal and economic management. Efficiency was modest, resulting in an overall project outcome
of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)



   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

This review concurs with the three areas of risks to the development outcome identified in the ICR on page
34, and summarized below:

(i) First, the dysfunctional political environment and the multiple institutional changes might constitute
impediments to the sustainability of project achievements and investments. The lack of commitment to fiscal
adjustments at the State assembly level might make it difficult for the Borrower to keep focus on fiscal
sustainability objectives as pursued by the project;

(ii) Second, the macroeconomic instability of the country as a whole and the fiscal imbalances at the State
level present a major challenge to the sustainability of the results achieved, especially as regards to the
reliance of public investments maintenance on the Federal Government budget. In fact, during the operation
itself, the State was forced to declare a fiscal calamity (bankruptcy), making it difficult for institutional
improvements to continue in the long term; and

(iii) Finally, expected reshuffle in the Government and senior staff turnover could present risks to the
governance improvements and informed decision-making changes made at the state level, and the technical
capacity gains achieved through the TA component may wane over time. The State’s financial challenges
might put the sustainability of the above achievements in jeopardy, indicating that less ambitious activities
with longer-term financing possibilities might have generated more impactful results.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The preparation of the project drew on lessons learned from previous SWAps implemented by the World
  Bank in the region. The multisector operation was underpinned by thorough discussions with key
  stakeholders in all the respective sectors supported by the project and in close coordination with
  a dedicated PIU. Furthermore, the design of the project included a major TA component, aimed at
  building capacity in governance, M&E, and other more sector-specific skills.

  However, the project faced the following key challenges at appraisal: (i) a rushed preparation due to
  pressure from both the Government and the World Bank, (ii) a limited technical capacity and insufficient
  time at the project launch, and (iii) a lack of experience in project design and of clear understanding of
  the World Bank’s contractual, procurement, and fiduciary rules and regulations. While the project
  supported capacity building during project implementation, this could not correct the impact of the limited
  capacity in the first two years, which affected all the sectors involved and resulted in restructurings,
  reallocations, cancellations and inability to reach some desired results. Finally, the selection of the SWAp
  as the financial instrument was not fully appropriate for the project, given the lack of clearly defined
  Eligible Expenditure Programs before project approval.


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)



  The project design and preparedness were weakened by (i) an unreasonably broad scope of the project,
  (ii) a lending instrument not sufficiently internalized by key local stakeholders, and (iii) a weak M&E
  framework, all of which did not align with the limited implementation capacity of the line agencies involved
  in the project. While the project responded to the State’s needs and priorities, it was designed in record
  time across a multisector agenda with very ambitious goals. Time and budget constraints placed on the
  original task team resulted in the design of a project that lacked a clear scope, and sometimes the
  required ownership, as well as targets based on inaccurate estimates that were ultimately revised.

  Although many of the risks were adequately identified, mitigation measures proved to be inadequate for
  resolving many of the implementation challenges, especially in the first two years. Additionally, country-
  level risks were underestimated and proved to exert the strongest negative impact on the operation.

  With respect to social safeguards [Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) and Resettlement Policy Framework
  (RFP)], the instruments were prepared by the client, consulted with communities, approved by the World
  Bank, and published in 2012.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Project implementation was monitored and documented with limited but later improved consistency, after
 the first restructuring. Between 2012 and 2019, 13 Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) were
 prepared and filed. However, the ISRs and Aide Memoires had some shortcomings in documenting the first
 half of project implementation. Similarly, recording of the restructurings had shortcomings as well, with
 limited detail or scattered documentation to account for all the reallocations and changes to the results
 framework.

 Supervision missions comprised multidisciplinary supervision teams that were well involved throughout
 project implementation, including strong engagement with the PIU and implementing agencies. However,
 the TTLs turnover with four task team leaders managing the project, including changes in specialists
 throughout its lifetime, negatively affected the supervision performance. The changes in specialists
 responsible for financial management and procurement particularly affected progress in project
 implementation. For instance, funds devoted to rehabilitating schools -- for which related activities were
 delayed and lacked the adequate documentation that show on-the-ground accomplishments -- were
 reallocated. The ICR did not report on the project's performance as regards to fiduciary issues, including
 the status of the external audit of the project at the time of project closure.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The annex 1 of the PAD summarized the project's results framework, which was composed of 4 Project
 Development Objective (PDO) indicators, 8 disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs), and 12 performance
 indicators (PIs) to complement monitoring. Given the results-based approach under the SWAp, the M&E
 design was of considerable importance to stimulate the desired focus on results and M&E in the
 participating agencies. The responsibility for monitoring and reporting on the program was placed in a unit
 located within the State Secretariat of Planning and Management, which played an essential role in
 ensuring the timely monitoring of the 12 PIs that were identified to measure specific interventions in each of
 the four thematic areas.

 While most PDOs and DLIs were designed to directly reflect the achievements linked to the program's
 activities, some of them were flawed, given their inability to measure the results of project activities directly
 or show causality. Too many PDO-level indicators depended on binary yes/no answers and failed to
 assess gradual progress toward the outcome. The PDO itself was broad and not well formulated or linked
 to clear PDO indicators with alignment to specific project subcomponents/activities. Moreover, some of the
 DLIs and intermediate indicators were neither measurable nor attributable. For example, the first three
 DLIs, focusing on fiscal sustainability, were inappropriate, given their inability to measure project actions
 directly. Finally, the design of the M&E framework was also inadequate to measure and quantify
 accomplishments of the TA components.

 The selection of the DLIs was based on the history of fiscal imbalances identified during previous
 operations of the World Bank and their inclusion in the Results Framework was meant to incentivize fiscal
 responsibility within the operation. However, this did not produce the desired results, because the project
 was unable to directly influence the fiscal situation, but instead created challenges to properly assess the
 project accomplishments.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was done through the Aide-memoires prepared after each supervision mssion, and
  the filed semi-annual ISRs. In particular, the ISRs provided an update of the status of the PDOs, based
  on the information provided from implementation agencies on the ground. However, poor M&E and
  absence of data during the first half of project implementation reduced the M&E input to project
  supervision.

  The definition and targets of the PDO, DLIs, and PIs were revised during the midterm review in
  December 2014, and in the first two restructurings to accommodate the project’s implementation needs.
  The two restructurings aimed to revise the results framework were implemented, largely offsetting the
  limitations and enabling the project to reach all its main objectives and their targets. Despite improved



                                                                                                       Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)



  supervision, the World Bank team did not adequately reassess the results framework during the different
  restructurings, which would have addressed limitations arising from the project’s design.




c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR did not report on the M&E utilization to improve project implementation. However, it can be
  inferred that the restructuring operations were initiated based on the feedback received from the Aide-
  memoires prepared after supervision missions, and the ISRs filed in the project's tracking system of the
  project.

  While the M&E framework ultimately made some important contributions in the strengthening of the
  results-based framework culture within the project implementation agencies and the State at large, it
  had shortcomings at design and throughout the life of the project. Improvements in monitoring,
  recording, and providing technical support throughout project implementation mitigated some of the
  challenges and inconsistencies described earlier, and contributed to the project's accomplishments.
  However, M&E for this project remained one of its weakest aspects throughout the project’s lifetime.
  Based on the above considerations, the overall quality of M&E is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The operation was classified as a category B project and the following policies were triggered at
   project approval: (i) Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01, (ii) Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04, (iii) Physical
   Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11, (iv) Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10, and (v) Involuntary Resettlement
   OP/BP 4.12. Environmental and indigenous safeguards initially created an implementation bottleneck given
   the State agencies’ lack of familiarity with the World Bank’s relevant processes. The initial idea for new
   highway construction was abandoned in part due to the World Bank’s safeguards restrictions, which
   differed significantly from the local legislature by requiring provisions for displaced families to be placed in a
   similar or better situation. With the new focus on road restoration, the safeguards manual was prepared with
   participation from a number of affected indigenous communities. This accomplishment helped enable better
   project actions, including the selection of adequate bus stops, provisions for traffic security education within
   indigenous schools to help avoid accidents, and the initiation of a long-term communication channel not
   previously available to these communities.

   In 2011, a social assessment was carried out within the program’s geographic area and indicated the
   presence of 33,000 indigenous peoples, representing 0.3 percent of the population of RGS. The social
   safeguards instruments (IPP and RPF) were prepared by the client, consulted with communities, approved
   by the World Bank, and published in 2012. Semi-annual supervision missions included a social specialist



                                                                                                      Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)



   who provided TA to strengthen the social development skills of the client institutions and integrated a social
   team that would oversee the implementation of the social safeguards of the project.

   The project adopted extensive frameworks, policies and actions through its implementation of the activities
   under the fourth objective, for aspects related to improving the environment and disaster risk
   management. Despite good social safeguards performance by the client since 2013, the project was rated
   Moderately Unsatisfactory since September 2018, given that the construction works of the four indigenous
   schools and the maintenance and improvements of four roads in indigenous territories were not expected to
   be concluded by project closing.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   While the project provided TA supporting financial management and procurement in the implementing
   agencies, the ICR did not provide a review and discussion of the performance of the project's
   fiduciary function during the project implementation. However, the supervision missions and the ISRs did
   not report any special issues in the fiduciary areas. Procurement and financial management functions were
   rated either satisfactory or highly satisfactory throughout the period of project implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR didn't identify any unintended impacts.



d. Other
   The ICR did not mention any other issues.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)



12. Lessons

 This review concurred with the key lessons identified in the ICR, which are summarized and
rephrased below:

      To maximize implementation readiness and results, Bank project teams need to be
       provided adequate time, and appropriate technical and financial resources. Project
       implementation is facilitated or hindered by the quality at entry. The identification of project
       components and underlying sub-components need to be the primary focus of both the design
       and implementation phases of a project. Stringent deadlines for project approval, limited
       staff, and lack of sufficient mechanisms to offset the limits in capacity, are likely to
       compromise the project design and implementation. In the case of complex or innovative
       projects, additional time, financial and technical resources should be provided to the task
       team at preparation to ensure quality at entry that will determine smooth
       implementation. Implementation shortfalls in this project resulted from a task team with
       limited experience tasked to meet an unrealistic deadline for delivery.

      Associating TA activities with investments can help achieve sustainable outcome
       across all result areas. The provision of TA activities to the agencies engaged in carrying
       out the Eligible Expenditure Program investments significantly contributed to the progress
       toward the PDO targets. The TA activities also helped enhance the sustainability of achieved
       outcome by institutionalizing the underlying changes in public sector management and
       incorporating legal and technological tools.

      An effective results framework needs to link activities to PDOs and effectively
       measure the TA performance . Identification of indicators and their measurement
       methodologies need to be participatory using adequate expertise and experience to fully
       reflect priorities of key stakeholders and avoid indicators with limited measurability. All
       indicators should be clearly associated with the PDO to make sure that links between the
       project activities and outcomes are clearly drawn. The Results Framework for the program
       partially failed to account for and measure some important results and outcomes, especially
       those accomplished within the TA component. Incorporating TA-linked outcomes and outputs
       into the Results Framework would have enabled a clearer evaluation and better
       communication of important project achievements. In the future, incorporating more
       indicators to measure the performance of TA would enhance the design and achievement of
       the outcome sustainability.

      While staff turnover in the World Bank team and in the Borrower agencies is
       unavoidable, implementation arrangements are needed to ensure the continuity of
       action toward the project outcome. On the government side, key ingredients underpinning
       project performance included: (i) sustained government ownership and commitment; (b)
       strong leadership for project oversight and management; and (c) a functionally dedicated
       Project Management Unit, whether composed of government staff or consultants, with an
       explicit mandate to work on the project. Leadership changes associated with four different
       task team leaders over the seven-year life of the project also contributed to some difficulties




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)



        in implementation. Both the WB and the Borrower needs to integrate mechanisms to ensure
        that rotation of staff doesn't affect the progress of project implementation.

       The impact of a program or a project lies in large part in the way it incorporates
        activities supporting long-term sustainability. A less ambitious project design that
        incorporated sustainability mechanisms such as continued funding schemes could produce
        more meaningful and long-lasting results and stronger impact. For instance, requiring a
        copayment could have produced a more sustainable project result, or focusing on larger
        scale technological changes could have made a stronger impact. Impact evaluation activities
        should be given a more central focus and included during the design stage. Design of an
        appropriate M&E system for the project as a whole along with each specific area could
        amplify the project’s success, especially in the long term. Impact evaluations within each
        sector should be encouraged, while technical staff should receive training on how to better
        design and implement such evaluations. Additionally, a more rigorous independent midterm
        evaluation should be carried out within and across the different project areas. This would
        help ensure that the project properly identifies appropriate adjustments when activities are
        not achieving the desired results and impact.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The project supported a number of key sectors underpinning the future development of the RGS by
  providing investments and TA. The preparation of a PPAR a few years after the project closing would shed
  light on the impact of the project and allow the formulation of more lessons in the use of the SWAp instrument
  by the World Bank to support its clients.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a comprehensive account of the project design and implementation, with sufficient focus on
the achieved results and the lessons learned from the project experience. The ICR provides a thorough
description of the results achieved in the four areas of project intervention related to infrastructure (transport),
education, support to the private sector, and public sector management as well as fiscal and economic
management. In each area, key outputs and outcomes were identified and discussed in comparison with
original and revised program targets. Lessons learned were identified in the ICR and they reflect the experience
of project design and implementation. Aspects of the ICR that could have been improved include: (i) the
operational and administrative efficiency of the project could have been discussed further, (ii) there was no




                                                                                                     Page 19 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (SIL) (P120830)



discussion of attribution of the project results, and (iii) the information on the project costs in the Annex 3
needed to be updated. Overall, the quality of the ICR is substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                        Page 20 of 20
