     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Community Empowerment Program (P125405)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021763

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P125405                                 National Community Empowerment Program

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Indonesia                               Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82130,TF-12192                     31-Dec-2015                                         281,566,854.91

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Nov-2012                             31-Dec-2018

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         266,000,000.00                                   23,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                          286,957,306.72                                   20,957,306.72

 Actual                                      281,573,783.95                                   20,957,306.72




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani               Pellekaan




 P131296_TBL
 Project ID                              Project Name
 P131296                                 National Community Empowerment Program ( P131296 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                               0

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)


                                                                                                Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Community Empowerment Program (P125405)



 20-Nov-2012

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                     0.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                                  0.00                                              0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDOs) as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 6) and the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 7) were:

   " To support the Republic of Indonesia to ensure the urban poor in participating Kelurahans (urban
   wards) benefit from improved local governance and living conditions".

   The PAD (page 7) states that, to achieve this objective, the project will: (a) strengthen and institutionalize
   elected representative organizations held accountable to communities: (b) provide grants to communities
   directly and transparently to finance an open menu of activities aimed at poverty alleviation: (c) enhance the
   capacity of central and local governments to partner with community organizations in public service provision:
   and (d) increase awareness of disaster risk mitigation and mainstream measures of resilience.

   For the purpose of this review’s assessment of the extent to which the PDO was achieved in Section 4 below
   it will be parsed into two objectives, namely:

   Objective 1: To ensure that urban poor in participating kelurahans benefit from improved local governance
   conditions

   Objective 2: To ensure that urban poor in participating kelurahans benefit from improved living conditions



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were four components (PAD, pages 8 -9).



                                                                                                  Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    National Community Empowerment Program (P125405)



  1. Capacity Building for Communities and Local Governments. The estimated cost at appraisal was
  US$85.1 million. The actual cost was US$79.6 million. This component aimed at providing capacity building
  support on community development to:

  • the Board of Trustees of the Badan Keswadayaan Masayarakat (BKMs) for preparing community
  development plans, using Kelurahan Grants for implementing sub-projects, and supporting consolidation of
  poverty alleviation and Community Driven Development (CDD) plans.

  • community groups in participating Kelurahans (community volunteers and local government officials) for
  planning and monitoring sub-projects. and

  • the Revolving Loans Fund (RLF) unit staff to support well-performing RLFs. (Under the approach
  adopted, revolving loans to non-performing RLFs,were to be phased out and well-performing RLFs would
  continue to receive grants as an incentive to maintain good loan repayment among its members).

  2. Kelurahan grants. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$373.9 million. The actual cost was
  US$544.0 million. This component co-financed Kelurahan grants for two types of activities.

  • sub-projects identified in the community development plans for: (i) prioritized infrastructure investments:
  (ii) income generating activities: and (iii) social programs to the poorest and the vulnerable groups: and

  • piloting three interventions: (i) empowering women's group in Aceh Province (This province was targeted
  in view of its more conservative, male-dominated culture): (ii) spatial development programs for
  neighborhood development targeting the poorest neighborhoods in about 200 kelurahans: and (iii)
  strengthening the livelihoods of individuals in poor communities.

  3. Implementation Support and Technical Assistance (TA). The estimated cost at appraisal was
  US$41.3 million. The actual cost was US$36.7 million. This component financed the following activities:

  • project management support and technical assistance at the central level, to the teams of Oversight
  Service Providers (OSP) in provinces and to the OSP offices in participating district governments, city
  coordination teams and community facilitators.

  • monitoring support and maintaining a complaint handling system

  • conducting evaluation surveys for monitoring the outcomes and impacts of the National Community
  Empowerment Program.

  4. Contingency for Disaster Response. Given the high risk of catastrophic events, a provisional zero-
  dollar component was included to allow for rapid allocation of funds in the event of a national disaster. No
  costs were incurred for this component.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$500.0 million. The actual cost was US$660.3 million.
  The actual cost was higher in view of the increase in the scope of project activities during implementation
  (discussed in section five).


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Community Empowerment Program (P125405)



   Project financing. The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$266.0 million and a US$23.5 million
   grant from the National Community Empowerment Program (PNPM) to support program activities in Aceh
   province. US$260.6 million of the IBRD loan and US$20.9 million of the grant were disbursed. The
   difference between the appraisal estimates and actual disbursements were due to the significant exchange
   rate fluctuations during implementation (During appraisal the exchange rate was US$1 = 9,550 Indonesian
   Rupiah (INR) and at closing US$1 was approximately equal to INR14,000). There was parallel financing for
   similar activities in the thirteen provinces not covered in this project from the Islamic Development Bank
   (PAD, paragraph 36).

   Borrower contribution. Counterpart funding from national, local and Community Organizations was
   estimated at US$210.8 at appraisal. Their actual contribution was significantly more than planned at
   US$370.0 million.

   Dates. The project approved on November 2012, became effective on December 28, 2012 and was
   scheduled to close on December 31, 2015. The project closed three years behind schedule on December
   31, 2018.

   Other changes. There were four Level 2 restructurings (including three for the IBRD loan and one for
   the PNPM Trust Fund).

   The following changes made through the first restructuring on December 11, 2014: There were
   disbursement delays in the wake of the reorganization of the executing agencies (the Ministry of Public
   Works and the Ministry of Housing which were merged into a single agency - the Ministry of Public Works
   and Housing). The closing date was extended by a year to December 31, 2016, for completing the affected
   sub-projects and for financing TA for preparing a follow-on project (the National Slum Upgrading Project),
   that was expected to serve the same kelurahans as this project.

   The project was restructured on December 12, 2014, to extend the closing date for the PNPM Trust Fund
   by 23 months and fifteen days to December 15, 2016 for completing the ongoing activities.

   The closing date was extended by nine months to September 30, 2017. Savings of US$17.0
   million, realized due to the exchange rate changes during implementation, were allocated for supporting the
   start up of the follow-on project mentioned above.

   Two changes were through the fourth restructuring on September 29, 2017. Following flash flooding in
   Bima, West Nusa Tenggara province, US$14.5 million was reallocated for reconstruction of the affected
   areas. This activity was financed from the project savings to provide additional support to 300,000
   beneficiaries. The closing date was extended by two years to December 31, 2018 for completing the
   reconstruction activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. The PDOs were relevant in the country context. At appraisal, about 44 percent of
Indonesia's population (233 million) lived in urban areas. Over the next four decades, the country was

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      National Community Empowerment Program (P125405)



               expected to add 56 million persons in its urban areas and urban poverty was expected to surpass rural
               poverty by 2020. Delivery of basic services remained inadequate in urban areas, with fewer than three
               percent of urban households having access to piped sewage connection and only 20 percent of the solid
               waste was being collected and transported to final disposal. Meeting the challenges associated with rapid
               urbanization was important to the government strategy.

               Government strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with those of the Community Driven Development
               (CDD) articulated in the National Program for Community Empowerment Program, widely known by its
               Indonesian acronym PNPM Mandri, launched in August 2006. This program was established as an
               umbrella program for bringing together community driven poverty related initiatives. The premise of the
               program was that community level infrastructure will better serve community needs and do so at lower
               investment cost when it is planned and implemented by communities themselves. By 2008, the program
               was operating in all rural and urban areas.

               Alignment with the Bank strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with the Bank’s assistance strategy for
               Indonesia. The core engagement area on community development and social protection of the Country
               Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2009-2012, articulated the need for designing and expanding programs that
               promoted inclusive growth and CDD programs. The PDOs continued to be relevant to two of the six key
               areas of engagement under the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2016-2020 when the project
               closed. Engagement area one highlighted the need for developing national infrastructure for growth and
               development, through supporting sectors such as domestic water supply and sanitation. Engagement area
               four of the CPF underscored the need for strengthening the decentralized framework for improving service
               delivery in urban areas through infrastructure development. The project's emphasis on gender and
               governance was aligned with the CPF's cross-cutting engagements.

               At the time of appraisal, the Bank had supported the PNPM program in urban areas through five urban
               program projects (UPPs) (UPP1, UPP2, UPP3, PNPM Urban 1 projects and the ongoing PNPM Urban III
               project). This project aimed at consolidating the PNPM urban experiences and mainstreaming innovations
               piloted under the ongoing PNPM Urban 1 project, including addressing universal access to clean water and
               sanitation. The other features incorporated at design, included empowerment of women in Aceh province,
               increasing the number of kelurahans and grant allocations to the poorest areas through the neighborhood
               development approach, oversight of revolving loan funds, and strengthening the complaints handling
               mechanism.

               Given that this project built on the experiences of the prior projects, the overall level of ambition was highly
               appropriate and therefore the relevance of the PDOs to the government and Bank strategy is by this review
               rated as high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                       Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Community Empowerment Program (P125405)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To ensure that urban poor in participating kelurahans benefit from improved local governance conditions.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The TOC was based on capacity building of the Board of Trustees (BKMs) in community
groups for preparing community development plans and implementing sub-projects which were aimed at
improving urban governance. These activities along with establishing a complaints handling mechanism were
aimed at ensuring the commitment of local governments to CDD to benefit the urban poor and thereby
contribute to the long-term development objective of reducing urban poverty. The causal links between the
project activities, their outputs and outcomes were logical and the intended outcomes were measurable.

Outputs (ICR, pages 13-14 and pages 36-37).

Technical assistance was provided for building the capacity of communities and local governments and the
following activities were completed as targeted.

• The communities formed Boards of Trustees (BKMs) and voted in elections for the Boards. The percentage
of adult population voting for the management of BKMs at the neighborhood level increased to 35.4 percent
from a baseline of, exceeding the target of 30 percent.

• An advanced approach to community development plan was formalized with community engagement on
spatial and integrated planning in priority areas, gender empowerment and the livelihoods pilot.

• Technical assistance was provided to the Kelurahans to manage grant allocations, channeling other local
government poverty programs through the BKMs and to align and incorporate the community development
plan into city development plans.

• Program operation manual, training materials, accountability matrix for project operators and monitoring
and evaluation were developed.

• A complaint handling system was developed and penalties for misused funds and rewards for well-
performing BKMs and community groups were instituted and publicized. The information collected by the
Monitoring Information System (MIS) were publicized. 98 percent of the provincial consultants provided
updated data on complaints via the MIS, exceeding the target of 90 percent.

• The percentage of local governments providing cost-sharing increased to 90 percent exceeding the target
of 80 percent.

• The BKMs with completed annual financial audits increased from 90 percent in 2012 to 97 percent in 2018
(The audits were conducted by external auditors).

• 4,000 community facilitators and consultants at the provincial level were trained (there was a zero baseline
and no targets for this indicator).

Outcomes.


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Community Empowerment Program (P125405)



• The participation of the poorest and vulnerable community members in planning and decision making
increased to 47.1 percent from a baseline, exceeding the target of 40 percent. (Page 8 of the ICR notes that
the community leaders were trained to perform a community self-survey to identify its "poorest" and most
vulnerable members. The poorest members were defined by the community itself, to ensure that the definition
of the poorest took into account national standards, while also being sensitive to the local context).

• The participation of women in planning and decision making increased to 41 percent from a
baseline, marginally exceeding the target of 40%.

• According to Annex 6 in the ICR a beneficiary survey of the urban poor was conducted by a consultant firm
between April 2016 to November 2016 in fifty municipalities in ten provinces included in the project. The
methodology entailed a two-stage sampling provinces by first randomly selecting provinces and then
selecting Kelurahans within selected provinces. The main conclusions of the survey were: (i) 82.2 percent of
beneficiaries expressed satisfaction with local governance practiced at the community level. This exceeded
the target of 80 percent.(ii) 90.5 percent were satisfied with their participation in community meetings and 99
percent with BKM's accountability reports (there were no targets for these indicators): and (iii) 81 percent of
beneficiaries expressed satisfaction with the complaints handling mechanism (There were no targets for this
indicator).

• 99.6 percent of the complaints were resolved, exceeding the target of 90% (As of December 31, 2018, the
project had resolved 67,090 of the 67,349 reported complaints).

This review concludes that since 82.2 percent of the urban poor in participating kelurahans were satisfied with
local governance practiced at the community level they presumably also benefited from improved local
governance and hence the efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved was “substantial”.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To ensure that urban poor in participating kelurahans benefit from improved living conditions.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The TOC anticipated that community-based infrastructure sub-projects (such as
improved tertiary roads, drainage networks, waste disposal facilities and health, social and cultural
facilities) and investments to support enhanced livelihoods (such as improved opportunities for petty trading
and micro-business activities such as food making, craft making and vehicle repairs) would result in improving
the living conditions of the urban poor. The outcomes of these activities were likely to aid the long-term
development objective of reducing urban poverty. The causal links between the project activities, outputs and
outcomes were logical and the intended outcomes were measurable.

Outputs (ICR, pages 14-18 and page 33).



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               National Community Empowerment Program (P125405)



                            • 99 percent of planned infrastructure, economic and social activities sub-projects were completed each year,
                            exceeding the 80 percent target. (The activities, included 8,405 kilometer (km) of tertiary roads and footpaths,
                            4,180 km of drainage networks, 43,160 units of waste disposal facilities, 7,694 educational, health, social and
                            cultural facilities, construction of 896 markets and shops, 88,810 housing units and 119,470 sanitation
                            facilities and rehabilitation of 35,550 potable water facilities. The project supported 19,000 groups of
                            individuals who took revolving fund loans to support economic activities pertaining to petty trading, and micro-
                            business activities such as craft making and services such as cloth making and vehicle repairs).

                            • Based on infrastructure certification and spot checking by 99 percent of infrastructure works were evaluated
                            as "good quality", exceeding the target of 70 percent.

                            • Employment was provided for 4,000 trained community facilitators. The ICR (page 18) notes that the
                            average employment of a facilitator was about four years, meaning that the project provided roughly 16,000
                            man-years in employment for facilitators. The project activities also created 28.5 million workdays for
                            construction workers. There were no baselines or targets for these indicators.

                            • 24.70 percent of kelurahans with revolving loan fund had a Portfolio-at-Risk (PAR) ratio (PAR is the
                            percentage of the total loan portfolios that have either outstanding or overdue repayments) of greater than
                            ninety days. This was short of the target of 50%.

                            Outcomes.

                            • 82.20 percent of the respondents in the beneficiary survey reported in Annex 6 of the ICR, expressed
                            satisfaction with the improved services supporting improved living conditions. This exceeded the target of 80
                            percent.

                            • 98.60 percent of the urban poor had improved access to infrastructure, social and economic services in the
                            participating kelurahans, exceeding the target of 80%.

                            • 8.7 million people in kelurahans benefited from project activities, exceeding the target of 6.0 million. 51% of
                            the 8.7 million beneficiaries were women, exceeding the target of 40%.

                            This review concludes that 82.2 percent of the urban poor in participating kelurahans benefited from improved
                            access to infrastructure, social and economic services financed by the project which arguably generated
                            improved living conditions among the poor in the project area and hence the efficacy with which Objective 2
                            was achieved was rated “substantial”.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      National Community Empowerment Program (P125405)



  Overall efficacy is rated substantial on the basis that the efficacy with which Objectives 1 and 2 were
  achieved was substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. The Net Present Value (NPV) and the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) were not
calculated at appraisal, as the project activities to be financed were not predefined but would be demand-driven
(PAD, paragraph 43). A Traditional EIRR was not calculated at closure, as the project exclusively financed non-
revenue generating sub-projects (ICR, page 43). Efficiency was therefore assessed by unit rate norms.

Cost effectiveness conditions. The PAD (paragraph 43) noted that most recent studies (a study by the
Indonesian National Planning Board - Finding of Post Construction Economic Impact Study of CDD projects in
2005, found that average construction costs of community based contracting was 40 percent lower, due to the
high level of voluntary labor by residents in CDD projects. A 2010 impact evaluation of CDD projects in
Indonesia confirmed that the cost of village infrastructure built by communities was, on average 56 percent lower
than the cost of equivalent works built by the Ministry of Public Works or local government contractors, due to
the savings from elimination (or reduction) of the cost of cost of contractor overheads. An annual assessment
conducted by the National Management Consultant confirmed that in 91.2 percent of the participating
kelurahans, infrastructure financed by the project was at least 20 percent less expensive than if the
infrastructure were to be constructed using local government contractors, exceeding the target of 80%. The
methodology for this assessment compared cost estimates prepared by the community against standard unit
prices issued by local government and the actual cost of construction. The average project cost was about 35%
less expensive. Further, the lower cost was not at the expensive of quality, as based on certification records and
spot checking, 99 percent of the infrastructure works were rated as being of good quality, exceeding the target
of 70 percent.

Administrative and Operational Issues. The project used the services of Oversight Service Providers. This
lowered oversight costs (as the company overheads were no longer included in the cost) and enabled faster
procurement process (the procurement period was reduced by more than 50 percent) compared to using
consultants). The project utilized the cost savings from exchange rate changes for activities associated with
Bima's reconstruction and the transition to a recently launched project (the National Slum Upgrading project
(NSUP). Further, the supervision cost was (0.6 percent of the loan) was lower that it would have been, since
missions for this project were combined with the supervision of other related ongoing projects (PNPM Urban 111
and the recently launched NSUP. Although the project closing date was extended by three years due to a
combination of factors, including restructuring activities, the increased counterpart funding enabled the project to
significantly expand its reach to new beneficiaries, and according to the ICR (para 41) the project benefited
roughly 2.7 million more individuals than was targeted at appraisal.

There was no traditional economic analysis presented in the ICR because the project generated institutional and
service benefits that could not be measured. Nevertheless, the ICR provided adequate evidence of the project’s



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      National Community Empowerment Program (P125405)



sound cost-effectiveness and enhanced basic services for the poor. The project’s efficiency is therefore rated
substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the government and Bank strategy is rated High. Efficacy of the two objectives - to
ensure that urban poor in participating kelurahans benefit from improved local governance conditions and to
ensure that urban poor in participating kelurahans benefit from improved living conditions - are rated substantial,
given that most of the outcomes were realized or exceeded. Efficiency is rated substantial, given that there is
adequate evidence of the ways costs were economized. This review therefore rates the project’s overall
outcome as satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR identified a number of risks to the project's development outcome.

Technical risk. The ICR (paragraph 65) noted that most of the project's physical infrastructure
investments, were not technically complex. With the technical assistance provided by the project for the
community groups, the technical risks were assessed as likely to be low.

Financial risk. There are financial risk facing local authorities, given that there were no clear arrangements
for covering the operational and maintenance costs of the infrastructure created under the project.



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      National Community Empowerment Program (P125405)



Political risk. The ICR (paragraph 65) noted that political risk is likely to be low, given the commitment of the
central and local governments to CDD projects.

Natural disaster risk. There is ongoing risk, given that many project activities are in locations that are prone
to seismic activity, volcanic eruptions, flash floods and other natural disasters.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project was prepared based on the experiences from a number of prior Bank-financed urban
  projects in Indonesia mentioned in Section 3. Lessons incorporated at design, included separating project
  monitoring from the project evaluation function to maintain objectivity of the consultants and incorporating
  greater balance between the social, economic and infrastructure themes covered by the project. The
  project was prepared by a team which had prepared the previous PNPM project, based in Jakarta.
  Several risks were identified at appraisal, including high governance risk and substantial risk associated
  with the weak implementation capacity (PAD, page 13). Mitigation measures incorporated at design,
  included allocating significant resources to maintaining an active project website and establishing a
  complaints handling mechanism. With mitigation measures, the overall project risk was rated as
  moderate (PAD, page 13). The implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the Project
  Management Unit (PMU) housed in the Ministry of Public Works (the main implementing agency), as in
  the prior Bank-financed projects supporting the National Program for Community Empowerment (PAD,
  Annex 3, paragraph 2). The arrangements made at appraisal for monitoring and evaluation and
  safeguards and fiduciary compliance were to a large extent appropriate (discussed in sections 9 and 10
  below).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR supervision missions were conducted twice a year. These missions were
 supplemented by shorter site missions every year. In addition to traditional supervision methods, the
 project introduced teleconferences and web-based supervision to monitor project progress. The
 supervision teams were multi-disciplinary, with expertise in project management, financial management,
 procurement, monitoring and evaluation and safeguards. The ICR also noted that supervision costs were
 kept low, as most missions did not only cover this project, but other related projects (the ongoing PNPM
 Urban 111 project and the recently launched NSUP) (ICR, paragraph 61). The process of engagement with
 the government was aided, given that all team members were based in the country office. Loan savings
 resulting from exchange rate changes were used for reconstruction activities and for supporting a follow-on
 project. The Bank's management of the project supported efficiencies in project administration and
 supervision when providing support for Bima's reconstruction. The Bank team decided to finance support
 for Bima through existing funds under Component two, instead of reallocating funds for Component

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Community Empowerment Program (P125405)



 Four. Allocating the additional funds through component two allowed those kelurahans to receive support
 without creating the administrative burden of reallocating funds under a new component.

 There were minor issues associated with financial management during implementation, which were
 eventually resolved (discussed in section 10).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was well-defined and the key performance indicators were realistic in monitoring
 performance (discussed in section four). The M&E design included monitoring through a web-based
 Monitoring Information System (MIS) that was publicly accessible. The M&E design also envisioned
 developing a complaints handling mechanism and an impact evaluation of the specialized program for
 poorer areas.

 One shortcoming at design, was that there was no indicator for specifically tracking progress on improving
 operation and maintenance.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 49) notes that monitoring was done through a variety of ways, including through the
  Monitoring Information System (MIS) website, complaints handling mechanism and spot-checking. A
  teleconferencing system was used by the Bank and government to expand supervision and by the
  National Management M&E Consultant employed by the project to monitor progress and trouble-shoot in
  real time. The complaints handling mechanism system allowed complaints to be submitted via the
  Project's website, phone or face to face with the community facilitators. These data were then published
  on the project website to ensure transparency. A beneficiary survey was also implemented in 2016 to
  track project performance.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para 50) the data collected at the central and local levels were utilized for: (i)
  identifying problems and incorporate better controls: (ii) target resources to the areas with the greatest
  needs to maximize impacts: and (iii) demonstrate the project's benefits to communities and households.
  The project shared common data with other CDD projects through the same MIS and this provided a
  reference for ministries to identify active projects and allocate resources. Information from the website

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Community Empowerment Program (P125405)



  was also used as a primary reference to all quantitative surveys and qualitative studies undertaken for
  the National Community Empowerment Program. The project's website at closure not only provided
  access to data on this project, but also provided information on the recently launched NSUP.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B project under the World Bank safeguard policies. Four
   safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Physical Cultural
   Resources (OP/BP 4.11): Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) (PAD,
   page 42).

   Environmental Assessment and Physical Cultural Resources. The PAD (page 23) noted that as in the
   past Urban Poverty Projects, the environmental impacts were expected to be localized environmental
   impacts that were reversible. The PAD (paragraph 55) notes that the project was to adopt the revised and
   updated Environmental Guidelines used for the PNPM Urban project. The guidelines included measures for
   management and conservation of Physical and Cultural Resources. The ICR does not provide details but
   notes that environmental safeguards were satisfactory. The ICR does not, however, indicate whether there
   were compliance issues associated with physical cultural resources during implementation.

   Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (paragraph 51) noted that some physical investments under the
   neighborhood level program could involve involuntary land acquisition and resettlement. The updated
   guidelines used for the PNPM Urban 111 project were to be used for addressing issues pertaining to
   compliance with involuntary resettlement guidelines. The ICR (paragraph 52) notes that about 603 hectares
   of land were voluntarily donated from the rehabilitation of 48,633 subprojects.

   Indigenous Peoples (IP). The PAD (paragraph 52) noted that IP communities lived in eleven villages in
   eight provinces covered by the project outside Java. The IP framework developed for the PNPM Urban 111
   project was to be used for addressing IP issues. The ICR does not provide details on whether there were
   compliance issues associated with the safeguards on indigenous peoples during implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. A financial management assessment was conducted at appraisal (PAD,
   paragraph 47). The financial risk was rated as substantial, in view of the scale of the project and limited
   capacity at the community level. Several mitigation measures were therefore incorporated at design,
   including intensive training arrangements for the district consultants and facilitators and the hiring of
   additional staff to the Project Management Unit for verifying consultants’ payments. With these mitigation
   measures, the financial risk was rated as moderate at appraisal. During implementation the project audits
   were unqualified in all years from 2013 to 2017. The ICR notes that the final audit of 2018 was in progress

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Community Empowerment Program (P125405)



   when the ICR was prepared and was to be submitted to the Bank by the end of June 2019. The ICR
   (paragraph 53) notes that the project website published details on consultant contracts audit results and
   follow up actions. Using the complaints handling system, the Project Management Unit (PMU) resolved
   67,090 out of 67,349 complaints and that the PMU recovered US$465,000 of the misused funds This was
   only 66% of the total misused funds according to the ICR (para 54); there is no mention in the ICR whether
   there was a plan for recovering the remainder.

   Procurement. A procurement assessment was conducted at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 50). The
   assessment concluded that the procurement risk was high, based on the overall fiduciary risk environment
   in the country. Mitigation measures included extending the high-value contracts under the existing
   contracts under the ongoing PNPM - Urban 111 project and recruiting two local individual consultants to
   handle day-to-day management of procurement activities. With mitigation measures, the procurement risk
   was rated as substantial at appraisal. The ICR notes that during implementation the procurement
   processes were in compliance with Bank's procurement guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following four main lessons from the experience of implementing this project,
with some adaptation of language.

1. Strong government ownership at all levels is crucial to overcome project challenges. The
success of this project highlighted the importance of strong ownership for stakeholders at all levels
of government. This is particularly important for CDD projects.

2. Concentrating investments in poor urban areas with the highest population densities may
result in higher impact then spreading investments widely to reach all poor populations
within an urban ward (kelurahan). Under the earlier projects, investments were dispersed widely

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       National Community Empowerment Program (P125405)



in an attempt to reach all poor populations within the urban ward. This project experimented a
different method for targeting investments by scaling up an advanced neighborhood development
scheme, which provided increasing financing to the poorest areas with higher population densities
based on medium term plans and spatial planning that was linked to city development planning. The
lesson is that to achieve poverty reduction a targeted approach will often provide better results than
a broader approach.

3. Both special grant allocations and gender sensitive meeting arrangements can help in
increasing female participation. This project aimed at increasing female participation through
training and a pilot initiative in Aceh where special grants were provided to improve women's access
and control of the decision making. The lesson is that female involvement in project management
can be achieved.

4. Online training (targeted for groups) may be critical for a national program that is
implemented across a wide geographical area and diverse target groups. This project required
annual training 4,000 facilitators and more than 120,000 people at the urban ward level. The training
was achieved through newer forms of training such as through online training. The lesson is that
modern training techniques can be effectively used in the context of development projects for rapid
and cost-efficient training programs



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and provides a good, candid and comprehensive description of the CDD projects. For
example, it clearly discusses the advantages of having a transparent complaints handling mechanism in such
projects. The ICR is consistent with the OPCS guidelines and draws useful lessons from the experience of
implementing this project.

However, the ICR provides very few details on compliance with safeguards. The text of the ICR could have
benefited from better editing to reduce its length; the recommended length for the main body of an ICR is 15
pages.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
National Community Empowerment Program (P125405)




                                                                                Page 16 of 16
