     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Reducing Inequality of Educat Opp. (P149858)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021752

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P149858                                   MX Reducing Inequality of Educat Opp.

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Mexico                                    Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84480                                31-Dec-2018                                         120,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Oct-2014                               31-Dec-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          150,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           120,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       120,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Judyth L. Twigg            Salim J. Habayeb             Joy Behrens                     IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (p. 6), the objectives were to: "(a) improve parental competencies in early
   childhood development in targeted rural communities; and (b) increase the transition rate from the primary to
   the secondary education level in National Council for Education Development (CONAFE)-administered
   schools in targeted municipalities." The statements of the ICR and Project Appraisal Document (PAD) were
   identical.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Reducing Inequality of Educat Opp. (P149858)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project contained three components:



   1. Early Childhood Development (ECD) (appraisal: US$ 116 million; actual US$ 96 million). This component
   was to provide capacity building to parents, relatives, and caregivers of children ages 0 to 3 years and 11
   months in selected rural communities to improve their competencies in caring for children and contributing
   to comprehensive child development. Specific project activities were to include ECD support and capacity
   building to ECD promoters, module supervisors, zone coordinators, and liaison coordinators, and the design
   of educational modules for this purpose. The interventions -- where beneficiaries meet weekly for two-hour
   sessions with an ECD facilitator, usually a local volunteer trained on ECD -- were to be targeted to
   communities served by CONAFE's existing ECD programs, covering rural communities with fewer than 500
   rural inhabitants and indigenous communities with fewer than 100 indigenous inhabitants. Preference
   was given to communities with high levels of marginalization and low levels of access to basic social
   services. Municipalities covered by the National Crusade Against Hunger (CNCH), launched in 2012 to
   reach 405 of the country's poorest and most marginalized areas, were to be included.



   2. Mobile Pedagogical Support (API) (appraisal: US$ 31.4 million; actual US$ 23.5 million). This component
   was to provide mobile pedagogical support for under-performing students, teachers, and parents of
   students in selected under-performing community schools. APIs, usually recent teacher education
   graduates, are supervised by Operations and Follow-up Coordinators (COSs). APIs have three main
   functions: one-on-one tutoring sessions with students; collaboration with Leaders for Community Education
   on design of strategies to improve classroom education processes for all students; and informing parents
   about their children's education. Specific project activities were to include API support and capacity building
   to APIs and their supervisors, and the design of educational modules for this purpose. The interventions
   were to be targeted to schools with at least 30% of students scoring "Insufficient" on the national student
   assessment (ENLACE).



   3. Technical Cooperation, Research, and Innovation (appraisal: US$ 2.25 million; actual US$ 0.2 million).
   This component was to provide technical assistance to CONAFE to support project management;
   evaluation of the Child Development Evaluation Card, a tool that aims to identify children at developmental
   risk; design of a curriculum for parental practices; design, development, and implementation of an
   information system on financial, administrative, and operational aspects of the ECD and API programs
   (SIIINAFE); consultancies for measurement of achievement under the project's first component; and




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         MX Reducing Inequality of Educat Opp. (P149858)



                       technical assistance to improve the overall design and implementation of the country's school-based
                       management program (FORTALECE).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
                       The project was to be financed by a loan of US$ 150 million from the International Bank for Reconstruction
                       and Development, with a front-end fee of US$ 0.375 million. US$ 30 million were cancelled in January 2018
                       because of changes in the peso-dollar exchange rate (an increase of 44% between preparation and
                       January 2018). Actual total disbursement and project costs amounted to US$ 120 million. No Borrower
                       contribution was planned or made.



                       The project was approved on October 24, 2014; became effective on December 11, 2015; underwent a mid-
                       term review in September 2017; and closed as planned on December 31, 2018. It was restructured three
                       times: (1) on January 10, 2018, to cancel US$ 30 million of the original loan amount at the government's
                       request; (2) on August 21, 2018, to update the measurement instruments for the first objective and to
                       remove support for FORTALECE from the third component in order to prioritize the project's core activities;
                       and (3) on October 24, 2018, to reallocate funds between disbursement categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At appraisal, although Mexico had made significant advances in coverage of education from the preschool
through upper secondary levels, education attainment and quality lagged behind other countries in the
region. Importantly, there was high inequality in attainment and learning outcomes between rural and urban
areas, and between indigenous and non-indigenous students. Attraction and retention of qualified teachers
in remote areas was a consistent challenge. The capacity of families and community members to support
their children's education was limited by their own low educational attainment. There was limited availability
of educational materials in indigenous languages and of teachers who spoke those languages.



The Bank's previous ECD project, closing as this project was being prepared, sought to improve access to
ECD services by providing APIs to the lowest performing students. This project built on that context by
seeking to maintain levels of access while improving the quality of ECD and APIs through informed
redesign of implementation models. Its objectives were aligned with the Country Partnership Strategy at
appraisal and closing (FY 2014-2019) and its pillar on increasing social prosperity (which specifically cited
improving the reach of ECD services in the most marginalized municipalities), as well as the achievement of
two objectives in the country's National Development Plan 2013-2018 (on "Inclusive Mexico" and "Mexico
with Quality Education").


Rating Relevance TBL




                                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      MX Reducing Inequality of Educat Opp. (P149858)



               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Improve parental competencies in early childhood development in targeted rural communities

                Rationale
                The project's theory of change held that training and capacity development for ECD facilitators, as well as
                facilitation of community-based support sessions for families, would in turn lead to increased skills and
                investment in child development among families and caregivers. As noted above in Section 3, targeting
                involved communities of high and very high levels of marginalization, with a special focus on indigenous and
                ethnic minorities (PAD, p. 4).



                Outputs



                A new model for capacity building related to parenting practices was designed, piloted, and rolled out
                nationally beginning in 2016, including the development of six new modules for the SIIINAFE (2016-2018),
                improved planning and training linked to the improved M&E (2016-2018), increased and strengthened
                supervision (2017-2018), and a redesigned curriculum that engages actively with parents as well as with
                children (2018). Many of these changes were informed by the results of an International Initiative for Impact
                Evaluation-funded impact evaluation conducted from 2012-2014, as well as recommendations from a
                consultancy firm hired by CONAFE to help design the new curriculum.



                The number of ECD service points managed by CONAFE increased from 17,833 in 2014 to 19,764 in
                2018. At closing, the target was set as identical to baseline. The original target, 28,787, included both
                CONAFE and state-managed services, but budget reductions at the state level led to reductions in those
                services. Those services were removed from the indicator and target at the August 2018 restructuring.



                All ECD facilitators attended at least two capacity building sessions. The level of knowledge among ECD
                promoters about early childhood practices increased from a 66.5% score on the Knowledge of Infant
                Development Inventory (KIDI) in 2016 to 76.56% in 2018, exceeding the target of 70%. The percentage of



                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX Reducing Inequality of Educat Opp. (P149858)



promoters who attended at least two capacity building sessions in the previous operational cycle increased
from 98.7% in 2014 to 100% in 2018, meeting the target.



The level of knowledge among State and Regional Academic ECD Coordinators, who were financed by the
project beginning in mid-2017, improved from a 77% score on the KIDI in 2017 to 84% in 2018, exceeding the
target of 80%.



The number of mothers and fathers educated on the ECD model at the national level increased from 274,168
in 2014 to 275,126 in 2018. At closing, the target was set as identical to baseline. The original target of
445,766 included parents educated by services at the state level that were affected by budget reductions.
Those services were removed from the indicator and target at the August 2018 restructuring.



Outcomes



The KIDI score of parenting practices among caregivers of children ages 0-4 improved from 54%
in December 2017 to 59% in December 2018, surpassing the target of 56%. The December 2017 baseline
was drawn from a representative sample in four states, and the final data collection was carried out in those
same four states in December 2018. Results were measured only for the last year of the project; given the
limited time frame of observation, this result represents relatively weak evidence of improvement in parental
competencies (i.e., achievement of the desired outcome).



The ICR (p. 10) explained that measurement delays were caused by "restrictions in the [government's]
federal budget"; the project team later explained that these budget cuts reduced funding for the external
consultant who was to have measured baselines. The ICR also indicated that there were serious
shortcomings with the structure of the cascade training model that had implications for knowledge and skills
transmission to community-level trainers (see Section 5); the project team later explained that, following a
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats (SWOT) analysis in 2018, the project attempted to
reduce the risk of message dilution by introducing two new types of trainers.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective


                                                                                                 Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX Reducing Inequality of Educat Opp. (P149858)



Increase the transition rate from the primary to the secondary education level in CONAFE-administered
schools in targeted municipalities

Rationale
The project's theory of change held that provision of mobile pedagogical support for parents, students, and
teachers in under-performing community schools, as well as provision of training and capacity development
for providers of that support, would in turn lead to improved educational achievement for students.



Outputs



5,407 APIs and 220 COSs were supported and trained in school years 2015-2016, 2016-2017, and 2017-
2018.



The percentage of primary education community schools in select CNCH municipalities supported by an API
increased from 34.26% in 2014 to 40.4% in 2018, meeting neither the original target of 50% nor the revised
target of 42%. The ICR explained that the remoteness and resource constraints of CNCH municipalities
limited the placement of APIs.



The percentage of APIs in select CNCH municipalities who attended at least two capacity building sessions in
the previous 11 months increased from 32% in 2014 to 100% in 2018, exceeding the target of 90%.



The percentage of parents who participated in activities organized by the APIs and Leaders for Community
Education at the end of the school year in community schools in selected CNCH municipalities increased
from 52% in 2014 to 79.17% in 2018, exceeding the target of 62%.



The amount of time spent by the APIs in one-on-one remedial sessions with underperforming children during
the last visit to school type A (schools serving the most disadvantaged children) increased from 1 hour, 40
minutes in 2014 to 4 hours, 3 minutes in 2018, exceeding the target of 3 hours, 20 minutes.



In 2015, Mexico's Secretariat of Public Education awarded the API intervention first place in the category of
Improvements in School Management. In 2017, the National Evaluation Council recognized the API strategy
as one of three best practices nationally in the use of monitoring and evaluation data for public policy.




                                                                                                Page 6 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               MX Reducing Inequality of Educat Opp. (P149858)



                            A new model of API training was rolled out in the spring of 2017, increasing the initial training from one week
                            to two weeks, providing four additional training sessions during the school year, assigning APIs based on
                            indigenous languages spoken, and enhancing COS support. This model was scaled up nationally starting in
                            the 2017-2018 school year, too late to have an impact on the outcome data available for the project.



                            Outcomes



                            The transition rate from primary to secondary education for graduates of CONAFE-administered schools in
                            selected CNCH municipalities increased from 60.3% for school year 2011-2012 to 70% for 2016-2017,
                            meeting the target of 70%. (The ICR did not provide baseline data specific to the project's time frame; the
                            project team later explained that the 2011-2012 baseline was used because of the long time it took to get
                            information on this indicator from the government, and that the impact evaluation later confirmed a 2014
                            baseline of 59.6%.) Achievement had been as high as 79% in 2015-2016, but the September 2017
                            earthquake, which affected the two states, Chiapas and Oaxaca, with the highest coverage of APIs, most
                            likely accounted for the reversal (according to the ICR, p. 15).



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Achievement of the early childhood development objective is rated modest. The ICR called into question the
                            effective implementation of the cascade model of training. The project reached its outcome target for
                            improved parenting practices, but the baseline and outcome target were set only the project's last year.
                            Achievement of the objective to improve the primary-to-secondary transition rate based on enhancements in
                            mobile pedagogical support is rated substantial. Transition rates met targets despite the impact of an
                            earthquake midway through the project period.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The PAD (p. 13) cited evidence from other Latin America and Caribbean countries that high-quality ECD
   programs are cost effective, and that API-type interventions can lead to substantial effects on learning outcomes

                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MX Reducing Inequality of Educat Opp. (P149858)



when targeted at the most disadvantaged students. Economic and financial analysis at appraisal (PAD, p. 13)
estimated that the average project beneficiary would have an additional 0.22 years of schooling by 2035,
producing an average wage increase of MX$ 235/year (based on a return to an additional year of schooling in
rural areas of 5.5%). This produced an estimated rate of return for the project of 6.4%, seen as acceptable given
the large share of project benefits that were to come as social benefits (PAD, p. 13).



The ICR (Annex 4) conducted a benefit-cost analysis for both the ECD and API interventions. It cited a 2017
study by the Brookings Institution as the basis for a US$185/child annual cost of the ECD component,
significantly less than analogous interventions targeted to children in Mexico; excluding overhead costs that are
not included in the comparator programs, the ECD cost is even lower at about US$130/child. Children targeted
by the ECD intervention were assumed to experience a US$217.51 increase in annual income, based on data
from home surveys conducted in 2018 and 2019 as well as the findings of peer-reviewed studies on the impact
of improvements in parenting behaviors on children's earnings. The benefit-cost analyses assumed that every
child would begin to work at age 23 and retire at 62, with a reference income equal to the median yearly income
in the country and assuming no change for inflation or economic growth (and therefore representing a lower-
bound estimate). The benefit-cost ratio of the ECD program was found to be 5.12, using a discount rate of 5%.
The average annual cost of the API intervention was calculated at US$214.30/child, lower than the cost of a
regular basic education teacher in Mexico. The API was calculated to produce an average per-child increase of
US$383.37 in income. The benefit-cost ratio of the API was found to be 9.19, using a discount rate of 5%.



The project invested significantly in piloting, evaluations, and analyses during implementation to improve training
practices and structures for ECD and APIs (ICR, p. 21), shifting investments toward models and practices found
to be more effective. The September 2017 earthquake damaged CONAFE headquarters. Hardware and
physical documents were lost, and SIIINAFE was temporarily taken off-line. As a result, all institutional activities
at CONAFE were suspended from October 2017 through June 2018, when CONAFE central offices were
relocated to the facilities of the Secretariat of Public Education. Despite this disruption, central and state
CONAFE teams worked locally to mitigate damage and minimize periods of program interruption.



Apart from earthquake-related disruptions, there were significant implementation inefficiencies. Central CONAFE
teams experienced high rates of personnel turnover, including five changes in the director position. The ICR (p.
27) cited challenges with the cascade training approach, where the complexity of the operative structure --
trickling down of information from the national level to the communities -- meant that information and skills were
lost and messages were skewed as one level trained the next. According to the ICR, this shortcoming in
program design represented a failure to learn lessons from earlier interventions, possibly attributable to high
turnover in CONAFE's ECD subdirectorate. In addition, CONAFE was unable to hire local informatics personnel
to work on the information system planned under the project, requiring the Bank to hire two
consultants. Budgetary restrictions on consultancy services produced delays in implementation of the ECD
component.

Despite the results achieved (covered in the Efficacy section), as well as the notable teamwork inherent in
recovery from the September 2017 earthquake, the implementation inefficiencies noted are considered to be



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MX Reducing Inequality of Educat Opp. (P149858)



important enough that overall efficiency does not quite meet the level expected given the sector and context,
consistent with an Efficiency rating of Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's objectives were highly relevant to country context and to Bank and government strategy.
Achievement of the early childhood development objective is rated modest. The ICR called into question the
effective implementation of the cascade model of training. The project reached its outcome target for improved
parenting practices, but the baseline and outcome target were set only the project's last year. Achievement of
the objective to improve the primary-to-secondary transition rate based on enhancements in mobile pedagogical
support is rated substantial. Transition rates met targets despite the impact of an earthquake midway through
the project period. Efficiency is rated modest due to significant implementation inefficiencies. These ratings are
indicative of moderate overall shortcomings, leading to an Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project achieved important institutional capacity building, most notably the development of SIIINAFE,
that is likely to be sustained. The ICR (p. 27) cited the primary risk as the possibility that the new presidential
administration (2018-2024) would decide no longer to support ECD and API activities. Discontinuation of that
support would have broken four decades of precedent, but the ICR nonetheless gauged that risk as
moderate. However, the project team later explained that, since project closure, the risk to achieved
outcomes has diminished considerably. In May 2019, the government made early childhood education
compulsory for 0- to 3-year-olds, and priority has been placed on services for the disadvantaged. According


                                                                                                        Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MX Reducing Inequality of Educat Opp. (P149858)



to the project team, rigorous evidence from the project's impact evaluation has propelled interest in scaling
up the project's ECD interventions to regular schools.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project contained well-defined objectives and a logical, plausible results chain. Capacity
  development for project management and M&E was built into the project's third component. Project
  interventions were well targeted at the most marginalized municipalities and community schools. Lessons
  learned from prior experience, as well as from a 2011 survey of APIs in 40 communities and a Strategic
  Impact Evaluation Fund-financed evaluation of prior API interventions, included the need to hold joint
  ECD sessions for fathers and mothers, as well as visits of APIs to parents, at times that do not conflict
  with fathers' work schedules; the importance of prioritizing social and problem-solving skills as well as
  motor skills in the curriculum; the need for instructors to rotate lead activities so that all parts of the
  curriculum are equally emphasized; and the need to introduce opportunities for peer learning among
  instructors (PAD, pp. 9-10; ICR, pp. 25-26). Overall risk assessment was thorough, with moderate risks
  identified related to the capacity of CONAFE state-level delegations (including in financial management)
  and to shortcomings with CONAFE's information systems, and a substantial risk of overlapping activities
  with other government programs providing ECD services. Mitigation measures included central
  supervision, support, and capacity building, and efforts by the Bank team to coordinate dialogue among
  government entities involved in ECD.



  However, there were moderate shortcomings. As noted above in Section 5, appropriate lessons about
  challenges with the cascade training approach were not adequately taken into account. In addition, the
  planned home observation measurement methods were costly (ICR, pp. 10, 22); their inclusion, despite
  expressed government concern about the cost, was due to overambition during project preparation (ICR,
  p. 22).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Turnover was relatively low in the project team, which carried out regular supervision missions and
 collaborated closely with the government when issues arose during implementation. For example, the 2018
 restructuring was carried out in two parts to meet the government's request that the partial cancellation of
 the loan be completed before annual fees were due. Several important qualitative, process, and impact
 evaluations were conducted to inform mid-course adjustments. Additional personnel were hired for
 SIIINAFE when resources were no longer available through CONAFE. Focused attention was paid to the


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Reducing Inequality of Educat Opp. (P149858)



 needs of indigenous peoples, including development of materials in indigenous languages and hiring of
 APIs who spoke those languages, throughout the project's lifetime.



 The ICR stated that the supervision team intentionally delayed project restructuring and adjustments to the
 results framework in order to prioritize adequate measurement of key outcome indicators, despite federal
 budgetary constraints; however, these delays meant that there were not adequate provisions in place to
 measure progress on one of the project's two objectives over most of the project's lifetime (see Section 9b).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 CONAFE was to compile and calculate project indicator data on an annual basis from three main sources:
 its own information (for student retention and absentee rates), "Estadísticas 911" produced by the
 Secretariat of Public Education (for primary and secondary grade failure rates and preschool and
 secondary school enrollment numbers), and data from a new standardized test that was to replace the
 ENLACE beginning in the 2014-2015 school year. It was acknowledged at appraisal that the CONAFE
 information system was in need of modernization and standardization, with data collected in different and
 sometimes outdated formats at the state level. As part of project preparation, a consultant was to be hired
 to conduct a diagnostic of existing issues and provide advice on possible solutions.



 According to the PAD (p. 27), due to the high application costs of the ECD monitoring instrument, impact
 was to be measured in only six states. Four of those six states had more than 50% of their populations
 classified as poor, and therefore the estimated impact was likely to represent a lower bound of the ECD
 intervention on parental practices, as better-off states were expected to benefit more from the program due
 to better initial conditions. Similarly, the impact of the API intervention was to be measured only in those
 municipalities of the CNCH where APIs operate (224 of 405 CNCH municipalities). As CNCH municipalities
 were the ones displaying the worst initial conditions (in terms of teacher quality, parental participation, and
 vulnerability), the estimated impact was again likely to be a lower bound estimate of the intervention's
 impact (PAD, p. 31).



 Indicators and targets were clearly defined and would have been effective measures of the project's
 activities and objectives had data been collected at appropriate times. The ICR (page 22) stated that


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Reducing Inequality of Educat Opp. (P149858)



 targets for program coverage, which in some cases sought just to maintain baselines, were "realistic" and
 "prudent" given the project's context, but it did not explain that claim.



b. M&E Implementation
  In general, M&E data were collected regularly through the planned channels. There were delays in
  baseline data collection on facilitator knowledge of ECD practices; the ICR indicated that these delays
  were due to turnover in the CONAFE directorship, as well as lack of CONAFE capacity to define the
  sample, "suggesting that [the project] could have included more institutional capacity building activities for
  M&E" (ICR, p. 23). The ICR also cited challenges related to the 2017 earthquake, and to federal
  budgetary constraints that impeded the hiring of a data collection firm. There were also delays in
  identifying a suitable instrument for measuring the ECD objective, resulting in data to measure progress
  over only a one-year period. The ICR (p. 24) suggested that the government and the Bank responded to
  these challenges in a timely manner, committing additional resources, introducing modifications to project
  management, and continuously updating SIIINAFE, but it is reasonable to expect that the Bank "could
  have followed up more closely with the implementing teams as soon as it became apparent that the
  indicator would not be measured on time using the original instrument" (ICR, p. 27).



c. M&E Utilization
  An impact evaluation of improvements to the API program informed CONAFE's decision to scale up the
  pilot nationally in 2016-2017. The project made effective use of the KIDI, with results processed through
  the SIIINAFE to provide timely information on APIs and academic coordinators who did not meet
  minimum requirements. Those who did not score the minimum were provided with additional training;
  following that training, those who still did not reach minimal KIDI scores were dismissed.



  Overall, in spite of initial shortcomings, M&E arrangements, implementation, and findings were sufficient
  to assess the overall achievement of objectives.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Environmental Assessment category C. It triggered OP/BP 4.10, Indigenous
   Peoples, given that indigenous peoples are among the most underserved and poorest populations in the
   country and therefore were de facto targeted by the project. CNCH municipalities covered by the project
   comprised 53% of the total indigenous population of Mexico. An Indigenous People's Plan (IPP) was
   developed based on the experience of prior operations, discussing the targeting of investments, actions for
   improving the effectiveness of interventions in indigenous areas, and the associated budget for IPP

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Reducing Inequality of Educat Opp. (P149858)



   implementation. The ICR (pp. 24-25, 26-27) described numerous activities that were implemented under the
   IPP, and the project team later confirmed that there was full compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory throughout most of project
   implementation. Interim unaudited financial reports were generally submitted on time, with only minor
   occasional delays. The audit report covering the last quarter of calendar year 2015 included a qualified
   opinion that revealed internal control weaknesses. The Bank team provided CONAFE with support for
   strengthening institutional information systems to record and control information on payments made to
   eligible beneficiaries. According to the ICR (p. 25), from that point forward, audit reports included
   unmodified opinions. The ICR (p. 25) also stated that the main shortcomings in financial management
   related to budget planning and execution processes, and to insufficient budget allocations for several
   significant categories of planned activities. Through the second half of project implementation, CONAFE
   experienced overall budget reductions and cuts to consultancy services.



   The ICR (p. 25) stated that procurement was conducted in compliance with Bank procedures and the
   project's operational manual.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                     IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MX Reducing Inequality of Educat Opp. (P149858)




The ICR (pp. 27-28) suggested several useful lessons, two of which are adapted here:



The negative impact of high personnel turnover can be minimized through proactive
measures. In this case, turnover of ECD personnel negatively impacted implementation and
measurement of results; by contrast, SIIINAFE maintained information and application materials for
qualified candidates for positions, allowing for quick response when staff departed.



The inclusion of fluency in indigenous languages as a criterion for hiring project
implementers increases the likelihood that measures targeted to indigenous communities
will translate into meaningful outcomes. In this case, the project shifted from listing language
skills as an "added benefit" to a requirement for selection and assignment of APIs, increasing the
achieved outcomes of the API intervention.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear, concise, and evidence-based. Evidence was credibly sourced. Supporting data -- including
a thorough explanation of the project's theory of change -- were efficiently presented in appendices. The
ICR followed established guidelines. The various parts of the ICR were internally consistent, with appropriate
cross-referencing of sections to ensure clarity on most aspects of the project's storyline. The lessons offered
were project-specific and should be useful to analogous projects in Mexico and other countries. However, the
ICR's explanations of some key aspects of the project, including the late second restructuring and the setting of
targets equal to baseline for some indicators, were unclear.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
MX Reducing Inequality of Educat Opp. (P149858)




                                                                               Page 15 of 15
