          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          Programmatic DPL 1(P148957)



                                                                                    Report Number : ICRR0021563

   1. Project Data



    Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
    Romania                                    Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


    Programmatic DPL
    Planned Operations:         2              Approved Operations:         2

    Operation ID                               Operation Name
    P148957                                    Programmatic DPL 1


     L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
     IBRD-83820                                31-Dec-2015                                       843,900,000.00

     Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
     22-May-2014                               31-Dec-2015

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                            Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                       1,034,800,000.00                                              0.00

     Revised Commitment                        1,034,800,000.00                                              0.00

     Actual                                      843,900,000.00                                              0.00




     Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
     Erika A. Jorgensen         Clay Wescott                 Sengphet Lattanavong          IEGEC (Unit 1)


PHPROJECTDATATBL




     Operation ID                              Operation Name
     P149776                                   2nd Fiscal Effectiveness and Growth DPL ( P149776 )



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Programmatic DPL 1(P148957)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                       Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-83820,IBRD-86650                  31-Dec-2017                                          593,050,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                     Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Dec-2016                            31-Dec-2017

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                        558,270,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                         558,270,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                     593,050,000.00                                              0.00




2. Program Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The program’s development objective (PDO) is to strengthen fiscal management (debt management and the
   quality of public spending) and the performance of state-owned enterprises; and improve the functioning of
   property, energy, and capital markets. (First Fiscal Effectiveness and Growth Development Policy Loan (DPL)
   (FEG 1) Program Document (PD), p. v). The PDO as stated in the Second Fiscal Effectiveness and Growth
   DPL (FEG 2) PD, p. iii, is almost identical (except for the omission of "debt management and the quality of
   public spending" as an explanation of fiscal management). The Loan Agreements do not contain the PDO.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   Pillar A: Strengthening fiscal management and state-owned enterprise performance
   A.1. Strengthening public debt management
   A.2. Introducing results-informed budgeting
   A. 3. Improving public procurement of pharmaceuticals
   A.4. Enhancing public investment management
   A.5. Improving financing and coverage of social assistance
   A.6. Improving corporate governance of state-owned enterprises

   Pillar B: Improving the functioning of property, energy and capital markets
   B.1. Improving urban real estate registration
   B.2. Completing energy markets liberalization
   B.3. Improving the functioning of capital financial markets
   B.4. Mitigating climate change
   (derived from FEG 1 PD, pp. 26-27 and ICR, pp. 21-26).


                                                                                                Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Programmatic DPL 1(P148957)




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   FEG 1 (€ 750 million) was approved on May 22, 2014. It was made effective on January 20, 2015 and
   disbursed on June 17, 2015 (ICR p. 3). The approximate 20 percent depreciation of the euro vis-à-vis the
   dollar between end-April 2014 and mid-June 2015 reduced the dollar equivalent from an estimated US$ 1,035
   million at approval to US$ 844 at disbursement. FEG 1 complemented 2013-15 financial assistance
   arrangements with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) (two-year stand-by arrangement approved
   September 27, 2013 for SDR 1,751 or about € 1.98 billion) and the European Union (EU) (precautionary two-
   year balance-of-payments assistance of € 2 billion approved October 22, 2013) (ICR, p. 10, and FEG 1 PD, p.
   8).

   FEG 2 (€ 500 million) was approved on December 15, 2016, and it was made effective on May 31, 2017,
   disbursed on August 31, 2017, and closed on December 31, 2017 (ICR, p. 3). FEG 2 financing was € 500
   million and was delayed from 2015 to December 2016 (ICR, pp. 15-16). Due to modest appreciation of the
   euro, the dollar equivalent rose from an estimated US$ 558 million at approval to US$ 593 million at
   disbursement. FEG 2 required a waiver of Bank Procedures (BP) 8.60 because more than 24 months elapsed
   between approval of the first operation in the series and the second.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  1.　 Country conditions

  The FEG series’ objectives were and remained relevant to country conditions at the time of series’ closing.
  Romania’s government had been focused on crisis management during 2009-14, supported by the IMF, the
  EU, and a series of World Bank DPLs. "Underpinned by the government’s medium-term agenda of fiscal
  management and structural reform, these [DPO-supported] programs helped Romania meet commitments
  under the EU Fiscal Compact and resume progress toward convergence with EU incomes and standards of
  living." (ICR, p. 10). By 2014, that agenda was shifting towards resumption of growth and EU convergence
  but with substantial continuity for ongoing structural reform.

  Following the achievement of macroeconomic and financial stabilization after the global financial crisis,
  Romania needed to face important structural challenges. Key metrics—income convergence with the EU and
  the at-risk-of-poverty rate—were lagging by 2013. Strengthened fiscal discipline, improved public expenditure
  management, better state-owned enterprise governance, liberalization of the energy sector, and
  better functioning real estate registration to support private investment, and a need for improved targeting of
  social assistance were key constraints identified by the European Commission, the IMF, and the World Bank.
  (ICR, pp. 11-12). The objectives of the FEG program (to strengthen fiscal management and the performance

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Programmatic DPL 1(P148957)



of state-owned enterprises; and improve the functioning of property energy, and capital markets)
encompassed precisely these priorities.

The FEG series was responsive to changing needs and circumstances in Romania during 2014-2017 (from
the concept stage of FEG 1 through closing of FEG 2), in particular "frequent changes of governments [and]
ministers and a high turnover at decision-making levels" (FEG 2 Program Document, November 16, 2016, p.
4). FEG 2 was delayed until enough progress had been achieved, and its prior actions were revised
(compared to the triggers set out in FEG 1) and somewhat weakened (see Section 3.b for discussion) (and at
the same time, the Bank’s country strategy was revised and updated—see Section 3.a.2.).

2. Consistency with Bank country strategy

This DPL series was central to the Bank’s CPS for FY2014-17 (extended to 2018. Although the series’ PDO
remained the same, its intermediate outcomes (linking prior actions to the PDO) were revised in FEG 2,
aligning with the revised CPS objectives (which responded to changing country circumstances). (See Section
3.b for details on the DPO series’ changes).

The CPS aimed to help create a 21st century government, accelerate growth and job creation, and promote
social inclusion. The DPL series planned to support four out of seven CPS objectives, reaching across all
pillars. (The series was to support: improved revenue and expenditure administration, and improved business
environment and a competitive economy under the pillar, Creating a 21st Century Government; eased
business exits under the pillar, Growth and Job Creation; and improved social protection system under the
pillar, Social Inclusion.) (CPS, April 28, 2014, pp. 32-34). With the extension of the CPS through FY18, the
CPS results matrix was revised to expand the number of objectives from seven to 14, and the FEG series
was to deliver on a revised set of nine of those CPS objectives: (i) revenue and expenditure administration
improved; (ii) strengthened debt management; (iii) improved strategic planning, prioritization and evidence
based policymaking; and (iv) improved governance, organizational functioning and efficiency of public
institutions and SOEs; under the pillar Creating a 21st Century Government; (v) creating an improved
business environment and a competitive economy; (vi) making it easier for business to entry and exit the
market; (vii) enhanced environment and climate action in line with EU requirements; and (viii) improved
energy efficiency, under the pillar Smart and Sustainable Growth; and, (ix) a more streamlined, better
targeted and more cost-efficient social protection system, under the pillar Social Inclusion.) The increased
complexity of the CPS results matrix creates challenges in determining how the FEG series contributed to
country results, but there is no question that the DPL series was consistent with the Bank’s country strategy
and evolved with it (discussed further below in Section 3.b).

DPL operations were to constitute 70 percent of Bank financing each year of the CPS (CPS, p. 19), and
although a second series did not materialize and FEG 2’s financing was reduced, DPF lending over the CPS
period (FY2014-18), comprising the FEG series of two operations, totaled US$ 1.3 million or 74 percent of
total lending. The task team clarified that delivery of DPOs each year as envisioned in the CPS was
undermined by frequent changes in government and leadership of key counterpart agencies, events which
also affected the content and timing of FEG 2 (approved in December 2016, following the extension and
revision of the CPS).


                                                                                               Page 4 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Programmatic DPL 1(P148957)



  The FEG series was key to delivery of CPS results. Since the CPS and the FEG 1 operation were prepared at
  the same time, they are consistent, and the results framework for the DPL series was designed to contribute
  substantially and directly to CPS objectives and results. One of the 11 FEG program results indicators was
  also an indicator in the (revised) CPS results matrix, and nine out of the 19 prior actions of the program were
  recorded as part of CPS results indicators. Similarly, the revised CPS and FEG 2 were prepared together,
  and program objectives were revised, including a weakening of expected results (and related indicators), to
  match the design of the program.

  FEG 1 complemented 2013-15 financial assistance arrangements with the IMF and EU (see Section 2.c). IMF
  Article IV consultations and European Commission post-program surveillance missions provided ongoing
  monitoring of Romania’s performance during 2016-17.

  3. Consistency with borrower’s strategies

  The program objectives were and remained consistent with the country’s development priorities as set out in
  the government’s 2013 National Reform Program and its 2013-16 Convergence Program, and its 2016
  National Reform Program and 2017-2020 Convergence Program. Romania’s development strategy has been
  driven by its commitment to European Union obligations, such as the "Europe 2020" agenda for smart,
  sustainable and inclusive growth. The FEG series was designed in coordination with IMF and EU financing
  and surveillance to support the country’s reform and convergence programs. As noted above, in response to
  heightened political uncertainty after approval of FEG 1, FEG 2 was revised based on changing
  circumstances but consistent with the borrower’s strategies.



  Rating
  High

b. Relevance of Design
  The design of the FEG DPL series is consistent with its stated objectives, and the design was adjusted to
  accommodate changing country circumstances, requiring a parallel adjustment to expected results. Neither
  the ICR nor program documents provide an explicit causal chain from program outputs (the prior actions) to
  the two program objectives (and the 11 intermediate outcomes under those two objectives). However, the text
  of the PDs and of the ICR, as well as tables in those documents, explains and illustrates how the prior actions
  contribute to specific outcomes and how those outcomes relate to the objectives (and country-level impacts
  laid out in the Bank’s country strategy). The Policy and Results Matrix (revised in FEG 2) provides (generally
  quantitative) outcome indicators with targets for the end of the program but lacking intermediate outcomes.

  FEG 2 revised the outputs for the series through specification of prior actions that modified triggers set out in
  FEG 1 to less demanding prior actions in FEG 2. Of the ten triggers for FEG 2 set out as part of FEG 1, five
  became prior actions, five were revised and weakened, and one new action was added (ICR, p. 15). FEG 2
  financing was decreased from € 750 million (as proposed under the CPS for 2014-17) to € 500 million
  because of reduced ambition of the prior actions and because Romania’s financing requirements had

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Programmatic DPL 1(P148957)



       decreased (ICR, p. 16). In addition, the preparation of FEG 2 was delayed from 2015 to December 2016
       because of slow progress on Prior Action #4, law on Minimum Social Inclusion Income Program, and Prior
       Action #5, law on corporate governance of public enterprises) (ICR, pp. 15-16). These extended delays
       triggered a requirement for a waiver of BP 8.60, as noted in Section 2.c.

       The revised design of the program for FEG 2 constituted a reasonable response to slowed reform momentum
       and capacity limitations and retained clear links from policy actions to outcomes (which were also revised). Of
       the 11 results indicators for the DPL series set out in FEG 1, only three are repeated as part of the 11 results
       indicators for the series as set out in FEG 2, and the revised results are less ambitious than the original
       versions. Overall, seven of the 11 revised outcome indicators achieved their target values by the time of
       evaluation (and one was not assessed). Since FEG 2’s policy actions and revised results were less
       ambitious, the outcomes and their indicators generally represent only modest progress towards achievement
       of the overall PDO.

       Romania’s macroeconomic policy framework remained adequate at approval and throughout the
       implementation of the DPL series. The country had achieved needed adjustment after the global crisis,
       correcting imbalances both external and internal. Fiscal and external buffers were adequate at the launch of
       the program and remained adequate. GDP growth exceeded projections during 2014-17 because of faster
       private consumption growth, especially during 2016 and 2017. Most macroeconomic aggregates were close
       to the levels expected, including the trade deficit, current account deficit, and the fiscal deficit. Public debt did
       not exceed 39 percent of GDP, among the lowest levels in the EU. Inflation came in well under projections,
       with the CPI averaging 0.1 percent during 2014-17 rather than the projected 2.9 percent, partly because of
       reductions to the rate of VAT. (FEG 1 PD, pp. 5-6, ICR, pp. 21, 44).



       Rating
       Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     strengthened fiscal management and state-owned enterprise performance

    Rationale
    The program documents lay out the underlying problems and challenges for fiscal management and state-
    owned enterprise (SOE) performance in Romania as the FEG program was being prepared. Weaknesses in
    public debt management had left Romania vulnerable to external shocks and rollover risk. The quality of
    public spending was low and not shaped by previous results. Ineffective public procurement in the health
    sector led to high costs in a tight budget environment. Public investment suffered from low execution rates
    and a large backlog of unfinished projects. Social protection spending was fragmented and inefficient. SOEs


                                                                                                              Page 6 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Programmatic DPL 1(P148957)



generated large fiscal and quasi-fiscal losses, at least partly due to antiquated governance arrangements.
Government fell short in its role as a shareholder, and needed privatization efforts such as IPOs were
insufficient (FEG 1 PD, pp. 9-10, 15, FEG 2 PD, pp. 13-14). These challenges map directly to the six
outcomes under this objective in the FEG program.

1 . Strengthening public debt management. Three prior actions contributed to this outcome: (i) a medium-
term debt management strategy and corresponding annual borrowing plan; (ii) introduction of an electronic
auction facility for the primary market; and (iii) enabling buybacks of government securities and introduction
of an electronic trading platform for the secondary market. These actions simplified management of auctions
and liquidity and improved transparency and debt risk management. In the long term, they may reduce
financing costs. However, the results indicator related to these actions--number of Ministry of Public Finance
(MoPF) liability management operations—did not achieve its target because further action by government
(the central bank) is necessary (baseline value of zero operations, target of three, actual value of zero (ICR,
p. 8)). (A second indicator—duration of auctions in the government security primary market—was omitted
from the ICR).

2 . Introducing results-informed budgeting. This outcome was pursued via a prior action under FEG 1:
amended public finance law and action plan for results-informed budgets. The implementation proposed as a
FEG 2 trigger in the Ministries of Health and Education ran into political opposition and capacity constraints,
and no further action was supported by the DPL series. Subsequent technical assistance and an ongoing
Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS) have supported additional steps, but actual implementation is not
expected until 2019 or 2020.

3 . Improving public procurement of pharmaceuticals. This outcome was supported by one prior action under
FEG 2: a centralized procurement plan for the Ministry of Health. The move to centralized procurement for a
list of key drugs pushed down their prices, but opposition by some stakeholders prevented scaling-up,
limiting its impact. Note that this outcome was added by FEG 2, substituting for the expected next stage of
results-informed budgeting. The target for the outcome indicator (price for centrally procured drugs) was met
by end-program, but further progress is uncertain because of limited capacity at implementing agencies
(baseline value of RON 22.2 average unit price for 31 antibiotic and 11 oncology centrally procured drugs;
target and actual value of RON 20.0 (ICR, p. 8)).

4 . Enhancing public investment management. Two prior actions fed into this outcome: (i) a system for
prioritizing significant public investments; and (ii) a 2016 list of significant public investment projects.
Transparency was increased, and allocation of budget resources to priority projects improved. Further
progress was made via new budget rules for 2017 requiring prioritization before submitting new public
investment budget proposals and through a RAS redesigning the very large investment portfolio of the
Ministry of Regional Development. The results indicator-increased budget allocation to large public
investments—exceeded its very modest target by end-program (baseline of RON 5.7 billion, target of
RON 6.1, actual of 9.0 (ICR, p. 8)), and allocation was up by almost 60 percent, but the execution status of
the investments is uncertain.




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Programmatic DPL 1(P148957)



    5 . Improving financing and coverage of social assistance. Two actions contributed to this outcome: (i)
    preparation for introduction of the Minimum Social Inclusion Income Program (MSIP); and (ii) submit law on
    MSIP to Parliament. The MSIP law was enacted in 2016, but the expected consolidation of means-tested
    programs has stalled, partly due to weak data processing and IT capacities. Increased budget to these
    programs has been postponed. The target for the outcome indicator (budget allocated for MSIP) was not met
    by the time of evaluation (no data was available) (baseline value of RON 1.2 billion, target of RON 1.8 billion,
    data not available for 2018 at time of ICR (ICR, p. 8)).

    6 . Improving corporate governance of state-owned enterprises. This outcome was linked to three prior
    actions: (i) clarification of line ministry and MoPF responsibilities over SOEs; (ii) law on corporate
    governance of public enterprises; and (iii) IPO for Electrica (the electricity supply and distribution company).
    These actions aimed to improve compliance with international accounting and reporting standards and
    professionalization of management. Given the dominance of SOEs in the energy sector and their poor
    performance, privatization via IPO in energy transmission and distribution was a priority to help restructure
    the energy sector as well as stemming fiscal losses. Too few important SOEs adopted professionally
    appointed Boards or management for much impact to be realized, but the IPO of Electrica was the largest
    IPO ever in Romania and was over-subscribed by more than 200 percent. The target for the outcome
    indicator (number of SOEs with professional appointments to Board and management) was partially
    achieved, with several SOEs still in the process of appointments (baseline value of 25 SOEs, target of 80,
    actual value of 32 (ICR, p. 8)).



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     improved functioning of property, energy and capital markets

    Rationale
    As for the first objective, the program documents lay out the underlying problems and challenges for
    property, energy, and capital markets in Romania as the FEG program was being prepared. Romania lacked
    the well-functioning markets necessary for investor confidence and adequate private investment. In property
    markets, insufficient information on real estate ownership undercut trading of property rights and collateral-
    based lending. In energy markets, high energy costs were driven by poor supply efficiency and lagging
    investments in energy infrastructure, both linked to a lack of integration with pan-European markets. Also,
    climate-friendly energy infrastructure was lacking. In capital markets, low efficiency (especially in financial
    supervision) and an underdeveloped non-bank financial sector provided a drag on growth. (FEG 1 PD, pp.
    15-19, FEG 2 PD, p. 18). These challenges map directly to the five outcome targets under this objective in
    the FEG program.



                                                                                                          Page 8 of 16
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Programmatic DPL 1(P148957)



    1 . Improving urban real estate registration. Two prior actions support this outcome: (i) independence of
    National Agency of Cadaster and Land Registration; and (ii) amended law on cadaster and real estate
    registration. Rural property registration was postponed (via FEG 2 redesign) beyond the program period.
    Cadaster reform faced opposition from notaries and lawyers whose business was threatened. Urban
    registration improved, but the impact on investment, which is driven by many factors, is difficult to assess.
    The cadaster law was amended rather than replaced. A new comprehensive law is required to achieve a
    European-standard property market, but interagency disagreements and political obstacles need to be
    overcome. The outcome target (share of registered urban real estate) was met by the end-program (baseline
    of 39 percent of urban real estate registered, target of 57 percent, actual of 57.3 percent (ICR, p. 9)). .

    2 . Completing energy markets liberalization. This outcome was pursued via three prior actions: (i)
    nonresidential electricity market liberalized; (ii) nonresidential gas market liberalized; and (iii) day-ahead
    market coupled with neighboring countries. Liberalization of the gas and electricity markets has led to
    convergence of energy prices to EU levels as international trade in electricity and gas trading on centralized
    platforms have grown. The outcome indicator targets (trading in gas and in electricity) were exceeded by
    end-program (although both targets were achieved a year later than expected under FEG 1) (baseline of
    zero natural gas traded at centralized platforms, target of two billion square meters, actual of 5.9 billion (ICR,
    p. 9)).

    3 . Improving the functioning of capital financial markets. Two prior actions aimed for this outcome: (i)
    strengthen the financial supervisory authority board; and (ii) amendments to the capital markets law. The
    policy actions strengthened corporate governance of the supervisory board and improved alignment of the
    regulatory regime with international best practice. The supervisory authority issued numerous rules during
    the program period to streamline capital market participation. At the time of evaluation, only one benchmark
    towards emerging market status—stock exchange liquidity—remained unmet, and efforts were underway to
    improve liquidity through, for example, listing of SOEs. The outcome indicator measuring progress towards
    gaining secondary emerging market status was met by the time of evaluation (baseline of four benchmarks
    towards secondary emerging market status met, target of eight, actual of eight (ICR, p. 9)).

    4 . Mitigating climate change. One prior action contributed to this outcome: a national climate change
    strategy. The strategy proposed mitigation measures for greenhouse gas emissions across nine sectors as a
    first stage towards EU commitments to cut overall emissions by 40 percent by 2030 from 1990 levels. The
    outcome indicator of reduced energy sector emissions was exceeded (baseline of 86.5 million tons of
    greenhouse gas emissions, target of 80.0 million tons, actual of 75.4 millon tons (ICR, p. 9)); however, the
    link from the output (the strategy) to energy emissions is loose at best. Nevertheless, the strategy was an
    important step signaling Romania’s commitment to a climate agenda going forward.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




                                                                                                          Page 9 of 16
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Programmatic DPL 1(P148957)




5. Outcome

The rating is consistent with high relevance of objectives, substantial relevance of design, and modest
achievement of each objective, The FEG series was central to delivery of CPS results and was closely aligned
to the government’s strategies. Its design matched its objectives, and both the program of policy actions and the
related results were adjusted to accommodate changing country circumstances. However, the weakening of the
set of policy actions as part of the program redesign under FEG 2 meant less progress towards achieving
program objectives. The program secured several achievements such as energy sector liberalization, but also
fell short on important aspects, including better coverage of social assistance, improved performance and
accountability of SOEs, and more efficient public expenditure management.


a.     Outcome Rating
       Moderately Unsatisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

The risk to development outcomes is significant, especially because of the number of outcomes that required
additional action to be realized or maintained. Political risks intensified following the December 2016
parliamentary elections and a new government replacing the politically weak but bipartisan technocratic regime
in office from November 2015 to December 2016. The ICR found an increasingly weak sustainability outlook,
with steadily deteriorating government ownership of the program and weakening commitment to reform and
rising political and institutional instability undermining implementation capacity. Despite extensive support from
the EU and the international financial institutions, governance, institutional and capacity risks remain high. Most
at risk are the outcomes on financing and coverage of social assistance and on corporate governance of state-
owned enterprises because neither relevant law had been fully implemented at the time of evaluation. Further
progress on pharmaceutical prices through scaling up requires overcoming stakeholder opposition, while further
progress related to faster execution of public investment projects, especially in infrastructure, is threatened by
capacity constraints and weak leadership (ICR, pp. 18, 26-27).




a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
       Substantial

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     The FEG series supported achievement of CPS objectives and the government’s own objectives in the
     program’s policy areas. The policy areas addressed key obstacles to sustainable growth and poverty


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Programmatic DPL 1(P148957)



  mitigation, but the amount of progress towards those overarching goals designed into the program (as prior
  actions) was ramped back for the second operation as the Bank responded to the government’s shifting
  policy objectives, despite the delay of the second operation to allow the government more time for policy
  progress. The macroeconomic framework was adequate throughout the program period, with continuous
  oversight and surveillance provided by the Bank, the European Commission, and the IMF. Design and
  implementation of the program were supported by Bank analytic and advisory work such as the 2013
  Country Economic Memorandum, Functional Reviews of various ministries, the extensive RAS program,
  and related investment operations (ICR, p. 17). The widespread use of RAS for assessment and
  preparation of policy actions created detailed knowledge about how reforms could be implemented and
  built commitment with the relevant stakeholders (although in retrospect, it was not enough to make up for
  limited capacity). Assessments of fiduciary aspects and environmental aspects and a Poverty and Social
  Impact Analysis were all undertaken appropriately. A candid assessment of risks was provided, with
  mitigation proposed (through the RAS program, close monitoring and dialogue with implementing agencies,
  and coordination with the IMF and EU). The M&E framework set quantitative indicators for the achievement
  of outcomes where possible. Implementation arrangements were carefully selected, with MoPF as the
  coordinating agency for the government, because of its positive track record on previous DPLs, and
  responsibilities clearly delineated among other ministries and agencies. (FEG 2 PD, ICR)

  The preparation of a second multisector operation, FEG 2, was made much more difficult by the turnover in
  ministers, which accelerated after FEG 1. The government’s support for policy reform generally waned with
  the changes in ministers. The Bank’s solution was to wait until a sufficient level of support could be built for
  an acceptable program, working closely with both political and technical levels of government. FEG2
  measures were scaled back to be less ambitious given the reduced appetite for difficult reforms. The hoped
  for result would be less expansive, but still targeting key binding constraints where it was thought progress
  could be made.

  Corruption is not mentioned directly in the program documents or the ICR, but the team provided insights to
  IEG into how the series was specifically designed to address concerns about rent-seeking and opposition
  to reform. The program supported policy actions that disrupted the existing political economy in Romania.
  State enterprise, cadaster, and drug procurement reforms all faced opposition from vested interests. Health
  procurement reform, although not a part of the program when the first operation was prepared, was critical
  by the time of the second operation. Mis-procurement of drugs had led to numerous deaths among patients
  from poor quality drugs. Taking on this difficult corruption agenda required intensive and lengthy
  preparation of FEG 2. Reform momentum was waning by the time of preparation of FEG 2, but its policy
  actions represent steps forward that are not easily reversed. The team explained to IEG that although not
  all areas were successful, the reforms that were implemented represent significant improvements on their
  own and can also serve as the starting point for a future reform-minded government.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Programmatic DPL 1(P148957)



 As the centerpiece of the CPS, the DPL series was continuously monitored and supervised from the
 Country Office, which allowed for easy communication with government, and with frequent missions. RAS
 were used in most policy areas supported by the FEG for guidance on implementation, with new activities
 added as needed. Bank dialogue with government was candid and constructive, providing explicit advice
 on how to address obstacles to implementation. This intensive supervision helped contain slippages in
 implementation, but it could not counteract declining government commitment and could only partially
 remedy worsening capacity constraints. The M&E framework established by FEG 1 proved difficult to track
 over a short timeframe, so it was revised with FEG 2 to end-program indicators. The triggers for FEG2 were
 important for tracking progress during FEG1, even though some were weakened prior to approval of FEG2
 (ICR, pp. 31-32).

 Two ISRs were conducted during the series, the first in June 2014, one month after approval of the first
 operation, and a second in October 2017, just before the series closed in December 2017. Additional ISRs
 should have been undertaken every 12 months during the series.

 See Section 7.a. on support from Bank AAA for program implementation.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  Government commitment to the program was strong at the time of FEG 1, was maintained through a
  technocratic government in 2016, but slackened during 2017. Preceding programs with the Bank, the
  EU, and the IMF during 2009-2014 had demonstrated the government’s commitment to macroeconomic
  stabilization and policy reform. Frequent changes in government and senior administration weakened
  government commitment by 2017 (ICR, p. 33). Overall coordination and guidance and specific
  implementation responsibilities had been clearly laid out for the responsible ministries and agencies
  (ICR, p. 20). Consultations on the policy measures supported by the FEG series were undertaken, by or
  in coordination with the Bank, with a wide range of stakeholders, including unions, business
  associations, stock market participants, Parliament and political parties, the media, and civil society as
  appropriate (ICR, p. 29). Close collaboration was maintained with the European Commission, the IMF,
  the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the European Investment Bank, and the World
  Health Organization (ICR, p. 12). However, the weakening of government commitment dominated all
  other features of government performance, delaying preparation of FEG 2 and requiring a downgrade of
  policy actions (FEG 2 PD, ICR, p. 33).




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Programmatic DPL 1(P148957)



  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  MoPF was designated as coordinator for the program because of the ministry’s experience in
  implementing previous DPLs, and several ministries (Health, Labor) as well as various agencies were
  responsible for implementation of different outcomes under the series. MoPF performed well in bringing
  issues to the attention of the Ministry of Finance and the Policy Committee (but they were not able to
  resolve substantive problems that arose) (ICR, p. 34).




  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  Although prior actions were completed, the monitoring of outcomes fell short of what would be needed to
  assess the impact of policy actions on program objectives, especially during implementation. The M&E
  framework set quantitative indicators for the achievement of outcomes where possible. However, because of
  trouble with short-duration tracking of indicators set out in FEG 1, results indicators were revised as part of FEG
  2 design, setting only end of program targets (to match the frequency of related data) and no interim tracking
  (as well as no interim indicators). As a result, M&E was designed to provide evidence of end-program
  achievements. There was no monitoring of progress towards indicator targets, although progress was
  monitored on triggers (ICR, pp. 19-21).



b. M&E Implementation
  MoPF was given overall responsibility for M&E implementation, with line ministries and implementing
  agencies submitting data to MoPF and providing briefings on progress and bottlenecks. The ICR notes that
  ministries and agencies involved in implementation lacked the mandate and/or capacity to monitor impacts of
  policy actions sufficiently. For example, MoPF lacked a mandate to analyze available data and formulate
  recommendations for SOE governance, and the Energy Regulatory Authority and the Agency for Cadaster
  and Land Registration were not able to assess the impact of policy actions on energy trading practices or
  real estate investment respectively (ICR, pp. 19- 21). IMF and EU monitoring eased after their disbursing
  programs ended in 2015.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Programmatic DPL 1(P148957)




c. M&E Utilization
  Because of the lack of mandate and capacity noted above, M&E results were not able to inform decision-
  making (about the design of FEG 2 or to support ongoing implementation of policy actions and prevent
  backtracking). However, this inability to make use of M&E results did not have an impact on program
  success because close supervision and the monitoring of triggers were the main instruments for tracking
  progress.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  --




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  --



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  --



d. Other
  --



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                      ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                             Moderately             Moderately
Outcome                                                                          ---
                             Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Programmatic DPL 1(P148957)



Risk to Development
                              Substantial             Substantial                  ---
Outcome
                              Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory      ---
                              Satisfactory
                              Moderately              Moderately
Borrower Performance                                                               ---
                              Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
Quality of ICR                                        High                         ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

 This review concurs with the following key lessons presented in the ICR, (the lessons are summarized below,
 with some additional aspects added):

 1 . Successful development policy financing requires sustained ownership of reforms and strong borrower
 leadership throughout preparation and implementation of the policy agenda, which typically starts long before
 preparation of the operation or series and extends beyond its closing. In the case of this series, the risk of
 weakening political commitment was recognized from the start; and although the series adopted numerous
 mitigating actions, that risk materialized, and mitigating actions could not preserve fully the achievement of
 results. demonstrating that the original risk rating of “substantial” was correct.

 2 . A prior action (under a DPL) should not require a decision of Parliament. Instead, consultation and
 collaboration with Parliament should be part of DPL preparation, through the provision of adequate
 information and inclusion of key parliamentarians and advisors in capacity building programs. Resorting to
 government actions, such as emergency orders, as a substitute for Parliamentary action and in the interest of
 achieving DPL results, contributes over the medium-term to undermining of good governance and the
 legitimacy of government institutions.

 3 . Availability of technical assistance and advisory activities as needed during design and implementation of
 a program can improve quality and bolster government commitment. The RAS program was critical for design
 and implementation of the FEG series. Because these activities were funded by the EU, the government
 could overcome its reluctance to accept technical assistance, and the policy diagnostics and advice provided
 by the RAS should have ongoing usefulness to future pro-reform governments.

 4 . Good local coordination between the implementing agency and the Bank’s Country Office is crucial for
 achieving DPL results. In this case, effective coordination between MoPF and the Bank was key for the
 effective monitoring of progress, allowing the responsible authorities and Bank management to intervene
 effectively at key moments during reform implementation.



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Programmatic DPL 1(P148957)




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is complete. It covers all relevant aspects set out in the ICR guidelines. It is frank and informative on
all key aspect of the DPL series, presenting substantial evidence and analysis in support of its assessment.
This series has a complicated history, which the ICR does a fine job in clarifying. Based on the extensive
evidence and narrative, the ICR presents a fair evaluation of what the series accomplished and of both Bank
and borrower performance. As is true for many DPLs, M&E and the tracking of results indicators is less
important during implementation than progress against triggers for the next operation. The ICR was very
candid about the importance of the series’ objectives, which were central to the CPS and to the country’s
development path, and the mixed results on those objectives by the end of the program. The lessons
presented in the ICR emerge clearly from the preceding assessment.

The ICR could have discussed more directly the decision to move ahead with the second operation. The ICR
does describe key elements of this process, including the use of RAS activities, links to other operations,
continuous engagement with the government, waiting 26 months for policy progress, and decreasing the loan
amount. The key risk that materialized, which was a politically driven decline in commitment to the reform
program, was highlighted.

As noted above in Section 7.a., although corruption is not mentioned in the ICR, the team explained to IEG
how the series was designed to address corruption and related concerns. The ICR omitted reporting on an
11th results indicator that was part of FEG 2’s Policy and Results Matrix and linked to a FEG 1 prior action
setting up an electronic auction system for the primary government securities market. This prior action was
part of debt management under FEG 1, was shifted to capital markets under FEG 2, and back to debt
management in the ICR. No data was presented so it is not known if the target was achieved or not. However,
this is a minor issue that did not affect the assessment presented in the ICR.




a. Quality of ICR Rating
     High




                                                                                                     Page 16 of 16
