     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pastoral Community Development III (P130276)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022035

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P130276                                   Pastoral Community Development III

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Ethiopia                                  Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 COFN-C1350,COFN-C1490,COFN-               31-Dec-2018                                        100,902,085.76
 C1500,IDA-53350

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Dec-2013                               08-Jul-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          110,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           110,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       100,902,085.76                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ebru Karamete              Fernando Manibog             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The formulations of the project development objectives (PDO) for the Ethiopia Pastoral Community
   Development Project -III were similar in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) and in the Financing
   Agreement (FA). The PAD statement was (page 6) “to improve access to community demand-driven social
   and economic services for pastoralists and agro-pastoralists of Ethiopia”; and the FA statement was (page 5):



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pastoral Community Development III (P130276)



   “to improve access to community demand-driven social and economic services for pastoralists and agro-
   pastoralists in targeted Regions of the Recipient's territory”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had four components:

   1: Community Driven Service Provision (Original Amount: US$136.7 million; Actual Amount:
   US$199.1million)

   Component 1 had three sub-components: (i) Community Investment Fund (CIF) that provides investment
   funds together with community contributions to support community sub-projects in targeted pastoral and
   agro-pastoral kebeles (sub-districts) to build demand-driven social and economic infrastructure; (ii) support
   to institutionalizing the community driven development (CDD) approach, by building community institutions
   that can engage in planning and resource mobilization, implement small public investment projects, and
   participate in the oversight of service delivery; and (iii) community level self-monitoring and facilitating
   periodic learning. Additional funds totaling US$ 43.9 million were obtained from IFAD.

   2: Rural Livelihoods Program (RLP) (Original AmountUS$45.9million; Actual
   Amount:US$20.6million)

   The component had three sub-components:(i) promotion of new pastoral Savings and Credit Cooperatives
   (SACCOs) for enhanced access to financial services; (ii) supporting beneficiaries for identification and
   development of livelihood (viable investment) opportunities (i.e., strengthen and/or diversify their production
   systems and encourage innovation); and (iii) promotion of adaptive research and innovative practices by
   supporting the establishment of farmer/pastoralist-research groups to bring together pastoralists and
   researchers to inter alia undertake adaptive research trials, introduce inputs/equipment associated with new
   technologies, support on-farm seed production particularly for animal fodder and nutrition rich crops for
   human consumption; and (iv) an innovation fund to finance proposals from farmer/pastoralist-research
   groups.

   Regarding the reasons for cost reduction, the project team provided the following information: “Following the
   financial monitoring and disbursement forecast, it become apparent that the second and the third
   components were over budgeted and were not in a position to fully utilize the allocated budget within the
   project time frame. On the other hand, the first component, which was capital intensive investment, had
   started to suffer from financial constraint. Therefore, detailed financial forecasts have been made for the
   four components and adjustment were made accordingly. Thus, the two components had to release
   significant amount of budget that could not be utilized after financing all the planned activities and the
   balance went to the demanding first component, and also some amount to the fourth component
   (management cost”.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pastoral Community Development III (P130276)



   3: Development Learning and Knowledge Management (Original Amount: US$4.7 million; Actual
   Amount:US$2.4 million)

   The component included activities to complement community level development with policy dialogue,
   strategic thinking around pastoralist development issues and enhanced transparency and learning.

   4: Project Management and M&E (Original Amount: US$ 20.6 million; Actual:US$28.3 million)

   The component included project management and monitoring and evaluation support at all levels, federal,
   regional and woreda, for implementation of the project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: Total project costs estimated at appraisal was US$210.2 million, and two additional
   financings were obtained for (IFAD’s) portion. Actual project costs at closing were US$250.3 million. The
   increased costs were due to increase of project scope for Component I (to cover additional sub-projects and
   beneficiaries

   Financing: The project was financed by an IDA credit (IDA-53350) of US$110.0 million and at project
   closing disbursement was US$100.9 million (92 percent of the original amount). International Fund for
   Agricultural Development Fund (IFAD) provided US$85.0 million (IFAD Loan No COFN- C1350), and with
   two additional financings of US$15.0 million and US$28.9 million, the original allocation went up to
   US$128.9 million. At closing, 93 percent (US$120.3 million) was disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower planned to provide US$1.0 million; the actual contribution at closing
   was US$4.9 million. It was also planned that communities would provide US$14.2 million; the actual
   contribution was US$24.3 million.

   Dates: The project was approved on December 12, 2013 and project effectiveness took about five months
   (May 15, 2014). The project was to be closed on December 31, 2018 but the actual closing was about 6
   months later on July 8, 2019. The reason for extension was to harmonize project closing with the closing
   date of IFAD financing.

   Restructurings: Two level II restructurings that would not require board approval was made on February
   26, 2018 and June 27, 2018. Both included reallocation among disbursement categories and extension of
   the closing date.

   A split rating is not conducted by this ICR Review, as (i) the PDO wasn’t revised; (ii)the additional financing
   increased the scope for the first component; and (ii) although the costs for the two components decreased,
   these changes did not reduce the scope of the activities or PDO indicator targets.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 15
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Pastoral Community Development III (P130276)



The project development objective was highly relevant to the strategies of the World Bank and the
Ethiopian government. Pastoralism and agro-pastoralism in Ethiopia is an economic livelihood system for
more than 12 million people that are based primarily on extensive livestock production and communities
that live in the arid and semi-arid lowlands of Ethiopia. Livelihoods of pastoralists are impacted by access to
rangeland as well as mobility, access to markets, access to services (e.g., animal health care), and climatic
shocks. Increased demand for livestock in both domestic and foreign markets have been driving changes in
pastoralist livelihood systems leading to commercialization and a process of consolidation in which the
ownership of larger herds is concentrated into the hands of fewer and wealthier herd owners – and a
parallel process of a growing number of pastoral groups owning fewer livestock animals. These latter
groups are being gradually pushed out to look for other livelihood options for survival as the activity is
becoming unviable. Key development issues faced by pastoralists include: (i) limited public participation in
local decision-making processes; (ii) poor access to social services; (iii) dependence on extensive livestock
production with poorly developed support services, and uneven access to markets; (iv) long-term
environmental degradation; (v) vulnerability to recurring droughts exacerbated by climate change; (vi)
increasing competition for natural resource use; and (vii) constrained mobility due to new settlements and
large scale development schemes.

The Government strategy in the short term included reduction in pastoralists’ vulnerability and improving
their capacity to climate change and provision of appropriate basic infrastructure and services; for the long
term, facilitation of gradual transition of pastoralists towards permanent settlement particularly through the
development of irrigation infrastructure, improvement in human capital, development of market networks,
development of financial services, and investment in road infrastructure and communication networks. In
2003, the government initiated the 15-year Pastoral Community Development Program (PCDP) with
financing from the World Bank and IFAD. The PCDP was designed to empower communities, woreda
(district) and regional (sub-national) governments to better manage local development in pastoral and
agropastoral areas. The program aimed to develop relevant institutions serving pastoralist communities and
to establish effective models for investment in delivery of public services (social and economic) that
engaged pastoralists more centrally in their own development processes. It also sought to improve and
diversify the livelihoods of pastoral households and promote community-based disaster risk management.
PCDP-III was the third and final phase of this series of operations to support remote pastoral communities.

The PDO was and remains highly relevant to the strategic priorities outlined within the Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) at appraisal and Country Partnership Framework (CPF) at closing. The PDO was relevant
to both pillars of the CPS (FY13-16) that were on fostering competitiveness and employment and
enhancing resilience and reducing vulnerabilities. The PDO was aligned with all three pillars of the CPF for
the period FY18 to FY22: (i) boosting productivity and private sector development for structural
transformation; (ii) building resilience and inclusiveness; and (iii) supporting institutional accountability and
confronting corruption.

The project also has been a key contributor of IFAD’s strategies for Ethiopia. IFAD’s Country Strategy and
Opportunity Paper (COSOP) identified investment in pastoral communities as one of its main pillars of
engagement in Ethiopia.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 15
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Pastoral Community Development III (P130276)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve access to community demand-driven social and economic services for pastoralists and agro-
               pastoralists in targeted regions of Ethiopia.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change:

               The project had a sound Theory of Change (TOC); its activities were logically and causally linked and
               complemented each other, and their cumulative effect would lead to the achievement of the Project
               Development Objective (PDO). The project’s investment funds were designed to deliver the following input/
               activities: (i) to build social and economic infrastructure with a CDD approach, as well as capacity building
               activities for community institutions, and pastoralists and agro-pastoralists; and (ii) to promote new pastoral
               SACCOs to improve saving cultures and identify livelihood opportunities for these households. These, in turn,
               would lead to outcomes that include improvements in the responsiveness of social and economic services to
               the demands of concerned communities and increases in their access to those services. These project
               outcomes were expected to contribute in the medium and the long-term to the objective of improving the
               livelihoods of pastoralists and agro-pastoralists, as measured in terms of growth and stability of incomes,
               improvements in their health, nutrition and education status, as well as greater empowerment and decision-
               making authority in local development initiatives. The assumptions were reasonable and included the
               following: community contributions were sufficiently made, and willingness by beneficiaries to adopt the
               identified livelihood opportunities and the technologies identified to solve production / business problems.

               Outputs:

               The project implemented the following activities:

                     Constructed, furnished and operationalized a total of 1,362 education subprojects accounting for 70%
                        of the schools in intervention kebeles.
                       Constructed 889 new water supply subprojects.
                       Built 79 small scale irrigation subprojects, including the installation of new irrigation works and the
                        rehabilitation of existing works.
                       Constructed 496 human health posts which provided quality health services to the beneficiaries
                       Built 321 animal health posts and made them fully functional.
                       Created and supported 857 Pastoral Savings and Credit Cooperatives (PASACCOs) exceeding the
                        target by 18.63 percent.
                       Established 129 Participatory Research Groups (PRGs) which undertook a variety of research
                        activities. These included the promotion and demonstration of 116 improved technologies and good
                        practices aimed at improving the productivity of crops and livestock among the target pastoral and
                        agropastoral communities


                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pastoral Community Development III (P130276)




      Provided (through woreda extension teams) technical advisory services such as viable income
       generating activity (IGA) selection, business plan preparation and supportive supervision to the
       households that were engaged in viable IGAs.
      Conducted a technical and market analysis study that identified 17 different viable IGAs among the
       long list of IGAs identified by the communities. Based on the study document, the identified IGA
       opportunities were introduced to 69,467 (38,769 females) households. Of the total advised
       households, 46,148 (26,862 females) households were engaged in viable IGAs.

Outcomes:

The project substantially achieved its outcome targets. It created access to basic social services by
supporting construction of a total of 3,353 community subprojects (including schools, health posts, potable
water delivery, and other types of services) which is an achievement of 179% of the cumulative target set in
the project results framework. Substantial achievements were reported in planning and mobilizing resources
for community subprojects. A total of 6,253,734 direct project beneficiaries benefited from these activities
exceeding the end target of 4,500,000 people (percentage of female beneficiaries were slightly lower than the
target (with actual 48 percent, less than the target of 50 percent). Detailed achievements are as follows:

      The actual number of students enrolled (grade 1-8) in the project-constructed schools was 617,104,
       which is significantly above the target of 182,600.
      The number of people provided with access to improved water sources under the project exceeded its
       target, with an actual achievement of 2,526,632 people compared to the target of 2,000,000. In
       addition, about 11,709,393 livestock animals benefited from functional water subprojects constructed
       by the project. Irrigation schemes enabled 6,801 hectares to be brought into cultivation with both cash
       and subsistence crops, (fruits, vegetables, maize, sorghum, teff, etc.) benefitting 39,314 households.
       Yet, in spite of the project’s various water supply subprojects, water remained a priority need for a
       large proportion of households in both the beneficiary and non-beneficiary groups. This was because
       of the inadequate budget allocation by kebeles to develop permanent and improved water sources
       such as deep well water points.
      The number of people with access to a basic package of health, nutrition, or reproductive health
       services significantly exceeded its target, with an actual achievement of 1,457,714 people compared
       to the target of 1,250,000 (490,631 of these beneficiaries were females). In addition, 352,167
       households in the project kebeles were able to access regular veterinary extension services. The
       percentage of households that identified health facilities as a priority need before the five-year period
       declined from 86% to 53% at project completion. The percentage of beneficiaries who identified
       nutrition services as a top priority need before the five-year period declined by 6 percentage points,
       while for non-beneficiaries, the percentage rose by 5 percentage points.
      The percentage of household heads in project kebeles who report that available public services
       address their priority needs exceeded targets for male household heads but slightly short for female
       household heads (Target: 80% Male and 80% Female; Actual 83% Male and 77% Female). The
       priority needs for public services were fulfilled for 81% of beneficiary households over the five-year
       period, compared to 49% of non-beneficiary households. Additionally, the end-line report stated that
       the proportion of households that identified schools, water, and health facilities as top three priorities
       before the five-year period, declined significantly.
      The proportion of ‘households who are members of SACCOs’ to the ‘total households in project
       kebeles increased to 15.3% from 5.4% at baseline. (whereas only 9% of non-beneficiary households
       were members of SACCOs). The SACCOs improved the target communities’ saving culture and

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Pastoral Community Development III (P130276)



                                   access to rural financial services in the remote pastoral and agropastoral areas where a formal
                                   banking system was non-existent. This is evident as 68% of the beneficiary households that were
                                   members of SACCOs took loans during the five-year period, compared to only 41% of non-beneficiary
                                   households.
                                  The number of households undertaking viable Income Generating Activities (IGA) supported by
                                   business plans significantly exceeded targets (actual: 57,348 vs. target:32,200).
                                  The engagement in IGAs improved the financial capability of many beneficiary households. The
                                   average household income in the year prior to the end-line survey was higher for beneficiary
                                   households (Birr 13,062) than non-beneficiary households (Birr 9,969). Two-thirds of the beneficiary
                                   households engaged in IGAs indicated that the IGA improved their households’ wellbeing and nutrition
                                   by increasing and diversifying their income, giving them extra money to invest in productive assets or
                                   to expand their businesses.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            While two outcome indicators regarding female beneficiaries were slightly less than the targets, the project
                            significantly exceeded most of its outcome targets.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency: An ex-ante economic and financial analysis was prepared estimating the
   incremental benefits of the project activities using the original cost of US$210.3 million. The economic internal
   rate of return (EIRR) was estimated at 16 percent and a net present value (NPV) of US$12.5 million, based on a
   10-year period of analysis and assuming a discount rate of 10 percent.

   Ex-post economic and financial analysis modelled the financial and economic benefits from the first and second
   components. The third component was assumed to support the impacts generated by the other two technical
   components, rather than lead to direct benefits of its own. For the 1st component, four types of sub-projects
   which amounted to 92% of all financed subprojects were included (primary schools, water supply, human health
   posts and veterinary posts). The impacts of the others were assumed to be of a similar order of magnitude
   (given the CDD approach). All four investments have been found to be economically justified, through the
   quantification of the expected benefits for the local communities (time saved, increase in earnings, better human


                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pastoral Community Development III (P130276)



and animal health, etc.). Overall, the additional benefits (as opposed to without the project) per year ranged from
US$3,151 for a typical health post, to US$21,042 for a veterinary post, to US$29,164 for a water access point,
and to US$ 55,977 for a primary school. For the second component, the benefits have been determined from
the household income obtained from engagement in project supported income generating activities with
financing from SACCOs. The income generated is derived from the available M&E data (while income
generated varied based on the activity, for a typical 6-month loan cycle, the weighted average loan size was
US$168, which would yield an average semi-annual income of US$66). Assuming that 100% of business plans
have resulted in viable income generating activities (as the project M&E system reports), the component’s
results were positive, with an EIRR of 26% and the NPV of ETB 206.5 million (US$7.5 million) on the overall
expenditure of US$20.9 million. Developing the findings from the final evaluation into IGA engagement
estimates, the results are still positive, but more modest, both in terms of NPV (ETB 87.3 million (US$3.2
million)) and EIRR (17%).

The economic results of alternative scenarios have also been calculated. Overall, the results are positive in all
scenarios. Assuming the more realistic RLP achievements in terms of IGAs; (b) assuming the more conservative
subproject number and (c) assuming both conservative options for community driven service provision and rural
livelihoods program activities. In the base scenario, PCDP-III’s economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is 34%,
with a net present value (NPV) of additional benefits of US$ 180 million, against the project expenditure of
US$250 million. In scenario C, with conservative estimates for both components, the EIRR is 30% and the NPV
is US$ 155.9 million.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency: There were some minor delays and reallocation of funds between
components. Despite a slower start, the implementation gathered pace during the second half and the project
utilized all the available financing. The extension of project closing date for about six months was mainly to
address additional sub-project financed via the additional financing. However, project management costs
increased by 38 percent from the planned amount and the ICR did not mention the reason for this increase. The
project task team subsequently stated that: “The project was operating in the most remote and disadvantaged
peripheral parts of the country, where the basic public services were very limited and the regional and local
government structures are poorly capacitated to effectively manage the project, Thus, these had resulted in
enhanced operation costs by the project, including additional staffing on the ground for enhanced outreach,
particularly during the initial phase-in stages. In addition, the project was extended for six months and that had a
significant effect on the operation cost. Following the recommendations of the Bank and IFAD, some positions
such as safeguards, were added to the project staffing. Similarly, due to inflation and high turnover of staff, the
project was subject to a couple of salary increment and staffing structural adjustments that had also an
implication”.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)



                                                                                                       Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pastoral Community Development III (P130276)



                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s objective is highly relevant to the strategies of the World Bank and the Government both at
appraisal and at closing. The project’s efficacy in achieving the development objective is rated as substantial
based on the evidence provided on improved access to community demand-driven social and economic
services and livelihood benefits. Efficiency is rated substantial based on the project’s EIRRs and NPVs, even
under alternative scenarios. Based on these three sub-ratings, the project’s overall outcome is rated
satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks could hinder the sustainability of the project’s development outcomes:

Political Risks (recurrent conflict). The project areas are susceptible to conflicts among different
groups/ethnicities related to resources, marriage, cattle raiding practices, historical enmity, and vengeance.
The conflicts are likely to deter mobility and everyday activities, thus endangering the development
outcomes. For instance, some schools constructed by the project stopped providing services due to the
conflicts that occurred. Also, these factors pose risks to the sustained O&M of these investments.

Institutional Risks: Weak woreda office capacity, high staff turnover to support communities, as well as
weak agricultural extension services, and lack of experienced and skilled teachers causes limited access to
improved agricultural technologies or weakens the positive outcomes on education and other social
infrastructure. These threaten the sustainability of the development outcome of livelihood interventions made
by the project.

Financial Risks: The limited sources of income of participating communities and lack of improved income
sources were also identified as risk factors for the sustainability of SACCOs, and likely to deter members
from continuing their membership. Interventions such as further enhancement of technical capacity of
committee members, increasing the number of members and formation of unions were needed to minimize
this risk.

Socio-Cultural Risks: The outcomes were challenged or sometimes resisted by the communities due to
the prevailing socio-cultural norms. These challenges persisted mainly in areas of education, human health



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pastoral Community Development III (P130276)



service and natural resource management. For instance, as reported in the end-line survey, there were many
community members who didn’t allow their daughters to attend school.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project had the benefit of two predecessor projects that had tested approaches, built implementation
  structures and generated lessons to draw from. In addition, the World Bank financed the analytical work
  and consultations necessary to inform the design of the project. Some of the key lessons were: (i)
  initiatives by communities and local government need to be complemented by adequate
  implementation/oversight support; (ii) significant awareness raising and financial literacy training is
  required for livelihoods development, (iii) vulnerability to recurring droughts should be addressed under a
  comprehensive disaster risk management strategy’ (iv) there is therefore a need for continuous
  sensitization of the woreda leadership and office heads as well as regular experience sharing among
  woredas, (v) gender: it is important to proactively mainstream the targeting of women in community
  consultations as well as to address their constraints in engaging with the process, e.g., training to women
  leaders, separate focus group discussions for women, including women as role models in project teams.

  Risk assessment and mitigation measures were adequate. The project identified design, social and
  environmental risks as substantial due to the challenges of implementing the project in remote
  underserved areas where implementation capacity was weak, pastoral communities had complex social
  relations prone to conflicts, and the environment was fragile.” The project relied on mitigation measures
  that had been well tested and found to be effective under the previous projects.

  The project results framework and M&E system and indicators were adequate. All aspects related to
  procurement, financial management, and safeguard issues were sufficiently addressed during project
  preparation and appraisal.

  The Bank’s Quality at Entry is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (paras 113-114) noted that the Bank allocated sufficient budgetary and staff resources and the
 project closely monitored and supervised the project. While there were three Task Team Leaders, there
 were no disruptions in supervision. The Bank’s task team carried out regular implementation support
 missions (an average of two implementation support missions per year), thereby facilitating timely attention
 to technical, safeguards and fiduciary issues in collaboration with the Project Coordination Unit. All
 supervision missions included field visits to evaluate the quality of infrastructure work and project
 implementation on the ground, followed up by timely and regular aide memoirs and management letters.

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pastoral Community Development III (P130276)



 Interim technical missions were also periodically organized to address issues in the project. The task team
 was solution-oriented and regularly followed up with the client on issues and status of agreed action plans.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the project had a well-defined results framework with appropriate indicators that covered the
 outcomes of the PDO statement. Most of the indicators were specific, measurable, achievable, relevant,
 and time bound. The institutional arrangement for M&E was properly designed from federal to kebele
 levels. Federal Project Coordination Unit had the overall responsibility for M&E that was supported by
 regional M&E officers, Mobile Support Team leaders, and woreda coordinators. As most of the staff of
 previous phases of the project were retained, the project had the necessary capacity for data collection,
 analysis, and dissemination.



b. M&E Implementation
  The collection of M&E data was made in an organized manner with data collection templates provided
  regularly to Woredas and Kebeles for efficient reporting. Regular M&E implementation at the woreda
  level and quarterly monitoring reviews at the regional level for learning ensured bottom up flow of project
  status and process information right up to the federal level and ensured close monitoring at all levels of
  project implementation. This helped the project build a comprehensive Excel database that was
  comprehensive, closely linked to the project’s operational activities, and oriented towards utilization by
  project managers to make implementation adjustments as well as to learn lessons.

  However, there was lack of a rigorous data quality assurance mechanism and absence of a web-based
  MIS, which was planned in the project design but was not rolled out in the project. In addition, there was
  a delay of more than two years in conducting the baseline survey. This was because initially, it was
  assumed by the government that the end-line data of PCDP II would be used as the baseline data of the
  previous project, but this was not feasible. Still, the baseline figures were not affected by the delay
  because the first year was spent in capacity building and planning and no field implementation was
  carried out.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project used M&E data to track implementation and review its performance. The information
  collected from the M&E system was also utilized by universities, researchers and policy makers for

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pastoral Community Development III (P130276)



  strategy and policy formulation related to pastoral communities. The M&E information was also used to
  derive the lessons for the upcoming projects (such as, Lowland Livelihood Resilience Project, LLRP).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was categorized as Category B in terms of environmental safeguards, triggering the following
   safeguards: OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental and Social Assessment, OP/BP 4.37 on Safety of Dams in
   cases of small dam construction (less than 4.5 meters) as part of small scale irrigation schemes or range-
   land development, Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Cultural Property (OP/BP 4.11), Pest Management
   (OP/BP 4.09), Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and
   Involuntary Settlement (OP/BP 4.12) as a precautionary measure, although this was not implemented under
   the previous project. Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared and disclosed on October 4, 2013 in
   country.

   The ICR (para 101) reported that all sub-projects were screened against any environmental and social risks
   and classified as category B or C. A site specific Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and
   Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAP) were prepared for the relevant sub-projects. Mitigation
   measures proposed by the ESMPs and ARAPs were implemented. Capacity building support including
   trainings were provided on safeguards and gender mainstreaming for woreda technical committee members
   and kebele development committee members, federal and regional core team members as well as Mobile
   Support Teams. For land acquisitions, the project ensured that the relevant local authorities acquired land
   with full consent of the project affected people and the processes followed were adequately documented.
   Also, the land compensation was made for eight project-affected households whose land was acquired
   during the project. The project followed an inclusive design to accommodate the needs of people with
   disability in the construction of schools and health centers.

   The ICR also reported that (para. 102), there were some delays in safeguard implementation and poor
   safeguard documentation, and weak site-specific safeguard instruments. In addition, while the Grievance
   Redressal Mechanism reportedly resolved the issues, proper documentation of the minor issues was not
   done.

   The ICR did not provide specific information regarding compliance of all safeguard policies. It noted that
   (para. 103) no outstanding environmental safeguards issues were reported, overall environmental and
   social safeguards compliance rating was ‘Moderately Satisfactory’. Also, the project team subsequently
   provided the following additional information:” The project implementation unit’s work relation with the
   regulatory agencies and the safeguards implementation and monitoring arrangement that has been put in
   place for management of environmental risks including safeguards staffing at operational levels could have
   been improved. To minimize potential environmental and health risks associated with the project financed
   infrastructure such as irrigation schemes, it is recommended that the beneficiary woredas should work
   closely with bureaus of health so that irrigation schemes or water points will not potentially be breeding sites
   for human or animal disease vectors. Besides, the operation and maintenance of the small-scale

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pastoral Community Development III (P130276)



  incineration facilities should be undertaken following the requirements of the World Bank environment,
  health and safety guidelines”.

  The project team subsequently provided the following additional safeguards compliance information:

  Natural Habitats:” The project activities did not lead to conversion of natural habitats. Activities which may
  have significant adverse impacts on natural habitats were excluded during environmental screening of the
  subprojects.”

  Pest Management: “The project activities did not lead to any significant increase in the application of
  pesticides and hence no adverse environmental impacts were encountered because of pesticides. The
  project also did not finance the procurement of any pesticides.”

  Physical Cultural Resources: “This policy was triggered for precautionary reasons though no direct risk on
  physical cultural resources was envisaged because of the project activities. The project activities did not
  cause any impact to physical cultural resources.”

  Safety of Dams: “This project did not finance any large dam. The small-scale irrigation structures were
  constructed in compliance with the requirements of OP/BP 4.37”.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: The ICR reported that (page 32), financial management improved over the
  project life. initial Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) were submitted late and with low quality, the issue was
  resolved over the years and the project was able to submit timely financial reports with good quality.
  Annual external audit reports of the project were consistently clean (unqualified opinion). Challenges were
  turnover of finance staff at all levels; delays in preparation and dissemination of approved budgets and
  weak internal controls over project fixed assets at woreda level. The ICR stated that (para. 104), the overall
  financial management of the project was rated Moderately Satisfactory. The FM risk for the project at
  project appraisal stage was rated ‘substantial’; and at the end of the project was rated ‘moderate’.

  Procurement: Procurement planning, processing and documentation improved during the course of
  implementation. Procurement staff were recruited at the federal, regional and MST levels, which was one
  reason for the successful performance of most of the procurement activities at various levels. There were
  regular capacity building activities carried out at all levels to ensure that procurement activities and contract
  administration of subprojects were carried out in compliance with the Community Procurement Manual of
  the project. The issues were: the documentation for all completed activities were weak or low quality; there
  was delay in implementation of the independent procurement audit with the first two fiscal years
  procurement audit report being submitted after two years’ delay. The procurement audit reports of the
  two years were carried out simultaneously and the report was submitted to the World Bank. Technical
  support was provided through procurement clinics.

  The ICR (para 108) reported that the procurement and contract management progress of the project was
  rated as Moderately Satisfactory.



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pastoral Community Development III (P130276)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR (para 63) reported that the project created opportunities for private sector actors involved in the
   construction business, mainly because of the many sub-projects such as schools, water points, and health
   posts needed to be built. For example, the brick-making business thrived in the project kebeles as the local
   communities preferred bricks procured from their own kebeles over bricks from distant towns. These
   opportunities strengthened the capacity of the suppliers in the project area because of the regular technical
   assistance and implementation support provided by the project.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provided valuable lessons. The most important follow with some modification of language:

      Capacity building support provided by Mobile Support Teams (MSTs) can bridge gaps
       in institutional capacity for project implementation. The key factors of success for the
       project implementation were the MSTs. The MSTs were highly capable teams with
       comprehensive skillsets to provide implementation and TA support at the woreda level. They
       were the backbone of the project and helped reduce the challenge of high staff turnover at
       the woreda level by serving as a backup for the woreda expert who might have moved on
       from the project. In low capacity contexts, WB projects need to consider a dedicated
       mechanism.
      A holistic approach for livelihood interventions can help achieve substantial results
       for CDD projects. The design of the project was informed by the practical lessons learned
       during the two previous operations. During the previous projects the Rural Livelihoods
       Program was only a subcomponent which in combination with the Community Investment
       Fund subcomponent constituted ‘Sustainable Livelihoods Enhancement. However, in this
       project livelihood creation was given due attention and it was a separate component
       constituting the following three subcomponents: (i) Promotion of new pastoral SACCOs, (ii)
       Identification and development of livelihood opportunities, and (iii) Promotion of adaptive
       research and innovative practices. Together, the three subcomponents ensured that the

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Pastoral Community Development III (P130276)



         project followed an integrated approach to establishing a proper setting for developing
         livelihoods. This holistic livelihood intervention has led to considerable positive impacts in
         terms of the income increase and poverty alleviation of beneficiaries in the project areas.

        Adequate time for planning in the first year of implementation is key for CDD projects.
         According to the project design, the first year of the project was to be spent on the planning
         and capacity building of the project following principles of CDD. The three-year
         implementation plan was formulated during this exercise, which built the necessary
         foundation for the project to be implemented effectively. Though this three-year plan was
         refined during the life of the project, it provided a useful perspective and starting point to the
         project team on how to implement the activities. CDD projects need to pay special attention
         to planning and capacity building to ensure a strong foundation for project implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The report was comprehensive and followed the guidelines. The project’s theory of change was adequately
presented and clear. The ICR’s lessons were useful. The weaknesses were: the safeguard information
provided by the ICR was broad, specific safeguard policy implementation and mitigation for all eight triggered
safeguards were not provided.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                          Page 15 of 15
