     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZR Catalytic Proj. Strengthen the INS (P125509)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0021991

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P125509                                     ZR Catalytic Proj. Strengthen the INS

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Democratic Republic of               Poverty and Equity


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16628                                    30-Jun-2017                                         11,037,433.06

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Jun-2014                                 28-Jun-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             11,800,000.00                                   11,800,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              11,800,000.00                                   11,037,433.06

 Actual                                          11,040,413.00                                   11,037,433.06




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Judyth L. Twigg               Malathi S. Jayawickrama         IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Catalytic Project to Strengthen the National Statistics
   Institute (INS) was to strengthen the capacity of INS to generate and disseminate statistical information (Grant
   Agreement, p. 5).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZR Catalytic Proj. Strengthen the INS (P125509)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project had three components:

   Component 1: Increasing INS technical capacity (estimated cost at appraisal US$0.86 million; actual
   cost US$0.97 million). The component was to increase the share of INS professional staff with formal
   degrees or on-the-job training in relevant areas: statistics, demography, economics, and information
   technology. This was to be achieved through: (i) pre-service formal training for competitive entry into
   regional statistical schools and subsequent scholarships tied to five-year binding contracts to work in the
   national statistical system; and (ii) on-the-job and thematic training for staff in various statistical tasks, such
   as survey data collection, quality control, and analysis.

   Component 2: Strengthening the non-technical environment (estimated cost at appraisal US$2.94
   million; actual cost US$7.35 million). The component was to improve the working environment by: (i)
   improving general management in INS through management and leadership training, and coaching to apply
   new skills; (ii) fiduciary capacity development through the provision of relevant training, financial
   management software and information technology systems, and support to potential needs for
   reorganization of the fiduciary practice at INS; (iii) improving the physical working environment by
   rehabilitating buildings used by INS technical departments in Kinshasa; and (iv) providing funds for office
   supplies, communication, gas, and other operating expenses for the Project Management Team.

   Component 3: Statistical production and dissemination (estimated cost at appraisal US$7.32 million;
   actual cost US$2.70 million). The component was to help develop critical statistical infrastructure, including:
   (i) the key cartography and pilot census phases of a population and housing census that was to allow the
   development of a master sampling frame for surveys and sector planning and monitoring; (ii) improved
   national accounts by including the urban informal sector; and (iii) improved access to and interpretability of
   statistical information by developing a statistical dissemination policy based on official principles of United
   Nations statistics and the African Charter of Statistics; provision of software for archiving data and training in
   the use of the software; quality control; enhanced internet bandwidth to disseminate the information through
   the INS web site; and anti-virus software.




   Significant Changes During Implementation

   The project was restructured twice (both were Level 2 restructurings):

   A first restructuring was undertaken in June 2017. It included the following:


                                                                                                         Page 2 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZR Catalytic Proj. Strengthen the INS (P125509)



         The three original outcome indicators were found to be too ambitious. They were revised to more
          accurately reflect plausible outcomes, focusing on staff training rather than actual production of
          statistical products, and two new indicators were added (these changes are discussed under Section
          4).
         Funds were reallocated to allow completion of an underbudgeted reconstruction of INS offices in
          Kinshasa. The funds were drawn from statistical production (the cartography of the population
          census and the support for national accounts), which was truncated in the project and partly
          reallocated to another Bank project (Statistics Development Project (P150148), $45 million, 2015-
          2020).
         The closing date was extended by 22 months to respond to delays at project start-up. Effectiveness
          was delayed by almost ten months due to processing of the grant in the legislature.
         The demolition and reconstruction of the INS building triggered OP/BP 4.11 due to potential impacts
          of that activity on cultural resources.

   A second restructuring took place on January 3, 2019, extending the closing date to June 28, 2019 to allow
   ongoing work to be completed.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. At appraisal, the total cost of the project was US$11.8 million. Actual project cost at closing
   was US$11.02 million.

   Financing. The project was financed with a grant from the Statistics for Results Facility Catalytic Fund for
   an amount of US$11.8 million, of which US$11.02 million was disbursed.

   Borrower contribution. The government provided US$584,120.

   Dates. The project was approved on June 9, 2014 and became effective on January 20, 2015. Its original
   closing date of June 30, 2017 was postponed twice, a first time on June 28, 2017 to January 3, 2019, and a
   second time from January 3, 2019 to June 28, 2019, at which time it closed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Project objectives were relevant to country needs, government policy, and Bank strategy at the time of
project development and implementation, building up the national statistical system in order to generate
necessary socio-economic information for informed policy making. Government policy was articulated in a
national strategy for the development of statistics, 2013-2017, that highlighted three major deficiencies:
human resources, institutions, and access to statistical information. The Bank’s Country Assistance
Strategy for FY2013-2016 recognized the need for better information to meet its objectives: the ability to
measure growth through national accounts; address vulnerability and resilience through better knowledge
of the population and its living conditions; and promote good governance by rapidly producing relevant


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 11
                                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                       ZR Catalytic Proj. Strengthen the INS (P125509)



               data. Subsequently, a World Bank Systematic Country Diagnostic was issued for 2018, as well as a
               National Development Strategy, both underlining the importance of statistical capacity building in the DRC.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen capacity of the INS to generate statistical information (original outcome targets)

                             Rationale

                                      Originally, achievement of this objective was to be measured by two key outcome indicators: the number of
                                      national surveys completed using the new master sampling frame; and the annual production of a national
                                      accounts report, including informal and industrial sector estimates. The key outputs were increasing the
                                      proportion of INS professional staff with formal degrees or on-the-job training in statistical methods. These
                                      activities – upgrading staff and data production - were to prove too ambitious to be accomplished over the
                                      original project period, leading to the restructuring and a redefinition of project indicators and targets.

                                      Against the original output targets, 248 people benefited from technical training sessions, not meeting the
                                      original target of 991. 9% of beneficiaries trained by the project were admitted to regional schools of statistics,
                                      not meeting the original target of 18%.

                                      The original outcome targets for completing national surveys using the new master sampling frame and
                                      producing national accounts annually using updated informal sector and industrial estimates were not
                                      achieved.

                                      Given only preliminary progress toward achievement of activities that would have resulted in achievement of
                                      the original outcome targets, achievement of this objective under those targets is rated Negligible.



                             Rating
                             Negligible


                             OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
                             Revised Objective
                             Strengthen capacity of the INS to generate statistical information (revised outcome targets)


                                                                                                                                         Page 4 of 11
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               ZR Catalytic Proj. Strengthen the INS (P125509)




                            Revised Rationale
                            Under the revised project, the scope of the project was made considerably less ambitious, with the outcomes
                            defined largely as training of staff and completion of sampling frames rather than actual production of
                            statistical products. New outcome indicators and targets were introduced (including the conversion of some
                            output indicators to outcome indicators) as follows:

                                  The number of new INS staff with formal degrees in statistics, informatics, or demography increased
                                   from zero in 2014 to 23 in 2018, equal to the revised target.
                                  The number of INS staff trained in core fields of statistical work increased from zero to 248, exceeding
                                   the revised target of 180.
                                  Demolition and reconstruction works for INS facilities were fully completed and deemed satisfactory.
                                  Completion rates towards sampling frames:
                                        o Completion rates of activities required prior to starting the field work for the cartography of the
                                           population census were 50 percent at project closure, compared to a target of 100 percent;
                                        o Completion rate of activities required to put into place a master business sample frame for
                                           enterprise statistics reached 80 percent, equal to the target.




                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 2
                            Objective
                            Strengthen capacity of the INS to disseminate statistical information (original and revised targets)

                            Rationale
                            The objective in both its original and revised form was to be achieved by a combination of initiatives achieved
                            under Objective 1 supporting the introduction of statistical products on the INS website.

                            By project closing, a total of eight products had been introduced, compared to an original target of 33 and a
                            revised target of 10. However, the website is no longer active due to lack of funds to maintain it with the
                            closing of the project. Achievement of this objective is therefore rated Negligible under both the original and
                            revised outcome targets.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 11
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZR Catalytic Proj. Strengthen the INS (P125509)




  Rationale
  With negligible achievement of the first objective and negligible achievement of the second objective under
  the original outcome targets, efficacy under the original outcome targets is rated Negligible.

  With substantial achievement of the first objective and negligible achievement of the second objective under
  the revised outcome targets, efficacy under the revised outcome targets is rated Modest.




  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
Factors that point to an efficient use of project resources included spending on measures that were likely to
underpin the targeting of future investments to high-return projects; investments in staff training to raise the
quality of the national statistical system and reduce its dependency on external technical assistance; and providing
a better working environment for INS staff with improved infrastructure and management skills. Factors that
signaled inefficiencies included the long delays in implementation generated by slow startup and procurement
challenges, the reduction in the scope of the project while spending the original amount; and 12 months to
restructure, while requiring a second restructuring. The ICR also points to other inefficiencies: failure of the
project’s governing committees to meet and staff to be hired (paras. 52-53); failure to sequence project activities
as planned (para.68); and failure to budget properly for INS operating costs (para.74).

In the absence of a formal analysis, and with evidence of significant implementation inefficiencies, Efficiency is
rated Modest.
Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable



                                                                                                       Page 6 of 11
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZR Catalytic Proj. Strengthen the INS (P125509)



                                                                                       0
ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

In accordance with OPCS/IEG guidelines, overall Outcome is derived by weighting the outcome rating under the
original/revised objectives/outcome targets according to the percentage of Bank funds disbursed under each. In
this case, 65% of Bank funds were disbursed under the revised outcome targets.

Based on Substantial relevance, Negligible efficacy, and Modest efficiency, Outcome under the original
outcome targets is rated Unsatisfactory.

Based on Substantial relevance, Modest efficacy, and Modest efficiency, Outcome under the revised outcome
targets is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

With the weighting favoring the latter, overall Outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

At project startup overall risk was rated substantial, reflecting weak capacity in the INS, risks related to the
census, insecurity in parts of the country, and financial resource constraints. All of these were also present
during implementation and remain as substantial risk factors in the future. The build-up of a census for a
master sampling frame is still underway, as is the updating of the national accounts, but resources for
operating costs have already fallen short of needs as their financing has shifted from the project on to the
government.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was relevant, addressing both government and Bank concerns over data needs for better
  policy making, and it was designed to directly address weaknesses in the national statistical system. Still,
  it would prove to be too ambitious to accomplish over the three-year (subsequently five-year) project
  period, and outcome indicators and targets had to be reset in 2017 to be more in line with implementation
  capacity. While project preparation included consideration of political and institutional risk, governance
  mechanisms for statistical institutions were still being shaped. Incremental recurrent costs were being
  met by the project but would subsequently not be fully taken over by the government due to budget

                                                                                                        Page 7 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZR Catalytic Proj. Strengthen the INS (P125509)



  shortfalls and consequently shifting priorities (for instance the INS website, which was a key component
  for achieving the project’s dissemination objective). Project-level investment budget shortfalls would also
  arise, especially in estimating the INS building's reconstruction costs (a shortfall that at least in part drove
  the restructuring of the project).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The fragile institutional environment in the country, including capacity constraints, appears to have placed
 significant challenges on supervision. The task team did respond to these challenges, as reflected in the
 restructuring of the project to be more in line with capacity limitations in the statistical system. The ICR
 points to continuous implementation support to the INS to reduce implementation risks, including
 maintaining fiduciary propriety, ensuring environmental and social management standards, and ensuring
 collaboration with other donors.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Targets in the results framework, i.e. for key indicators for monitoring progress and determining outcomes,
 proved to be too ambitious to accomplish over the three-year (subsequently five-year) project period, and
 the results framework was revised during implementation to better reflect capacity constraints to developing
 censuses and sampling frames within the time period of the project. Notably, the work underlying a new
 population and housing census, necessary for developing a master sampling frame, was only partly
 completed, and the original outputs could not be achieved under the project. Instead, outcome targets
 more in line with reality on the ground and still likely to contribute towards the project objectives were
 introduced, such as changes in the number of skilled staff, rehabilitated INS facilities, and progress on the
 main components for a population and housing census and more comprehensive national accounts.



b. M&E Implementation
  All indicators in the results framework were reported on in the context of the Bank's supervision
  system. To some extent this reporting, as well as data collection, were influenced by frequent staff


                                                                                                        Page 8 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZR Catalytic Proj. Strengthen the INS (P125509)



  changes in the INS, delaying the advancement of the project. According to the ICR, the pace of
  implementation improved after the restructuring of the project.



c. M&E Utilization
  Information flowing from the monitoring of indicators was used to better focus supervision interventions
  by the task team.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Prior to project restructuring, the project’s environmental assessment category was rated B in anticipation of
   the demolition and reconstruction of the INS building. Its census activities triggered OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous
   People). For the INS facility, mitigating measures were put in place, and the government developed an
   Environmental and Social Management Plan that was validated by the Bank. The ICR does not make a
   direct statement about compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies, though it notes that the project's draft
   Grievance Address Mechanism, developed by the Bank, was handled informally by the INS, meaning that
   there was no verification that informally handled complaints were addressed properly.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The ICR (para 87) is quite brief on financial management, simply noting that the
   Borrower complied with the legal covenants, having put into place a project accounting system prior to
   project startup.



   Procurement. The ICR does not discuss procurement beyond noting that technical assistance was
   enlisted to reduce risk in procuring the works contract, in monitoring construction, and in monitoring
   safeguard mitigation measures.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 11
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ZR Catalytic Proj. Strengthen the INS (P125509)



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                   IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                     There was negligible
                                                                                     dissemination of statistical
                                   Moderately            Moderately
Outcome                                                                              information and evidence of
                                   Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                                                                     significant implementation
                                                                                     inefficiencies.
                                                                                     Shortcomings in quality at entry
                                   Moderately            Moderately                  influenced subsequent
Bank Performance
                                   Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory              performance despite supervision
                                                                                     efforts during implementation.
                                                                                     There were shortcomings in the
Quality of M&E                     Substantial           Modest                      results framework, notably key
                                                                                     outcome indicators.
Quality of ICR                     ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The following lessons are drawn from the ICR:

Capacity constraints influence the sequencing of activities. In this case, while project design
had project components feeding into each other – staff training and an improved working
environment were prerequisites for statistical production and dissemination – sequencing was too
ambitious in view of implementation capacity. More care could have been exercised in assessing the
balance in terms of requirements for implementing the different components.

Successful project preparation matches key indicators with realistic time frames for
achievement. In this case, the initial set of outcomes depended on actions that, while desirable and
likely to be achieved over some longer time period, were unlikely to be completed during the life of
the project, requiring the introduction of new outcome indicators and targets.

Incremental recurrent cost implications can inhibit successful outcomes. The experience of
the operation, especially the unsatisfactory outcome on dissemination of statistical information,
underlines the importance of being clear about the recurrent financing implications of a completed
project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 11
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZR Catalytic Proj. Strengthen the INS (P125509)




14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided enough information for the project to be assessed, and for results and ratings of the
operation summarized and evaluated. Still, the discussion around efficacy could have been better structured
around the objectives, and the analysis of efficiency could have more strongly made the distinction between
efficiency of the project (the extent to which project resources were used wisely) and efficiency in the sector.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 11
