     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021925

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P098151                                    BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Bangladesh                                 Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-45810,IDA-59240                        31-Dec-2014                                         86,165,213.75

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 12-May-2009                                31-Mar-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            62,200,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             87,629,850.65                                              0.00

 Actual                                         87,272,553.25                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Helen Santiago Fink        Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project’s Development Objectives (PDO) were the following:

   PDO 1: To improve air quality in Dhaka (Financing Agreement p. 4; PAD p. 12)

   PDO 2: To Improve safe mobility in Dhaka (Financing Agreement p. 4; PAD p. 12)



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  20-Mar-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Environment
   Original Cost at Approval: US$16.23 million; Additional Financing: US$17 million; Total Financing:
   US$33.23 million; Total Costs at Closing: US$25,854 million (ICR Annex 3 p. 49). This component was
   implemented by the Department of Environment (DOE) to address air quality aspects and included the
   following sub-components:

        a. Capacity building for air quality management: support for the Air Quality Cell (AQC) at the
           Department of Environment (DOE) to implement all air pollution abatement activities in Bangladesh
           and consolidate activities, including air quality monitoring, data analysis and reporting as well as
           standards, enforcement and controls for emissions reduction (PAD p. 14);
        b. Brick kilns emissions management: provide technical support to the newly established Brick
           Advisory Committee; adoption of cleaner technologies and promotion of practices among the brick
           enterprises through demonstration projects;
        c. Communication campaigns and analytical studies: promotion of public awareness and plan
           communications campaigns for the success and sustainability of the initiatives after project closure;
        d. Project management: manage consultants, travel, office equipment, meeting costs, audits and other
           operating costs necessary for project implementation and reporting.

   Component 2: Transport
   The transport component was split into two subcomponents, each implemented by a separate unit; the
   Dhaka City Corporation (DCC) was responsible for the implementation of physical improvement of traffic
   flow and pedestrian mobility, institutional strengthening and regulatory review, while the Dhaka Transport
   Coordination Board (DTCB) was responsible for the preparation of the bus route network rationalization and
   franchising, institutional strengthening and regulatory review.

   Transport 2A Dhaka City Corporation (DCC): Original Cost at Approval: US$39.30 million; AF: US$18
   million; Total Financing: US$57.30 million; Total Costs: US$54.95 million. The Transport 2A component
   included the following sub-components:

   a) Physical improvement of traffic flow and pedestrian mobility: investments in traffic engineering and
   management aimed at improved traffic flow and pedestrian movement, to include foot-over-bridges (FOB),




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)



  traffic signals, one-way streets, separation of motorized and non-motorized traffic, and construction of
  sidewalks to accommodate people-with- disability (PWD);

  b) Institutional strengthening and regulatory review: review of DCC's Traffic Engineering Division (TED) to
  update and upgrade its role in the context of the Strategic Transport Plan; technical assistance for (i) design
  of traffic engineering; (ii) traffic signal systems operation and maintenance in coordination with DMP; (iii)
  mainstreaming environmental management in urban transport and (iv) traffic management in coordination
  with DMP; and

  c) Project management.

  Transport 2B: Dhaka Transport Coordination Board (DTCB): Original Cost at Approval: US$6.673
  million; Total Financing: US$6.673 million; Total Costs: US$6.468 million. The Transport 2B component
  included the following sub-components:

  a) Preparation of the bus route network rationalization and franchising: (i) a feasibility study for a bus rapid
  transit (BRT) system in Greater Dhaka; (ii) the Bus Rapid Transit detailed design and (iii) a public transport
  network study for Greater Dhaka;

  b) Institutional strengthening and regulatory review: (i) providing a pivotal role to DTCB in planning and
  coordination of urban transport including BRT; (ii) enabling bus sector reform with a focus on route
  rationalization and franchising; and (iii) facilitating the implementation of the action plan developed in the
  context of the Strategic Transportation Plan (STP) and Air Quality Management Project (AQMP) to reduce
  air pollution from diesel vehicles; and

  c) Project management.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total costs approved for the project were US$97.2 million, which included Additional
  Financing (AF) of US$35 million during the second restructuring in 2017. Total actual disbursed funds were
  US$87,27 million. The remaining financing balance was cancelled (ICR p.3).

  Financing: The project financing was provided by IDA and there were no other co-financiers apart from the
  borrower’s contribution.

  Borrower Contribution: The Government of Bangladesh’ (GOB) contribution was set to US$9 million at
  appraisal, while the total actual disbursed at project closure was US$2.8 million.

  Dates and Restructuring:
  The project was approved on May 12, 2009 and became effective on August 19, 2009. The original closing
  date was December 31, 2014 and the actual closing date was March 31, 2019, i.e. a 4 years and 3 months’
  extension. The project underwent the following four restructurings:

  July 4, 2013: First Restructuring
  A Level 2 restructuring was undertaken to enhance development impact through changes in both project
  components. This involved changes in the Results Framework (RF) to serve as a management tool and the


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)



   dropping of several activities for both environment and transport warranting a reallocation between
   disbursement categories. The project closure date was extended from to December 31, 2014 to December.
   15, 2016.

   January 13, 2017: Second Restructuring
   A Level 1 restructuring involved Additional financing (AF) of US$35.0 million to augment both environmental
   and transport activities. The Results Framework was revised to reflect the higher results expected on
   account of the AF and extended the project closing date from December 15, 2016, to December 15, 2018.

   December 6, 2018: Third Restructuring
   A Level 2 restructuring canceled unused funds, specifically US$3.5 million (SDR 2.513 million) in due to
   currency fluctuations; it also extended the project by an additional 3.5 months to March 31, 2019.

   March 19, 2019: Fourth Restructuring
   A Level 2 restructuring involved reallocation between disbursement categories as well as the cancellation of
   unused funds.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The City of Dhaka has experienced rapid urbanization and an eight-fold increase in population since the
1970s, and currently had approximately 12 million inhabitants at appraisal with projections of 20 million by
2020. Such growth had been coupled with increased vehicular traffic and associated air pollution and
carbon emission further exacerbated by emissions generated from industry (brickmaking among
others). The increasing air pollution, significantly higher than WHO standards, was putting economic,
health and human capital pressures on the city, with potential loses in human lives totally 1,200 to 3,500
lives per annum and health care costs and productivity annual losses totally approximately US$170 to 500
million (PAD p.9), alludes to development problems across sectors.

The project’s Development Objectives “To improve air quality and safe mobility in Dhaka” were timely and
well aligned to national goals and policies as well as to World Bank strategies and objectives. Urban air
pollution in Dhaka was largely attributable to vehicles (43.0% at the time of appraisal) followed by small
brick kiln industries (37.5% at the time of appraisal). With expected growth of these polluting sectors and
their impact on the growth of air pollutants and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, the project was well
targeted to mitigate key sources of air pollution through regulatory reform and the demonstration of
innovative approaches. The following document references serve as evidence of its rationale:

The Strategic Transportation Plan for Dhaka (STP), prepared under the Bank financed Dhaka Urban
Transport Project (DUTP), to promote investment in the transportation sector in the metropolitan area of
Dhaka as well as traffic management actions (Project Appraisal Document (PAD) p. 9).

The National Strategy for Sustainable Brick Manufacturing in Bangladesh (2017) aimed to identify
emissions from social and environmental impacts of brick kilns, as well as address policy, institutional,
technological, aspects for cleaner brick production. Similarly, the Government of Bangladesh (GOB) Brick
Kiln Policy of 2008, aimed to control environmental pollution and improvement of the environment and in

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)



               support of 2006 studies that showed the brick kilns were the greatest contributor to carbonaceous content
               of airborne particulate matter in Dhaka, followed by vehicles (GOB Department of Environment (DOE)
               (2012).


               The World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF[VD1] ) (FY16-20)) developed for the GOB
               highlights improving transportation services and reducing environmental externalities (e.g. air pollution) in
               the highly urbanized Dhaka as a key priority. It also sets out to improve the use of clean technology in the
               brick-making sector in the context of poverty reduction and economic development, (CPF p. 11, 41, 86). In
               addition, it focuses on upgrading and maintaining key transport corridors for safe and efficient movement of
               people and goods (para 52).

               While the objective remained relevant throughout the project cycle and was a necessary response to an
               environmental development challenge in Dhaka, there is a lack of clarity around what outcomes would be
               achieved through improving the air quality and mobility (ie. in what ways this was expected to improve
               peoples’ lives). Focusing on “improved air quality” and “improved mobility” does not help in understanding
               what development results were expected as a consequence of the project. The expected results are clearly
               described in the PAD, but are not reflected in the PDO formulation. These may be longer term targets but
               tracking them and identifying them is an important aspect of a successful development operation.
               Moreover, as this project builds on the experiences and lessons of two past Bank-supported projects in
               Bangladesh, namely the Air Quality Management Project (AQMP) and the Dhaka Urban Transport Project,
               (PAD p. 11) and involves demonstration/pilot investments in the brick kiln industry, a more appropriate PDO
               formulation and related indicators would have been expected.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Objective 1: To improve air quality in Dhaka

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The project’s outputs were expected to be cities with updated emission profiles, air quality monitoring
                             stations, strengthened legal framework and communication campaigns. These outputs were expected to lead
                             to the outcome of a certain number of brick kilns adopting cleaner technology and decreasing (i) particulate
                             emissions by 20% and (ii) GHG emission by 20% by end of project period. This in turn was to lead to the
                             project development objective of improved air quality in Dhaka. The long-term objective this was expected to
                             contribute to was improved economy, health benefits and improved quality of life. The logical chain is not very

                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)



clear and convincing for several reasons; i) it is not clear how the outputs of updated emission profiles, air
quality monitoring stations, improved legal framework and communication campaigns were to lead to brick
kilns adopting cleaner technology; ii) it is clear that brick kilns adopting cleaner technology may lead to
improved air quality; however, in this case, the air quality was not measured and reported, and attribution
issues were not referred to; i.e. the possibility that there are other elements influencing the air quality
(positively and negatively) is not addressed.

The project underwent four restructurings over the course of 10 years, with no changes to the PDO, but the
results indicators were merged and revised for clarity in terms of greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) and
Particulate Matter (PM) reductions (both to 20%) (ICR Table 2, p.11 and Table 3, ICR p.14). The 2017
additional financing (AF) of US$17 million for the environment component increased the number of brick kilns
to be modernized with new technologies from 10 to 12 kilns to strengthen the PDO. The modifications did not
affect the original ToC but rather enhanced the ability of the brick-kiln industry to support the reduction of air
pollution in Dhaka.

The ICR Table 2, p.11 and Table 3, ICR p.14, illustrate the changes in the indicator targets. The revisions
provided clearer language and more specific metrics. For example: The original PDO target (Results
Indicator 1) separated greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) and PM, whereas the revised indicator combined
the two indicators to read: ‘number of brick kilns adopting cleaner technology and decreasing (a) particulate
emissions by 20% and (b) GHG emission by 20% by end of project period’. An original target of 10 kilns was
adjusted to 12.

The project’s expansion of scope and revision of indicators do not warrant a split rating and the ICR has been
assessed only on the basis of the revised performance targets over the entire project period.

Outputs:

Project outputs included the following:

      Emissions profiles were updated for four cities— Dhaka, Chittagong, Rajshahi, and Khulna, which
         exceeded the original target of two cities;
        A Clean Air Act (CAA) as planned, target met;
        16 Continuous air monitoring stations providing air quality data in Bangladesh was established, as
         targeted;
        A revision of the Brick Burning Act to become the new ‘Brick Manufacturing and Kiln Construction
         Control Act of 2013 (Act 59 of 2013), adopted by the parliament on November 20, 2013, as planned;
         and
        A communications campaign was implemented, as planned.

While the communications campaign was implemented as planned, no evidence is provided in the ICR that
this led to increased public awareness of air pollution sources and mitigating solutions for improved air quality
(as the ICR claims), as this was not measured and reported on.

In addition to the indicators and output targets listed in the Results Framework, the ICR described the
following project outputs (without target information):

      Establishment of a Brick Technology Information Centre (BTIC);

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)




      Completion of a Long-Term Policy Framework for Greening the Brick Industry;
      Development of comprehensive inventory and mapping of brick kilns in Dhaka; and
      Increased capacity through the upgraded AQC to the Air Quality Wing with an approved staff of 23
       and expanded abilities to monitor air quality, analyze data, and publish monthly reports during the
       project execution period.

Outcomes:

There is only one outcome indicator relevant for PDO 1 in the Results Framework, which is related to the
number of modernized brick kilns. 12 brick kilns adopted cleaner technology and decreased (i) particulate
emissions by 20% and (ii) GHG emission by 20% by end of project period, exceeding the target of 10.

In addition, the ICR reports that new zigzag technologies recorded by the Bangladesh Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research (BCSIR) in 2018 achieved an average reduction of 1,405 (tons/year/kiln CO2)
emission compared to zero from traditional fixed chimney kilns (FCK).

According to the ICR, did the brick kiln pilots contribute to a significant reduction of SO2 emissions by 80%,
increased energy efficiency by 30% and decreased air pollution by 70% within the respective kilns as
assessed by the Bangladesh Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, which was an additional
contribution to PDO1 (ICR para 32) that was not recorded in the Results Framework as no related indicators
had been identified.

The ICR (para 55) suggests the project outputs and outcome contributed to indirect benefits on poverty and
public health on poor and vulnerable persons who work at and/or live close to brick kiln sites and sources of
exposure, estimated at 800K-900K people across the country. However, at the rate of 1.8% per year (ICR
p.50) for kiln modernization the potential impact is limited in the near term.

The ability to better measure air quality does not necessarily equate to improved air quality. Over the course
of the project’s ten year duration, some baseline data and air quality trends could have been recorded and
included in the ICR but were not; and therefore, in this respect the project falls short of demonstrating its full
impact and meeting its full objective.

In addition, the establishment of an operational structure for a countrywide air quality monitoring network with
16 Continuous Air Monitoring Stations (CAMs) in 13 major cities and the support of 15 mobile monitoring
systems, including an air quality lab at Department of Environment (DoE) was a valuable project output that
contributed to the achievement of the PDO. With this network, five air pollutants (PM, SO2, NOx, O3, and
CO) were monitored and the air quality index calculated for each city and published online daily. As a result,
the public had the ability to check the status of the air quality in their respective city (ICR para 33).

However, the project’s Results Framework does not include any indicators that measures improved air
quality, which is a major weakness in the Results Framework. The project indicators only estimate reduced
emissions from the brick kilns adopting cleaner technology. While it is plausible that this might lead to
improved air quality, without this being measured and reported on in the project, there is insufficient evidence
to draw that conclusion.




                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)



Furthermore, since there is no reflection on or information about attribution in the ICR, there is insufficient
information to assess whether the improved air quality in Dhaka is the direct result of the modernization of
these 12 brick kilns only, or other measures in Dhaka could have contributed to the results.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Objective 2: To improve safe mobility in Dhaka

Rationale
Theory of Change

The project’s outputs were expected to be the completion of traffic-related studies and an improved legal
framework coupled with physical constructions such as improved intersections, sidewalks, bridges and traffic
corridors. These outputs were expected to lead to outcomes such as an increase in vehicular traffic and
pedestrians using bridges and sidewalks. These outcomes were in turn expected to contribute to the overall
PDO of improved safe mobility in Dhaka. This was in turn expected to contribute to long term objectives such
as improved economy, health benefits and improved quality of life. The Theory of Change is clear and
convincing with no underlying assumptions.

Outputs:

        The Vehicular Emission Standards updated, as planned.
        23 Foot-Over-Bridges were constructed, reaching the target of 23 bridges.
        88 kilometers of new sidewalks with surface drainage constructed, meeting the target of 88 kilometers.
        Three traffic safety campaigns were conducted as planned. The campaigns used a variety of
         communication tools and encouraged pedestrians to use the FOBs, underpasses and sidewalks for
         their own safety.
        2 corridors of separation of Motorized Vehicle (MV) and Non-Motorized Vehicle (NMV) traffic
         constructed, achieving the target of 2.
        39 sections physically improved, achieving the revised target of 29 (original target was 40).
        A study for better mobility of disabled people in one selected area in Dhaka was complete and key
         recommendations implemented, as planned.
        The Dhaka Transport Coordination Board (DTCB) Act was revised was presented to the Cabinet for
         approval, as planned.
        The Motorized Vehicle act for reduction in emissions was revised and submitted to the Cabinet for
         approval, as planned.
        Studies for (i) rationalization of the bus route network; and (ii) Bus Rapid Transit on a pilot corridor
         completed, as planned. This was part of the planning for a larger urban transport project to introduce
         better quality bus operations on the bus routes as well as to assess the feasibility of implementing a
         BRT corridor in Dhaka.


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)



In addition to the indicators and output targets listed in the Results Framework, the ICR described the
following project outputs (without target information):

      A Traffic Engineering Cell with a staff strength of 39 personnel was approved (met target, ICR para
         39).
      Technical assistance (TA) and capacity building was provided to the Dhaka City Corporation (DCC)
       (eventually divided into two entities; the Dhaka North City Corporation (DNCC) and Dhaka South City
       Corporation (DSCC)), Dhaka Metropolitan Police (DMP), and DTCA staff. Although the fragmented
       mandate between the DCC and DMP regarding traffic signals and traffic management was
       problematic throughout the project, by project end, the DMP was designated by the GoB as the lead
       agency for traffic management, including all operations and maintenance functions (ICR para 29);
      Two workshops with government agencies and civil society organisations were organized to study
       improvement of accessibility and mobility for persons with disabilities. These activities resulted in the
       preparation of the draft vision for the City of Dhaka, creation of a video clip posted on the World
       Bank’s website as part of an awareness raising campaign. In addition, advice to enhance the designs
       of sidewalks and bus stops that were constructed as pilots under the project with standards for
       disabled people was also provided (met target).

Outcomes:

      An increase of vehicular traffic in location of interventions reached 293,197 vehicles, exceeding the
         target of 239,500 due to less congestion and vehicular idling.
        The percentage of vehicular traffic increased with 9.5% at selected intersections with operational
         traffic signals, exceeding the target of 8%.
        85% of pedestrians are using the Foot Over Bridges in locations of interventions, exceeding the target
         of 75%.
        79% of pedestrians are using sidewalks in locations of intervention, exceeding the target of 75%.
        91 intersections with operational signals (including newly installed and existing fixed), achieving the
         target of 91.

The traffic count surveys were carried out for the ten road intersections that benefited from infrastructure
improvements. A traffic survey was carried before the work commenced as well as upon completion, each for
a period of 8 hours.

Pedestrian behavior was measured by the Design Supervision and Monitoring consultant who counted the
number of pedestrians crossing the road at the FOB location before and after the intervention. Despite the
availability of the FOBs, people continued to cross roads not using the FOBs because they don’t want to go
up and down the stairs (there is only one FOB that the project installed escalators) and/or it is much faster to
cross at grade. Later in the project guard rails were installed at the curb and in the median to physically
prevent people from crossing the roads at grade. However, the numbers captured in the indicator do not
reflect the current status after the installation of guardrails as the post-implementation surveys were usually
carried out soon after the opening of the FOBs.

An original indicator measuring the number of traffic accidents was dropped due to difficulties in measuring.




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project reached and exceeded most of its output targets and could also provide sufficient evidence for
                            achievement of Objective 2 Improved safe mobility in Dhaka. As Objective 1 Improved air quality in Dhaka
                            lacked a direct indicator to measure and report on the air quality in Dhaka, there is insufficient evidence to
                            assess this achievement. Furthermore, attribution issues were not adequately addressed, and the rating of
                            the first objective is thus Modest. The overall Efficacy Rating is Substantial given the positive and
                            documented achievements under Objective 2.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The economic analysis was conducted on two project sub-components to align, in part, with the economic
   analysis undertaken at appraisal: i.e. 1) the brick-making sub-component within the environment component;
   and 2) the traffic signaling sub-component within the transport component. At appraisal, the activities of
   technical assistance and capacity-building were found to be unamenable to economic analysis, and therefore
   the efficiency analysis is based upon the two sub-components only (ICR para 45).

   Overall project efficiency is illustrated in Table 4.5 of the ICR p. 56, and reflects an economic NPV in 2019, to be
   BDT 75,420.80 million (US$892.55 million with US$1 = 84.5 BDT). The benefits-costs ratio of the project is
   11.03, with an IRR of 33.14 percent. Comparisons cannot be made to the PAD as an IRR was not calculated for
   the overall project at that time.

   The ICR outlines the brick-making efficiency level, evidenced by the average emission levels from the new kilns,
   to be at approximately 88.5 percent, with a fuel use reduction of about 47 percent (ICR Annex 4, p.50). Also,
   health cost saving was recorded at BDT 7.7 million per kiln per year on account of the technological upgrades,
   based upon measurements from the previous 2011 World-Bank project: Introducing Energy-efficient Clean
   Technologies in the Brick Sector of Bangladesh. The cost-benefit analysis demonstrated a high level of
   efficiency (55%) of the newly designed zigzag kilns compared to the baseline data for the Fixed Chimney Kilns
   (FCKs) with one of the most significant benefits being the reduction in CO2 emissions, on average a reduction of
   1,405 tons/year/kiln. The payback period for the new kilns was 1.5 years (ICR Table 4.1, p. 50). And yet,
   projected uptake of the modernization of the brick-kiln industry is only 1.8% per year or 3,036 kilns (approx.
   38%) of the country’s industry by 2040 (ICR p. 55).

   Transport efficiency was evidenced in both of its sub-components. Component 2A focused on facilitating safe
   transport and demonstrated a benefit of BDT 585.6 million (or US$6.93 million) on account of a reduction in fatal

                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)



accidents and serious injuries considering an economic life up to 2040 (ICR, p.54). However, due to the lack of
baseline data on traffic accidents which warranted such an indicator to be dropped, it is not possible to take
these estimates at face value.

The economic benefit of time saved in transport recorded a saving of approximately BDT 97,000 per day per
passenger. A benefit of 3.9 BDT Million from GHG emissions reduction due to lower idling fuel vehicles was
recorded in 2019, with projected benefits of 6.5 BDT Million in 2040 (ICR p. 54, Table 4.3).

Overall, the project provided 11.03 times the economic benefits with an economic NPV of US$892.55 million
(ICR p. 56). This was the case despite the analysis not including the benefits from capacity-building, improved
pedestrian health, disability-related initiatives in urban transport nor of future policy actions, in order to avoid
double counting and due to the lack of full information and incorporation into the project design.

Administrative Efficiency
The project overall suffered from administrative inefficiency. Delays were experienced from the onset with
challenges confronting PDO2 due to institutional and procedural contracting issues. The PDO2 investments in
transport infrastructure were subject to initial delays with process approvals and procurement only awarded in
2013. Also, the lack of adequate baseline data for the selection of target indicators (ICR, para 36) warranted
revision, slowed the process and limited the capacity of the project to fully measure its impact. The need to
revise the RF, indicators, funding allocations and project timeframes, that warranted four project restructurings,
a 16-months’ approval and revision process within the GoB (ICR para 67), and a total of 4 years and 3 months’
extension, were indicative of administrative inefficiencies.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                33.14
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance was rated Substantial with noted shortcomings on the outcome focus of the PDO. The overall
Efficacy rating was Substantial, though the rating of the first objective is Modest due to a lack of evidence on air
quality. Efficiency was rated Substantial, though there were significant administrative inefficiencies. Given the



                                                                                                       Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)



Modest rating for the first objective and shortcomings in both the efficiency and relevance ratings, the project
has an overall outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks to the project’s development outcome were identified:

Institutional risk: With the relatively complex institutional arrangements of the project, there is a risk that
collaboration and coordination between them might not be upheld after project closure, jeopardizing
development outcomes.

Financial risk: The brick kiln industry’s modernization is projected at 1.8% per year and could be impacted
by the uncertainty of the financial viability of factories dependent upon many factors including leadership,
policy incentives, and costs.

Environmental risk: The vulnerability of Bangladesh to climatic changes and natural disasters could
potentially compromise the infrastructure investments made in the transport sector.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project adopted an integrated approach to improving air quality by addressing both environmental
  and transportation conditions which affected the quality of life in Dhaka due to rapid urban and
  industrialization growth. The focus on co-benefits provided broader understanding of the linkages
  between infrastructure and technological investments and the social and environmental gains possible
  both in the transportation and brick manufacturing sectors, including reduced energy consumption, lower
  greenhouse gas and improved health and safety.

  However, although the PAD highlighted the value of co-benefits, the project fell short in being able to
  quantify benefits from capacity-building initiatives, pedestrian health, and disability-related initiatives in
  urban transport. This was a shortcoming in the design that failed to collect the necessary data and
  impacted the ability to comprehensively assess the project’s economic efficiency (ICR para 45, 46).
  Similarly, the project fell short in assessing the appropriate outcome indicators from onset and the
  appropriate data for development of baselines. Also the project underestimated its ability to deliver an
  accurate assessment of the institutional capacities, which resulted in the need for multiple restructurings
  and a protracted implementation period. Overall, complex institutional arrangements led to
  implementation delays, a weak M&E system, and a Results Framework which was lacking some relevant



                                                                                                       Page 12 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)



  indicators to measure achievement of the objectives, which led to insufficient documentation of potential
  project achievements.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Between April 2010 to March 2019, the World Bank conducted 17 supervision missions to the country, one
 of which included the midterm review in 2013. The periodic implementation support missions were critical
 for early identification of issues and potential delays as well as to understand the resource needs to sustain
 and increase the activities of the project components throughout the AF. In this respect, the Bank’s early
 awareness led to four restructurings in part to improve the RF, however, the correct indicators were not
 identified for the PDO1/environment component and therefore failed to provide an accurate reading of the
 project’s performance.

 Despite some turnovers of the TTLs, the transport co-TTL joined the team in 2011 and remained until
 project closure. The task team proactively mobilized Trust Funds to provide additional implementation
 resources for BRT trainings, knowledge exchange and data collection support.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 a.   M&E Design

 The project underwent four restructurings and changes to the Results Framework the M&E design was not
 sufficiently rigorous to capture important project achievements due to lack of important baseline information
 and relevant indicators. The inadequacy of the original M&E design is clear from the many revisions to the
 Results Framework and indicators.

 Some PDO indicators and some intermediate indicators were changed. The original PDO1 indicators for
 the brick kilns were merged into one combined indicator. However, this revised indicator was only for
 emission levels of the pilot brick kilns and not a measurement of the air quality in the City of Dhaka which is
 the development objective (PDO1), to improve air quality in Dhaka. This is the significant shortcoming.



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)



 The PDO2 indicators were revised for simplicity to collect and record data. One indicator was revised to
 measure traffic flows from a total percentage to the actual number of vehicles at specific intersections. A
 new indicator was added towards the end of the project to measure the vehicular traffic increased at
 selected intersections with operational traffic signals. The original indicator on the number of traffic
 accidents was dropped due lack of data and replaced with two new indicators on the movement of
 pedestrians using foot bridges and sidewalks as indicative of infrastructure investments for improving
 safety (PDO2) measured on the basis of survey data. The Design, Supervision and Monitoring consultant
 hired by the client carried out surveys of pedestrian counts at selected locations of interventions, i.e., at
 seven Foot-Over-Bridges and eight roads sections with sidewalks. Surveys were carried out before and
 after the interventions to count pedestrians before the construction, and pedestrians using and not using
 the FOB or sidewalks after the construction.

 To reconcile for the dropped indicator pertaining to the number of traffic accidents (R13) in the economic
 evaluation, the Bank team made an assumption of the project interventions preventing two fatal and three
 serious injury accidents by 2040, estimating about one fatal accident in 10 years will be prevented, and for
 each fatal accident, there will be 1.5 accidents with serious injuries. Since it was difficult to estimate the
 actual impact as the locations of interventions are scattered around the city, the team took a conservative
 assumption so as not to overestimate.

 Of the original fifteen intermediate indicators, nine were revised and one dropped during the 2013
 restructuring, while during the 2016 restructuring, six were revised and four new indicators were introduced.
 The latter four indicators involved BRT designs and feasibility studies indirectly related to the PDO2 focus
 on transport safety.

 The indicator target for the indicator ‘Intersections with new traffic signals installed and operational’ was
 revised downward from 40 to 29 locations due in part to institutional constraints. Most other indicators were
 revised upwards and all indicators met their targets or exceeded them.




b. M&E Implementation
  Responsibility for tracking the project’s progress was spread across the three implementing agencies—
  the DOE, DCC, and DTCB—through their PIUs. These agencies delivered reports on project process
  and indicators on a six-monthly basis.

  Baseline data was not collected at the start of the project and this resulted in the need for multiple
  restructurings to allow for a more accurate assessment of the development objectives (ICR para
  107). The air quality data generated by the Continuous Air Monitoring Stations (CAMS) funded by the
  project were monitored by a separate, specialized unit; the Air Quality Wing (AQW)/AQS in the
  Department of Environment yet this was not recorded by the project.



c. M&E Utilization
  Information from the M&E reports were used in identifying the need for the four project restructurings,
  including closing date extensions, reallocation of funds, and the request for Additional Financing (AF) to

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)



  achieve the PDOs. The M&E data served as guidance for the PIUs and the sector agencies to improve
  performance and take corrective measures and it informed the development of action plans. The data
  was published on the government’s website for public transparency.

  M&E reports were valuable in assessing the need of a disability stakeholder group for greater
  accessibility at specific traffic crossings and led to the project’s investment in appropriate infrastructure
  (ICR para 81). The M&E reports were used to strategize and troubleshoot issues, such as the need to
  redesign the pedestrian bridges (FOB) for the disabled community. Similarly, the information from the
  reports, in the case of the air quality monitoring stations (CAMS), were shared with stakeholders and
  supported the development of communications and awareness raising campaigns.

  Air quality reports from the CAMS were shared with stakeholders and supported the development of
  communications campaigns.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category ‘B’ and two safeguard policies were triggered: Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The GoB prepared an
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) in June 18, 2008, and it was reinforced by
   an Environmental Assessment for the air monitoring stations, road improvement works and warehouse
   constructions, among others.

   Due to the nature of the work undertaken, several social safeguards issues were triggered. Some project
   interventions were temporary in duration and involved the displacement of vendors from sidewalks and
   other public spaces for a limited period of time. However, others were more significant and affected social
   and economic aspects, including housing, livelihoods and quality of life, like e.g. a planned infrastructure
   project to widen a road which involved the dismantling of the front sections of 22 homes belonging to a
   minority community.

   An Abbreviated Resettlement Plan (cleared by the World Bank) was prepared and implemented based on
   the ESMF stipulations. The 22 households were compensated for the rebuilding of the dismantled facades
   and related income loss. Social safeguard compliance was rated Satisfactory throughout the project
   implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                       Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)



   Financial management

   The project was rated Moderately Satisfactory for Fiduciary Compliance throughout the project term. The
   project’s capacity building component benefited local staff through the delivery of financial management
   and procurement training that facilitated the project execution. The PIU teams adhered to Bank
   requirements on procurement documents, financial reports, and external audits.

   Procurement

   The project’s complex institutional design, comprising of three implementing agencies (DCC, DCTB, and
   DOE) and participation of the secretaries of the environment (MOEFCC), local government, and transport
   resulted in procurement delays and a protracted implementation period.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                There are shortcomings on the
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                first objective under Efficacy.
                                                                                There were shortcomings at the
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory    project’s Quality at Entry due to
                                                                                inadequate indicators.
Quality of M&E                  Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are taken from the ICR with some modification of language:

Air quality management operations require an integrated cross-sectoral approach. The project
design focused on two major air polluting sources (brick kilns and transport sector) and institutional
coordination between environment and transport departments and local municipal corporation. While
this approach did encounter some challenges during implementation, the overall performance and
results of the project indicate that such an integrated cross sectoral approach is critical for
sustainable air quality management interventions.


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)



A combination of policy, institutional and demonstration investments are critical for building
capacity and awareness on Air Quality Management. Lack of technical capacity, weak regulatory
framework and limited or unreliable data are the most common challenges faced in the development
and implementation of air quality management plans across developing countries. The project tried
to address these challenges by combining analytical work such as source apportionment studies,
capacity building activities, improving the regulatory framework and demonstrating investments for
air quality improvement.

Long-term project sustainability depends on proper project design. The operational capacity of
stakeholders, partners and governmental authorities responsible for the project deliverables and/or
those assuming ownership and enforcement must be assessed with the view to ensure long term
impact, functionality and maintenance.

Well-developed M&E systems and appropriate level of data collection are essential for
efficient project implementation. The borrower’s M&E system for projects must be developed in
the early stages of the project life cycle, such as at appraisal or preparation. Adequate resources are
necessary for productive M&E function and capacity for collection of these adequate baseline data is
collected at the start of the project. Such preparation facilitates the development of appropriate
results indicators and sufficient data to ensure the results framework can capture the co-benefits of
the project for a more complete understanding of resource efficiency and programmatic impact.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was detailed and provided a good chronological cataloging and financial accounting of the four project
restructurings, though the reasons for their necessity could have been better elaborated. The quality of the
analysis undertaken was well developed with projections carried into the future until 2040, in some cases (ICR,
p.52). Yet, the quality of the evidence was in some cases relatively weak as it was unclear how the data had
been collected and results measured. Also, the discussion of co-benefits, a fundamental premise of the project
(PAD p.10), was limited. The ICR also contains some discrepancies in the total number of kilns in the country
(p.22, 50). Lastly, the ICR was quite lengthy, more than the double of the length stipulated in the guidelines.
However, overall the report is rated Substantial.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
BD: Clean Air & Sustainable Environment (P098151)




                                                                                 Page 18 of 18
