        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)



                                                                                      Report Number: ICRR0022069

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                      Project Name
 P095091                                         Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP)

 Country                                         Practice Area(Lead)
 Mali                                            Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                                Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-47510,TF-97175                              30-Sep-2016                                            71,644,772.40

 Bank Approval Date                              Closing Date (Actual)
 03-Jun-2010                                     31-Jul-2019

                                                 IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                 70,000,000.00                                   17,910,666.88

 Revised Commitment                                  72,055,346.99                                        925,229.87

 Actual                                              67,267,145.28                                      2,105,802.20




 Prepared by                     Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                    John R. Eriksson              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P099709_TBL
 Project ID                                      Project Name
 P099709                                         Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) ( P099709 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                                Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-97183                                                                                                 4377627.12

 Bank Approval Date                              Closing Date (Actual)
 03-Jun-2010

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)




                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                      0.00                                   6,200,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                       0.00                                   4,377,627.12

 Actual                                                   0.00                                   4,377,627.12




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   This project was a fully blended IDA/GEF operation.

   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as articulated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, para 14)
   was to:

   "increase the productivity of smallholder agricultural and agribusiness producers in the targeted
   production systems and project areas."

   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 8) was to:

   "increase the productivity of smallholder agricultural and agribusinesses producers in the Targeted
   Production Systems in Selected Areas of the Recipient’s territory."

   The PDO statement in the PAD and the FA were similar except for the underlined sections.

   The PDO as articulated in the Global Environment Facility Grant Agreement (p. 5) was to:

   "increase the productivity of smallholder agricultural and agribusinesses producers in the Targeted
   Production Systems in Selected Areas of the Recipient’s territory.

   The Global Environment Objective (GEO) as articulated in the PAD (para 15) was to:

   "increase the use of sustainable land and water management (SLWM) practices in the targeted
   production systems and project areas."

   While the Global Environment Objective is not referenced in any of the legal agreements, it is cited in the PAD
   (ICR, p. 3, footnote#1).

   This Review will evaluate the project according to the PDO as stated in the Financing Agreement.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following three components:

   1. Technology transfer and service provision to agricultural producers (appraisal cost: US$59.10
   million, actual cost: US$30.51 million). This component aimed to foster the modernization of smallholder
   farming systems and supply chains through dissemination of improved technologies and practices, and
   through the professionalization of agricultural support services. This component included the following sub-
   components:

   1.1. Farming systems and supply chains modernization. The aim of this sub-component was to
   promote and disseminate productive technologies and techniques in order to increase smallholders’ farm
   productivity and enhance competitiveness of supply chains.

   1.2. Capacity building for producer organizations (POs) and service providers. The project would
   support capacity building of the Permanent Assembly of Mali Agricultural Chambers (APCAM), the Regional
   Chambers of Agriculture (CRAs) and POs. It would support the hiring or training of PO staff for selected
   internal functions so that they can deliver services to their members.

   1.3. Facilitating rural credit development. The project would facilitate rural credit development, following
   recommendations from the Bank’s 2006 Rural Finance Study, by providing financial management and
   accounting assistance to investors in the agribusiness sector.

   1.4. Technology generation and research-producers linkages. The project would facilitate technology
   generation by supporting the National Agricultural Research Committee and will strengthen linkages
   between research, extension and producers by supporting the Regional Committees for Research and
   Extension.



   2. Irrigation Infrastructure (appraisal cost: US$67.00 million, actual cost: US$34.11 million). This
   component would finance infrastructure to improve water management. Irrigation design would pay
   particular attention to the protection of soil and water resources. All irrigation development investments
   funded by the project would include a package of advisory support services financed under component 1.
   This component included two sub-components:

   2.1. Small scale irrigation. The project would support feasibility and environment studies for small-scale
   irrigation investments. It would contribute to the development of 1,500 hectares (ha) of new small-scale
   gravity-fed village irrigation schemes and 3,100 ha of small-scale low-land development through sustainable
   rainwater management practices.


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)



  2.2. Large scale irrigation. The project would contribute to the expansion and modernization of the Office
  du Niger (ON) area through expansion of the land under irrigation and improved management of the
  scheme along the lines of the ON area development master plan. The project would develop 2,200 ha of
  irrigable land at Sabalibougou for which a detailed design study is available. The project would also support
  500 ha of new irrigation scheme at M’Béwani, as well as the extension of the drainage system (53 km).

  3. Comprehensive Programmatic Approach, Sector Monitoring and Project Coordination (appraisal
  cost: US$25.00 million, actual cost: US$19.02 million). This component supports the evolution toward a
  programmatic approach in the agricultural sector through facilitating institutionalized policy dialogue
  between the Government of Mali and donor partners, establishing the framework for shared financing,
  enhancing the design of key public programs, and improving the evidentiary base for monitoring sector
  performance. This component included four sub-components.

  3.1. Policy dialogue and coordination. The project would support policy dialogue between Ministries,
  Producer Organizations (POs), private sector representatives and donors to strengthen the coordination of
  the sector and forge a more
  consistent programmatic approach of investments and interventions.

  3.2. Sector Monitoring and Evaluation. The project would seek to: (i) restore the regular production of
  reliable statistics on the sector; (ii) provide reliable data and up-to-date information to policy decision
  makers; (iii) facilitate sector-wide consultation based on reliable information and analyses; and, (iv) monitor
  sector evolution and progress.

  3.3. Delivery of core public services. The project would facilitate the emergence of a pluralistic network of
  service providers through the creation of the National Agricultural Advisory Service Council. This sub-
  component
  would help line Ministries deliver core public services that are critical to agricultural productivity increases
  and to the competitiveness of value chains.

  3.4. Project coordination and monitoring and evaluation. This sub-component would finance project
  implementation, coordination of stakeholders, monitoring and evaluation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. Total project cost was expected to be US$160 million equivalent. The actual cost reported by
  the ICR (p. ii) was US$88.22 million or 55% of the expected amount at appraisal. The difference was due
  the failure of the borrower to provide the agreed share of counter-part funding, and the disbursement of
  10.5% and 46% of the original amounts pledged by the European Union Food Crisis Rapid Response
  Facility Trust Fund and the International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD), respectively (see below
  for more details).

  Financing. The project was financed through a six-year Specific Investment Loan (SIL) of US$70 million
  from the International Development Association (IDA), a Grant of US$6.2 million from the Global
  Environment Fund (GEF) and a Grant of US$19.5 million equivalent from the European Union Food Crisis
  Rapid Response Facility Trust Fund. The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) co-
  financed the project with a credit of US$32 million. The actual amounts disbursed according to the ICR (p. ii)
  were US$65.16 million for the IDA credit (94%), US$2.10 million for the European Union Food Crisis Rapid

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)



   Response Facility Trust Fund (10.5%), US$4.45 million for the GEF fund (72%), and US$14.70 million for
   IFAD (46%). The total amount disbursed from all the afore mentioned sources was US$86.41 million.

   Borrower Contribution. The Government’s contribution to the project was estimated at US$23.7 million
   through tax exemption. Beneficiaries’ contribution was estimated at US$6.7 million. The actual amounts
   according to the ICR (p. ii) were US$1.8 million for beneficiaries and the Government did not provide any
   counterpart funding due to resource constraints (ICR, para 16).

   Dates. The project was approved on June 3, 2010, and became effective on June 19, 2010. The Midterm
   Review (MTR) was carried out on January 21, 2015 compared to a suggested date in the PAD on
   September 15, 2011. The suggested date in the PAD would have been too early into implementation to
   conduct the MTR. The project closed on July 31, 2019 compared to an original closing date of September
   30, 2016. The 34 months extension was needed to accommodate extensive procurement delays that
   negatively impacted implementation (ICR, para 57).v

   The project was restructured four times, all of which were Level II restructuring.

   The first was on December 15, 2011, when the amount disbursed was US$6.06 million, in order to extend
   the EU TF closing date from December 31, 2011 to April 30, 2012 , and reallocate funds from the IDA credit
   to finance all the project activities that could not be implemented prior to April 30, 2012 from the proceeds of
   the EU Grant.

   The second was on June 14, 2013, when the amount disbursed was US$20.78 million, in order to modify
   the results framework (modifications to indicators and targets), changes to: components, project costs and
   disbursement arrangements, reallocation of proceeds, and changes to financing plan.

   The third was on January 27, 2016, when the amount disbursed was US$52.75 million, in order to extend
   the closing date (of the IDA Credit and the 2 Grants) from September 30, 2016 to July 31, 2018.

   The fourth was on June 14, 2018, when the amount disbursed was US$60.50 million, in order to extend the
   closing date from July 31, 2018 to July 31, 2019, change the implementation schedule,
   change disbursement estimates, and modify the results framework (modifications to indicators and targets).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. In 2008, Mali continues to be one of the poorest countries in Sub-Saharan Africa
with a US$480 GDP per capita and a 47.6% national poverty rate according to 2006 estimates. Poverty is
more prevalent in the rural areas (57.6%) and most rural people continue to derive their livelihoods from
agriculture. Food insecurity and malnutrition are high and were aggravated by the fuel and food crisis of
2007/08. In 2009, food prices remain above the 2008 level and above the 5-year average. Natural
resources degradation, population growth and climate change continue to pose serious challenges to
medium and long-term food security in the country. Furthermore, increasing agricultural productivity is

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 21
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)



hindered by three main challenges: lack of productive infrastructure, low usage of modern agricultural
inputs, and lack of coordination in the agricultural sector.



At appraisal, objectives were in line with the Government's Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy
Framework (GPRSF) for 2007-2011, which prioritized food security and raising the incomes of rural
producers through increasing, securing and diversifying food production. Objectives were also in line with
the Bank's Country Assistance Strategy for Mali (CAS; 2007-11) which placed agriculture as one of the
three key sectors to drive economic growth. Objectives were also in line with pillar 1 of the Comprehensive
Africa Agriculture Development Program (CAADP) which called for establishing a comprehensive
programmatic approach to sustainable land and water management (SLWM). Objectives were also in line
with the four pillars of the Bank Climate Change strategy in Sub Saharan Africa.



At completion, objectives continue to be in line with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework for Mali
(CPF FY16-19) which among others aimed to improve productivity in Mali’s agriculture sector,
specifically under Objective 2.1 (Improve Productive Capacity and Market Integration of Farmers and
Pastoralists) and Objective 2.2 (Agriculture value diversification) of Area of Focus 2 (Create Economic
Opportunities). The ICR did not report on the relevance of objectives with regards to the Government's
priorities at completion.



The Project Development Objective PDO was: “to increase the productivity of smallholder agricultural and
agribusinesses producers in the Targeted Production Systems in Selected Areas of the Recipient’s
territory." According to the ICR para 28: "the project’s focus was increasing productivity of smallholders and
primarily address low irrigation levels, low input use, the poor adoption of technology and have a better
coordination of the sector." Therefore, the relevance of including "agribusiness producers"as stated in the
PDO is questionable given the focus of the project. The PDO also lacked connection to higher level
objectives, namely, ensuring food security and increasing the income of rural producers.

The Relevance of the GEO was not discussed, neither in the PAD nor the ICR. That said, this Review finds
that the GEO statement lacks any connection to environmental objectives.

Based on the above-mentioned information, Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial rather than High
due to lack of information on the Government priorities at completion, inconsistency between the PDO and
the project activities with regards to "agribusiness producers", and lack of connection to higher level
objectives.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                          Page 6 of 21
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               PDO: to increase the productivity of smallholder agricultural and agribusiness producers in the targeted
               production systems in selected areas of the recipient’s territory.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change. To achieve the stated objective, as articulated in the PDO, "to increase the productivity of
               smallholder agricultural and agribusiness producers" the project aimed to increase adoption of technologies;
               and improve access to water resources for agricultural production. These two approaches were to be
               supported by a programmatic approach to invest in the sector, as well as better monitoring and
               coordination. The disseminated technologies and sustainable land and water management practices (SLWM),
               as articulated in the GEO, would target smallholders in various value chains. According to the ICR (para 9)
               this was expected to result in better links between agricultural research and farmers, facilitated by stronger
               producer organizations and better access to agricultural financing. Improved water access for
               agricultural production would focus on the rice value chain, and to a lesser extent horticulture, through the
               development of irrigation infrastructure on both large and small scale schemes. The adoption of technologies
               and improving access to water were expected to result in increasing productivity in the project areas. As a
               long-term outcome, the project was expected to improve food security in Mali.

               Achieving the stated objectives was underpinned by three key assumptions identified by the ICR (para 9).
               First, political, social and economic stability in the country are critical factors to ensure smooth implementation
               and sustainability of outcomes. Second, achieving food security is dependent on the successful management
               of the occurrence and impact of extreme weather events or natural catastrophes. Third, technology adoption
               and matching grants both require an effective delivery mechanism in order to achieve the project's objectives.
               Specifically, for technology adoption, the availability of capable public and private service providers is critical
               for the dissemination of new technologies.

               While the stated activities were linked to the PDO and the included assumptions were logical, it was not clear
               how better links between agriculture research and farmers would be achieved. Also, claiming that investing in
               the sector would improve agricultural financing was not backed by specific project activities geared to improve
               financing.

               Outputs

               The information below is form the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.

               Technology Transfer and Service Provision to Agricultural Producers

                     Number of producers that have adopted new cowpea varieties: no information was provided on the
                      number, but the ICR reported that 70% of producers adopted new cowpea varieties compared to a
                      target of 50% and baseline of 1% (target exceeded).
                     3,705 producers adopted the system for rice intensification (SRI) representing 26% of producers
                      compared to a target of 30% and a baseline of 1% (target not achieved).


                                                                                                                    Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)




      Number of dairy producers that adopted improved husbandry practices: no information was provided
       by the ICR on the number, but the ICR reported that 26% of dairy producers adopted improved
       husbandry practices compared to a target of 30% and a baseline of 1% (target not achieved).
      1,250 producers that adopted SLWM practices for rice (ICR, p.13 table 7), cowpea and maize, and
       3,789 adopted SLWM practices for agroforestry (ICR, p. 13, table 7), these represented 62% of
       producers compared to a target of 60% and a baseline of 5% (target exceeded).
      13 strategic and applied research programs under the Agricultural Research Agency and the Institute
       of Rural Economic Research were directly supported by the project in the following themes: forage
       crops, animal feeds, artificial insemination and SLWM (ICR, para 40).
      661 sub-projects were financed for various types of projects; predominantly cowpeas (26%),
       horticulture (17%), rice (12%) and livestock fattening (10%) (ICR, para 39).

Irrigation Infrastructure

      6,209 hectares of irrigated areas were developed compared to an original target of 7,295 hectares and
       a revised target of 6,400 hectares (revised target largely achieved).
      4,180 producers benefited from developed irrigated area compared to an original target of 7,740 and a
       revised target of 5,400 (target not achieved). The ICR noted that "there original target as stated in the
       PAD indicated 7,740 farm units, with 10 individuals expected to benefit per farm unit, and thus a target
       of 77,400 individuals. It is not clear how it was changed to 7,740 individuals in the results framework."
      An 11 km drain was constructed although 33 km at Karankola and 20 km at Tango were initially
       expected. The drain was completed just before the project closed (target not achieved).

Comprehensive programmatic approach, sector monitoring and project coordination

      Number of policies/strategies developed: The project monitored the adoption by the Government of
       agricultural policies, namely: Agricultural Development Policy and the Land Tenure Policy (ICR, p. 8,
       table 4). However, no further information was provided on the impact of these policies.
      1,750 reliable statistical data and sectoral analyses were produced compared to a target of 1,800 and
       a baseline of 610 (target substantially achieved).
      Number of stakeholders whose capacity has been built: no data provided on this indicator.



Outcome

The project aimed to increase productivity of smallholders agricultural producers. To achieve this objective,
the project featured two approaches, first, the project supported technology transfer and improved service
provision to smallholders, and second, the project supported improved access to irrigation water through
improvements to the irrigation infrastructure in the project areas. The project initially focused on 15 value
chains which were later (during the 2016 Restructuring) reduced to 3 chains (rice, cowpea and milk). Direct
project beneficiaries for the three value chains reached 247,720 compared to a target of 300,000.

Impact of the project on dairy production. The project supported dairy production by input distribution of
animal feeds, forage seeds, artificial insemination and training. According to the ICR (para 35) milk
production per cow per day reached 5.83 liters per day per cow compared to an original target of 6 liters per
day per cow and a formally revised target of 2.71 liters per day per cow. However, improved husbandry

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)



practices showed a low adoption rate where only 22% of dairy producers adopted improved husbandry
practices compared to a target of 50%. Furthermore, the ICR (para 35) reported that data was not regularly
collected by the project. Therefore, it is doubtful whether the increase in milk production is directly
attributable to the project activities.

Impact of the project on cowpea yields. The project supported improvements in cowpea yield through input
distribution, and linkages to research. High yielding and drought tolerant cowpea seeds were distributed to
smallholders, in some cases they served a dual purpose of cowpea production for human consumption and
forage for animals. By project completion cowpea yield reached 700 kg per hectare (target achieved).

Impact of the project on rice yields. The project supported improvements in rice yield through extension
and input distribution, in combination implementation support with producer organization strengthening and
sub-project financing. The project also promoted the System for Rice Intensification (SRI). Adoption of SRI
reached 26% among rice producers compared to a target of 30%. Irrigation improvements supported by the
project also had a significant impact on rice yields which increased from 3-4 tons per hectare to 6-7 tons per
hectare (ICR, para 38).

The project achieved seven out of ten intermediate outcome indicators, and six PDO outcome indicators were
fully achieved and three substantially achieved. However, the achievements under three PDO indicators
(share of producers that have adopted new cowpea varieties in the target production basins, total irrigated
area developed in hectares, and the number of producers benefiting from newly or improved irrigated land) as
well as two intermediate outcome indicators (producer organizations' sub-projects that have achieved their
objectives, and percentage of dairy producers who adopted improved husbandry practices) were not directly
attributable to the project (ICR, para 37).

Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the efficacy of achieving the PDO is rated Modest due
to concerns about the robustness of the data provided in the ICR, and questionable attribution of the reported
improvements to the project activities.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
GEO: to increase the use of sustainable land and water management (SLWM) practices in the targeted
production systems and project areas.

Rationale
Theory of Change. To achieve the stated GEO "increase the use of sustainable land and water management
(SLWM) practices in the targeted production systems and project areas", the project would promote the
adoption of SLWM practices such as moisture conservation, live fences, and water saving technologies
among the smallholders in project areas. This Review assumes that the implementation of these activities
was expected to improve the sustainability of production in the project areas.



                                                                                                  Page 9 of 21
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)




                            Outcome

                            The project supported the adoption of SLWM activities through training, farmer field schools, and communal
                            activities. Among the SLWM activities supported were: moisture conservation, live fences, and water saving
                            technologies. By project completion, producers that had adopted SLWM practices reached 60 producers
                            (target achieved), and 30 areas were under SLWM techniques in project production basins compared to a
                            target of 25. However, the ICR (para 37) reported that M&E field missions showed the number of producers
                            that adopted the SLWM practices, but they do not indicate the proportion of producers or areas (nor the total
                            number of producers in the areas visited) that adopted. Therefore, it was not possible to attribute this
                            achievement directly to the project. Furthermore, it is not clear from the GEO statement what environmental
                            objective the project was trying to achieve through increasing the use of sustainable land and water
                            management practices.



                            Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved seven out of ten intermediate outcome indicators, and Six PDO outcome indicators
                            were fully achieved and Three substantially achieved. However, the achievements under three PDO
                            indicators (share of producers that have adopted new cowpea varieties in the target production basins, total
                            irrigated area developed in hectares, and the number of producers benefiting from newly or improved irrigated
                            land) as well as two intermediate outcome indicators (producer organizations' sub-projects that have achieved
                            their objectives, and percentage of dairy producers who adopted improved husbandry practices) were not
                            directly attributable to the project (ICR, para 37).

                            Overall efficacy is rated Modest due to concerns about the robustness of the data provided in the ICR, and
                            questionable attribution of the reported improvements to the project activities.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                 Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                  Insufficient evidence


   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency

   ex ante



                                                                                                                            Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)



At appraisal the economic and financial analysis (EFA) in the PAD estimated that the project investments would
generate an internal economic rate of return of 34% with a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$184 million over six
years. The capital opportunity cost was 12%. These results were based on a project budget of US$76.2 million
(IDA+GEF). No sensitivity analysis was conducted to test the impact of different scenarios, particularly these
linked with the risk matrix at appraisal, on the estimated IERR.

The EFA used different production practices in the project’s regions and the differences between smallholders
and medium holders as representative for the target population. The analysis focused on four value chains (rice,
cowpea, milk production and poultry) as indicative models for the project investments. The analysis used the
production costs and margins of the selected crop and livestock activities without modeling incremental benefits
rather than the standard methodology of comparing with-project situation (WP) with the without-project situation
(WOP). Also, the EFA used a systemic aggregation of benefits, instead of aggregating the targeted number of
beneficiaries assuming that the entire agricultural population in the project regions would benefit from the
technology transfer and adoption. The ICR (para 42) correctly questioned the methodological choices used in
the ex ante EFA, and pointed out that the ex ante EFA methodology resulted in very large economic results with
an over-estimated efficiency.



ex post

The ICR efficiency analysis estimated an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 11.7% compared to 34% at
appraisal and an NPV of US$13.9 million compared to US$184.2 million at appraisal. The ICR EFA did not
follow the same methodology as that used at appraisal. The ex post EFA used a cost-benefit approach to
estimate the net additional benefits attributable to the project’s main outcomes, and a cost analysis to assess
the efficient use of resources. Representative sub-projects (cowpea, rice, horticulture, livestock fattening, bio-
digester) were analyzed by modelling to demonstrate the impact of technology transfer and service provision to
agricultural producers. The EFA also analyzed the financial returns to the large-scale irrigation schemes
financed by the project, demonstrating their economic justification.

The ICR analysis of the efficiency of the use of the project resources is problematic.. The EU Trust Fund
disbursed only 10.8% of the trust due to procurement delays and a 6-month Bank suspension following the coup
d’état in March 2012 (ICR, para 25) .The ICR (para 46) reported that the project experienced significant
overspending for some activities, for example, activities relating to capacity building for POs and service
providers over spent by 221% compared to the envisaged budget. Also, under the third component
(comprehensive programmatic approach, sector monitoring and project coordination), the project over-spent
significantly by 141% when compared with the restructuring allocation. On the other hand, while significant
resources from the first and third components were reallocated to the large-scale irrigation activities under the
second component, only 80% of the re-allocated resources were spent. Also, the public service delivery related
expenditure utilized 83% of the allocated resources. Finally, the ICR (para 46) reported that "very little has been
spent for technology generation and research/production linkages and not all resources were used for sub-
component 1.1 (farming systems and supply chains modernization)."

The ex post analysis could have benefited from the inclusion of a cost efficiency analysis comparing the cost of
irrigation infrastructure in Mali to similar countries. Also, the EFA could have included a sensitivity analysis to
show the variation in EIRR against different scenarios that might face the project investments.




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)



Administrative and Institutional Efficiency

The project closing date was extended twice for a total of 34 months. The project experienced significant
procurement delays combined with an escalation in labor and materials costs. This negatively impacted the
implementation of the irrigation schemes. Implementation delays meant that the expected benefit streams from
the project investments would not materialize in the envisaged time-frame. Therefore, it is plausible to assume
that such delays would negatively impact the project's economic rate of return. The project also experienced a
slow disbursement rate, and according to the ICR (para 47) by project completion the project achieved an
overall 78% disbursement rate including all financing sources: IDA (96%), EU TF (11%), IDA GEF TF (64%),
and the UNDP GEF TF (72%). There were also implementation delays that stemmed from firing incompetent
project implementation staff and delays in the recruitment of replacements (ICR, para 58).



Efficiency is rated Modest. This rating is based on a low ex post EIRR of 11% compared to a discount rate of
12% (owing to the difference between the methodologies employed for estimating the ex ante EIRR and the ex
post, a comparison between the two estimates is not valid) combined with significant implementation delays,
and concerns about the efficiency of resource use.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    100.00
 Appraisal                                                34.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
 ICR Estimate                                             11.70
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Efficacy was rated Modest. While the project-supported
activities that seemed to improve cowpea and rice yields as well as dairy productivity, there are concerns
about the robustness of the data provided in the ICR, and attribution of the reported improvements to the project
activities is questionable. Efficiency was rated Modest due to a low ex post EIRR (11% compared to a discount
rate of 12%) combined with significant implementation delays, and concerns on the efficiency of resource use.

Based on a Substantial rating for Relevance of Objectives, and Modest rating for both Efficacy and Efficiency,
Outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (para 82) identified four areas that pose potential risk to the development outcome:

First, the risk related to SLWM practices promoted by the project is not likely to be sustained. The ICR
reported that the cost associated with some SLWM practices, such as building dams to reduce the speed of
surface water, might discourage beneficiaries' participation.

Second, weather fluctuation poses a risk to sustained agriculture production, specifically, the cowpea and
forage production. Mali is prone to drought and floods. The agricultural season 2018/19 was negatively
impacted due to drought. These weather-related events could negatively impact yields with serious
consequences to food security in the country.

Third, the lack of adequate maintenance plans for the irrigation infrastructure supported by the project pose a
technical risk. Maintenance of the developed irrigation perimeters depends on the availability of government
funding. If government priorities change, allocation to irrigation maintenance might be reduced. This would
negatively impact maintenance implementation. The establishment of a rolling fund for water fees might
provide a sustainable solution that would enable funding maintenance requirements.

Fourth, the is a risk that the input subsidy program supported by the government would stop. If this happens,
the achieved yield gains under the project would be expected to decline, in the absence of subsidization, as
poor farmers would not have the economic means to purchase inputs, including fertilizers and high-quality
seed, for their production.



The fifth risk is emphasized by IEG:

Political stability and security concerns. Mali continues to be prone to political instability. There are also
security concerns in some regions. A deterioration in one or both aspects could undermine the gains
achieved under the project, and threaten the fragile food security situation in the country.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

                                                                                                        Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)



  This project was in response to the Government's request to move to a sector wide approach in
  agriculture. The project builds on the Bank-financed National Rural Infrastructure Project (closed on
  December 31, 2007) for large-scale and small-scale irrigation development, and on the Bank-financed
  Agriculture Services and Producer Organizations Program (closed on December 31, 2009) for technology
  generation and transfer, promotion of private delivery for advisory services to farming communities, and
  empowerment of producer organizations (POs).

  Notable lessons reflected in the project design included: maximizing the efficient use of resources
  through the parallel combination of soft and hard investments, close supervision and adequate level of
  post-construction support-especially on the marketing side to ensure ownership and long-term
  sustainability of small scale irrigation, and responding to capacity needs of various stakeholders in
  addition to beneficiaries, where capacity-building would be provided to agricultural researchers and
  extension agents, and service providers for quality control and phyto- and zoo-sanitary surveillance.

  The project design was complex including several value chains and irrigation basins. Design was also
  ambitious as it aimed to address three main challenges in one project: (i) the lack of productive
  infrastructure especially for irrigation and post-harvest management and processing; (ii) low productivity
  due to low input use, unsustainable land and water management practices, and poor access to advisory
  services and financing; and, (iii) the lack of coordination in the sector, and (iv) a lack of strategic vision by
  the Government of Mali (GoM) for long-term investments in the sector (ICR, para 6). The Results
  Framework did not reflect the key assumptions underpinning the project's theory of changes (ICR, para
  9). Design overestimated the capacity of the implementing agencies to be able to develop irrigation for
  7,000 hectares in 18 months after project approval. Also, the expectation for the provision of advisory
  services through partnerships with the private sector was unrealistic-given that private sector
  organizations were not included in the implementation arrangements.

  Eleven risks were identified at appraisal, four were rated High, five were rated substantial and two were
  rated moderate. The ICR (para 75) reported that the suggested mitigation measures were not enough to
  manage the risks. For example, the project relied on capacity assumptions for the various implementing
  agencies that proved to be overestimated, and capacity building efforts to manage the risk were not
  enough.

  Finally, M&E design was complex with too many indicators and "no resource allocation was made to
  finance M&E activities (ICR, para 75)."

  Based on the above mentioned assessment, Quality-at-Entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory due to a
  complex design that over estimated the implementation capacity, failure to include adequate risk
  mitigation measures and complex M&E design.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project implementation was challenging at the earlier stages of the project due to political instability
 and security concerns. The Bank carried out a total of 17 supervision missions throughout the life of the

                                                                                                        Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)



 project. According to the ICR (para 76), the Bank provided "adequate supervision support." The ICR (para
 76) reported that the MTR and the 2016 project restructuring contributed to "a turnaround in the project’s
 performance" particularly on irrigation development activities. The Bank and the project team worked
 together to restructure the project and revise indicators to make them more measurable.

 During the first part of the implementation period, the project suffered from low quality reporting, which
 undermined addressing implementation bottlenecks. Further, the implementation agency did not always
 follow the recommendations of the Bank Task Team. The performance ratings assigned to the project in
 the first half of the implementation period did not reflect accurately the problems that the project faced.
 These included: "issues with financial management, procurement, recruitment, and implementation
 progress (ICR, para 78)." Also, see Section 10b below.

 The Task team could have provided more attention to addressing M&E problems. While the project was
 restructured specifically to address issues related to the Results Framework, these changes were not
 adequately followed up with the project. The team also should have given more attention to the candor of
 assessing the project ratings at the first half of the implementation period. Finally, the Task Team leader
 was changed three times compared to changing the project coordinator seven times, these excessive
 changes of the latter were disruptive and affected the project implementation (ICR, para 80).



 Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the Quality of Supervision is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory
 due to significant shortcomings including M&E weaknesses.



 Overall Bank performance is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. This rating reflects significant shortcomings
 at Quality at Entry including design weaknesses and failure to included adequate risk mitigation measures.
 Also, Quality of Supervision suffered from significant shortcomings including limited attention to M&E
 weaknesses.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD included a Results Chain, but not an explicit Theory of Change as it was not a requirement at the
 time of appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR (pages 2 and 3) included a Theory of Change that reflected the




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)



 connections between the project inputs, outputs, intermediate outcomes, outcomes and longer-term
 objectives. The ICR also stated the longer-term assumptions that underpin the Theory of Change.

 The overall responsibility of M&E activities would be under the Statistics and Planning Unit (CPS),-which
 oversees the rural development sector under the Ministry of Agriculture. CPS was expected to
 oversee data collection, compilation and communication to the central level through two national M&E staff
 and to collaborate at regional level with one staff in the Agricultural Regional Division and one staff in each
 Regional Agricultural Chamber. Both these national partners were expected to collect data on
 certain indicators, the Mali Rural Economics Research Institute would collect yield measurements, the
 Agricultural Market Observatory would collect data on urban markets, and all environment and SLWM
 related M&E activities and indicators would be collected by the Ministry of Environment and Sanitation.
 However, according to the ICR (para 61), M&E activities lacked the necessary financial resources to
 support regional M&E activities, which were the primary entry point for data collection.

 The PDO would be assessed through four project outcome indicators: increase in rice production in project
 targeted areas, increase of rice yield on small scale irrigation perimeters, increase of cowpea yield in
 project production basins, and increase of milk production per milking cow in the targeted areas. These
 indicators were linked to the PDO and measurable. However, the RF lacked outcome indicators for the
 agri-business segment of the project beneficiaries (ICR, para 59). The GEO would be assessed through
 two GEO outcome indicators: increase in areas under sustainable land and water management (SLWM)
 practices in project areas, and increase in producers' organizations adopting SLWM practices. While these
 indicators were linked to the GEO, they were intermediate outcome indicators rather than outcome
 indicators.

 The Results Framework (RF) included 16 intermediate outcome indicators to assess the different activities
 supported by the project. Most of these indicators were linked to the project activities and had clear
 measurable targets with baseline data. The ICR (para 60) reported that the monitoring and evaluation
 manual included 60 indicators in total, which made tracking this large number of indicators relatively difficult
 for the project's M&E system. This relatively large number of indicators was needed to "meet the specificity
 of the other donor partners of the
 project, especially IFAD and GEF, ICR para 60)."

 M&E design was overly complex with over 60 indicators in the monitoring manual. Design also lacked the
 adequate financial incentives that would ensure the efficient functioning of a system that relied on multiple
 national agencies and institutions to collect M&E data.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was negatively impacted by the delayed start-up, and set-up complications
  associated with using national procedures. Also, the deteriorated security situation in some regions of of
  the country hindered M&E activities. The M&E system was only set-up in 2013, three years after the
  effectiveness in 2010, which left data gaps in the earlier period of implementation (ICR, para 63). After
  the 2013 restructuring, the number of indicators was reduced and the roles and responsibilities of the
  different actors involved collection on project activities was clarified. While these two actions improved
  data collection, not all PDO and intermediate indicator data was regularly collected. Missing data was
  completed through various surveys and monitoring field missions. There was no consolidated database
  or system to track the changes in indicators. The M&E system also lacked Information and

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)



  Communication Technology (ICT) methods to complement the system, such as a mapping using GPS
  coordinates of the sub-projects.

  The ICR (para 64) reported that the M&E system was not capable of providing a full picture of the project
  activities except towards the end of the implementation period. Data on crop yields seem to be based on
  sound methodology and independent analysis. Despite efforts to avoid beneficiary double counting, the
  ICR (para 64) reported that this could not be accurately ruled out particularly for component 2. That said,
  M&E implementation improved starting in 2016 as the agencies involved in data collection started to
  receive financial resources to fund M&E activities. A final impact evaluation was carried out
  which according to ICR (par 65) was "well done" and "timely."

  Overall, M&E implementation was challenging given the complex design, deteriorated security situation,
  and lack of resource allocation to fund M&E activities for the majority of the implementation period.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para 67) M&E utilization was modest. This was due to a number of reasons, first
  the project lacked a management information system "capable of providing real time information beyond
  some of the core indicators." Second, M&E implementation difficulties resulted in a situation where the
  project management relied on ad-hoc decisions rather than strategic decisions based on sound project
  M&E data. Third, M&E information flow was hindered by the initial implementation arrangements and
  according to the ICR (para 67) efforts to rectify this problem resulted in limited success. That said, the
  ICR (para 67) commended the final impact evaluation study and some knowledge management
  products, which could potentially inform future operations in the sector.



  Overall, M&E is rated Modest due to a complicated design, problematic implementation arrangements
  and lack of dedicated M&E funding, all of which resulted in limited M&E utilization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an environmental category A operation because of key investments in large
   scale irrigation. These irrigation investments might have adverse but limited environmental impacts mainly
   on water resources and might require the resettlement of local villages. Seven safeguard policies were
   triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest Management (OP
   4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Safety of Dams
   (OP/BP 4.37), and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). An environmental and social
   management framework (ESMF) and a pest management plan (PMP) were prepared. An environmental
   assessment (EA) for the Sabalibougou irrigation scheme was updated and a resettlement action plan (RAP)

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)



  was prepared. As per OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources, an archaeological survey was
  conducted on the proposed irrigation sites to determine the project’s potential impact on those resources
  and propose mitigation measures. As per OP/BP 7.50 regarding “Projects on International Waterways”, on
  October 9, 2009, the Recipient notified on a no-objection basis the riparian countries through the Niger
  River Basin Authority in Niamey of the type and size of the irrigation investments planned at ON under this
  project.

  Safeguard compliance. According to the ICR (para 69) an Environmental and Social Specialist was not
  hired during the project implementation, and safeguards issues were addressed through consultants hired
  by the Office du Niger. A resettlement action plan was prepared to displace four hamlets. However, some
  infrastructure that was built according to the plan did not comply with national standards and displaced
  households received 3 hectares rather than 5 as the plan stated (ICR, para 71). Also, the Grievance
  mechanism did not follow the Bank standards and no report of its implementation was available. According
  to the ICR (para 70) the Bank "recommended the Client to handle with all social and environmental
  incompliance on the project." However, it remains unclear whether the Client took the necessary actions
  recommended by the Bank or not.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The project experienced a 10-month implementation delay because the borrower
  had to agree on using the "Bank’s financial management system as the national systems were not
  considered to be sufficiently robust (ICR, para 25)." According to the ICR (para 72), financial reports,
  statements and audit reports were timely, and audit reports did not highlight "important shortcomings." The
  total disbursement rate of the IDA managed financing (IDA, EU and GEF) reached only 78% at the closing
  date (ICR, para 72).



  Procurement. Procurement was negatively impacted by a number of factors reported in the ICR (para
  71): first, the project experienced delays in contract signatures; second, there were delays in the execution
  of works; third, some contracts were not approved in the procurement plan, while other contracts were not
  submitted to General Directorate of Public Markets review as required; fourth, procurement notices and
  contract awards were not published; fifth, the deadline for bid submission was not sufficient; sixth, technical
  expert(s) were absent in the contracts evaluation committee; seventh, there was poor record keeping and
  documents were not uploaded in the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement; and last, receipts
  and payments were not archived. Procurement delays partially contributed to the cancellation of the EU
  trust fund-when only 10% of the trust fund was disbursed (ICR, para 25). Also, procurement delays and
  escalation of labor and material costs negatively impacted the implementation of irrigation schemes (ICR,
  para 25). The Unit for Planning and Statistics procurement staff were hired after a two- year
  delay. Furthermore, procurement delays contributed to the late construction of the Karankorola drain-
  which was only completed as the project was closing. Therefore, the immediate impact of
  this infrastructure investment could not be assessed during the life of the project-despite a nine years
  implementation period. Overall, procurement was weak and contributed to implementation delays and to
  the cancellation of EU funding.



                                                                                                   Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None



d. Other
   None



11. Ratings
                                                                                      Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                      Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately               Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately               Moderately
Bank Performance
                                 Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                   Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

 The ICR included eight lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

      To ensure capturing early stage data, it is important to have the M&E system fully
       designed and ready to implement once the project becomes effective. The project
       experience showed that relegating the system’s design to the project’s implementation phase
       fails to capture early stage data, the system often becomes under-resourced, and eventually
       becomes unhelpful as a management tool. For example, ensuring baseline
       information/studies are undertaken before project implementation begins.
      Projects implemented in challenging conditions like Mali need to be more focused to
       ensure smooth implementation and achievement of outcomes. This includes better
       targeting at design stage, and strategic choice of value chains to accelerate the pace of
       implementation. The complexity of demand-driven approaches need to be tempered by
       limiting the menu of options (type of support, commodities included, etc.), and by avoiding a
       geographical scattering of interventions.
      Successful Risk Management requires integrating systemic risks (social, political and
       economic) in the design choices combined with the development of adequate
       adaptation/mitigation measures. The project’s risk analysis at design failed short of
       identifying any macro risks, yet the emerging crisis in 2012 posed multiple challenges to
       implementation. Innovations – in terms of activities and implementation arrangements – have
       to be gradually introduced in riskier contexts and some contingency plans should be

                                                                                                        Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)



         developed for the main risks in order to avoid as much as possible disruptions to
         implementation and ad-hoc decision-making.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR acknowledged that M&E design was complex and implementation was weak. The
ICR (para 49) also acknowledged that robustness of the evidence provided by various outcome indicators
weakened the attribution of their achievements to the project.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings to the extent possible - given
the M&E weaknesses. However, two outcome indicators and three intermediate outcome indicators suffered
from attribution problems.

Lessons were generally based on evidence and analysis. They were based on the project experience although
they could have befitted from better formulation, see Section 12.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a good discussion on outcomes despite concerns on the accuracy of the
M&E data. However, the discussion was overly positive giving the reader a false impression that outcomes are
positive. This suddenly ended when the ICR concluded that the achieved results could not be fully attributed to
the project activities.

Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and integrated.

Consistency with guidelines. The assigned ratings in the ICR were justified and backed by sound
arguments. However, the outcome discussion could have benefited from more details on the reasons that
contributed to the assigned rating.

Conciseness. The ICR provided thorough coverage of the implementation experience and candidly reported on
shortcomings. There was enough clarity in the report’s messaging. However, attribution was problematic due to
a complex M&E design combined with poor M&E implementation. The ICR did not report on the relevance of
objectives with regards to the Government's priorities at completion.The ICR could have provided more explicit
statements on compliance with Bank's safeguard policies.



Overall, the ICR Quality is rated Substantial, despite minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Mali-Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP) (P095091)




                                                                                  Page 21 of 21
