     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SZ-Loc Govt SIL (FY11) (P095232)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022008

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P095232                                    SZ-Loc Govt SIL (FY11)

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Eswatini                                   Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80030                                 30-Jun-2017                                           26,543,917.05

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Jan-2011                                30-Jun-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            26,900,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             26,900,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         26,543,917.05                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo          J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson         IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Loan Agreement (LA),"the objective of the Project is to assist the Borrower to develop institutionally
   strengthened rural local governments (Tinkhundla) and urban local governments (ULGs)-LA, p. 5".

   For the project to eventually address the consequences of any emergency situation, the Project
   Development Objective (PDO) was revised during the 2016 restructuring and was restated as follows: "to
   assist the Borrower to develop institutionally strengthened rural local governments (Tinkhundla)", Urban Local


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SZ-Loc Govt SIL (FY11) (P095232)



   Governments (ULGs), and to improve the Borrower’s capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an
   Eligible Crisis or Emergency."

   As there was no case of emergency requiring the project’s intervention, the achievements of the project will
   be assessed against the original PDO with a clarification that the purpose of institutional strengthening in the
   PDO was to plan and manage infrastructure needs and services as stated in the Results Chain (Theory of
   Change) in the ICR. The expanded PDO against which this project’s achievements will be assessed in this
   ICR Review is as follows: "To assist the Borrower to develop institutionally strengthened Rural Local
   Governments (Tinkhundla) and Urban Local Governments (ULGs) to plan and manage infrastructure needs
   and services".




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three original components and a fourth Contingent Emergency Response Component added
   during the November 2016 restructuring as delineated below:

   1. Tinkhundla Infrastructure and Capacity Building Support (appraisal: US$7.76 million; actual:
   US$3.78 million). This component aimed to fund the following activities: (i) Small-Scale Infrastructure
   Funding aimed to support the carrying out of subprojects by eligible Tinkhundla through the provision of
   performance-based infrastructure funding; (ii) Capacity Building Support toward strengthening the capacity
   of participating Tinkhundla to manage the delivery of basic local public services in their jurisdictions,
   including through the support of a Rural Capacity Building Mobile Team (RCBMT).

   2. Urban Infrastructure Grants and Capacity Building Support (appraisal: US$18.55 million; actual:
   US$15.90 million). This component was to fund the following activities: (i) Performance-Based
   Infrastructure Grants aimed to support the provision of infrastructure by ULGs through the financing of
   investments in roads and related civil works, through the provision of Performance-Based Infrastructure
   Grants and ULG’s contribution, and (ii) the Capacity Building support aimed to strengthen the capacity of
   ULGs and sound management practices toward the delivery of basic local public services, including through
   the support of an Urban Capacity Building Mobile Team (UCBMT).

   3. Project Management and Technical Assistance (appraisal: US$7.18 million; actual: US$6.74
   million). This component was to fund the following activities: (i) Project Management consisting in
   the establishment and operation of the Project Support Team (PST), (ii) Formal training and capacity

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SZ-Loc Govt SIL (FY11) (P095232)



   building toward strengthening the capacity of ULGs and Tinkhundla in overall local government
   management and systems, (iii) Technical Assistance for local government borrowing through strengthening
   the financial capacity of ULGs including through the delivery of advisory services; (iv) Performance
   assessments and related reviews toward the carrying out of performance assessments and periodic reviews
   of project processes; and the studies to assist the Borrower in developing a sustainable local government
   financial framework; and finally (v) the set-up of monitoring systems in the Ministry of Housing and Urban
   Development (MHUD) and the Ministry of Tinkhundla Administration and Development (MTAD) aimed
   to strengthening local government monitoring systems.

   4. Contingent Emergency Response Component (appraisal: US$0.00 million; actual: US$0.01
   million). This component was included as a precautionary measure when the project was restructured in
   2016 in case of an urgent need for assistance or to bolster a capacity constraint in the event of an
   unexpected drought situation, but was never triggered.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost: The project’s appraised cost was US$33.76 million. The actual cost of the project according to the
   Data Sheet in the ICR amounted to US$26.54 million, representing the disbursement of 78.6 percent of
   the total estimated project cost.

   Financing. The original financing by an IBRD loan was US$26.90 million, of which almost 100 percent
   (US$26.54 million) was disbursed.

   Borrower contribution. Counterpart funding was not elucidated in the main body of the ICR report.
   However, the ICR’s Data Sheet indicated that the Borrower's contribution was expected to be US$4.0
   million, and contributions from the local Governments (US$2.20 million) and the communities (US$0.66
   million) were also anticipated. In the event, according to the ICR Data Sheet, none of these contributions
   were made.

   Dates. The project was approved January 20, 2011 and made effective on March 12, 2012. The project
   was restructured twice: (i) first on November 29, 2016 to make changes in the Project Development
   Objectives, in the results framework, in components and cost, in the Loan closing date, in the
   disbursements arrangements, and in the implementation schedule; and (ii) second on October 5th, 2017 to
   reallocate resources among disbursement categories. The project was closed according to the new
   schedule on June 30, 2019, two years after the original closing date.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were substantially relevant to country's priorities at appraisal and over the lifetime of
the project. The project was consistent with the Interim Strategy Note (ISN) for the period 2008-2010,
which included in its outcomes the goal of improved management in local authorities and identified this

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SZ-Loc Govt SIL (FY11) (P095232)



               project as a key initial intervention for scaled-up Bank's support. The project was also consistent with the
               Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Eswatini for the period 2015–2018 that had as its primary goal "to
               support the country’s efforts to reduce poverty and inequality and promote shared prosperity in a
               sustainable manner." The CPS had a two-pillar strategic approach namely: (i) promoting growth and job
               creation and (ii) strengthening state capabilities. The primary objective of the project relates to the
               "strengthening state capabilities", with indirect benefits for the "promoting growth and job creation"
               pillar. Strengthening the rural and urban local governments' ability to plan and manage infrastructure needs
               and services was a major contribution to enhancing the state capabilities at local level.

               A shortcoming of the project’s PDO was that, as a self-standing statement, it was not clear about the
               purpose of “institutional strengthening”. Fortunately the PAD (paragraph 4) had indicated the different, but
               at times overlapping, institutional responsibilities the RLGs (mainly planning for infrastructure needs)
               compared with the more advanced responsibilities of ULGs (mainly planning for infrastructure services). In
               light of this clarification this review rates the relevance of the project’s objectives as substantial.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             "To assist the Borrower to develop institutionally strengthened Rural Local Governments (Tinkhundla) and
                             Urban Local Governments (ULGs) to plan and manage infrastructure needs and services"

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change

                             The Project Appraisal Document (PAD) did not have an explicit theory of change, but the ICR constructed
                             one based on the results framework presented in the PAD. The theory of change toward the PDO was built
                             on the logic that training events and workshops, mentoring, development of training manuals and materials,
                             annual performance audits, and the development of a sustainable local government finance framework would
                             lead to improvements in the areas of (i) project financial management, (ii) infrastructure project management
                             and administration, (iii) participatory planning and project ownership, and (iv) capital investment and asset
                             management. The above achievements would in turn enhance the technical capacity of rural and urban local
                             governments to plan and manage infrastructure needs and services for RLGs and ULGs. The expected long-
                             term impact was the availability of and access to services for communities, opportunities for economic growth,
                             and improved community safety. Key assumptions underpinning the theory of change were that: (i) urban
                             and rural local governments adopt and implement new processes, (ii) budgets for maintenance be prioritized
                             by urban and rural governments and communities, and (iii) guidelines for improved local government

                                                                                                                             Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SZ-Loc Govt SIL (FY11) (P095232)



financing frameworks be adopted at the level of the national ministries (ICR, Figure 1, Results Chain, page
8). The results chain or theory of change presented in the ICR was generally sound and will guide the
assessment of the efficacy with which the project achieved its objective.

Efficacy

Key project's achievements are detailed on pages 14-17 and 20-22 of the ICR, and are summarized below:

Outputs

(a) Tinkhundla

      Tinkhundla secretaries who received training and mentorship can now prepare comprehensive Capital
         Investment Plans (CIPs), register and follow objective process in project identification, prioritization
         and selection;
         The percentage of targeted Tinkhundla signing annual sub-project execution side letters with the
         Ministry of Planning, and those completing annual budgets on time for submission to the Ministry of
         Tinkhundla Administration and Development (MTAD) were exceeded, all reaching 100 percent against
         a target of 75 percent;
        87% of rural local governments are now scoring 80 or above against a target of 75 percent on their
         final performance assessments with significant progress in their ability to complete budgets and audits
         on time. The assessment reviewed a set of mandatory minimum requirements, the participatory
         planning and budgetary practices as well as the administrative effectiveness, reporting and disclosure
         practices and sustainability of improved practices of the Tinkhundla;
        The project was successful in strengthening the capacity of Tinkhundla in documentation, keeping
         proper record, filling systems, and some Tinkhundla have continued the use of community
         consultation and prioritizations process adopted during project implementation; and
        The construction and/or upgrade of roads and bridges, school infrastructure, markets, community hall,
         clinics, dip-tanks, footbridges, water crossings, fencing, and sports fields.

(b) Urban Local Governments

      The target of non-rural roads rehabilitated was fully achieved and reached 40 km;
      The percentage of ULGs with completed, up-to-date road asset registries was exceeded, reaching 92
       percent against a target of 75 percent, and from a baseline of zero;
      The percentage of ULGs having annual financial audits completed within six months of the end of the
       financial year was exceeded, reaching 92 percent against a target of 75 percent, and from a baseline
       of 25 percent;
      92% of participating urban local governments are now scoring 80 or above against a target of 75
       percent on their final performance assessments with significant progress in their ability to complete
       budgets and audits on time. The assessment included a minimum requirement review, financial
       stability and good governance, administrative efficiency, project execution and service delivery as well
       as transparency, accountability and participation assessment. The performance assessment for ULGs
       progressively increased minimum score requirements from 50% to 80% on the above-mentioned
       areas, and over time more than 90% of all ULGs were able to meet minimum score requirement,
       showing improved capacity on all targeted measures;


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SZ-Loc Govt SIL (FY11) (P095232)




     However, the target for minimum percentage of operating budget allocated to asset maintenance was
      missed, reaching only 7 percent against a target of 15 percent, and from a baseline of 5 percent; and
     The upgrade and/or construction of roads and drainage and the provisioning of street lights.
      The largest portion of the 40.62 km road construction program in the ULGs was for 30.1 km of road
      upgrades.

Outcomes

(a) Tinkhundla

     The construction of markets in some Tinkhundla promoted business development which in turn
      contributed to opportunities for local economic development. Low water bridges connected previously
      disconnected communities to greater economic opportunities;
     The project has created a demonstration effect as a basis for communities to conceive and implement
      more ambitious projects in the future. The ICR reported (ICR, para 50) that asset management and
      basic capital planning activities have been entrenched in the local practice. For instance, it was found
      that public posting of the three-year capital development plan and the annual capital development
      budget at the council offices notice boards are now a common practice in the participating Tinkhundla;
     A significant outcome in Tinkhundla was the strengthening and empowerment of local communities to
      conceive, plan and implement projects. As communities had to take ownership of the small-scale
      infrastructure projects and are collectively responsible for the maintenance of achieved infrastructure,
      the projects have improved community cohesion and participation.

(b) Urban Local Governments

     In ULG, the target of the ratio of capital expenditures to total revenue was exceeded, reaching 28
      percent, against a target of 25 percent, and a baseline of 5 percent;
     The construction of roads and roads-related infrastructure in urban areas promoted shared prosperity
      and improved overall accessibility and access to economic and social opportunities. Citizens involved
      in business activities throughout the ULGs where road construction was undertaken have noted an
      improvement in business performance once accessibility improved. Capital investment in urban areas
      also served as an economic injection into the construction sector, with various town clerks noting
      increased numbers of local construction workers employed for project delivery;
     The installation of street lights has contributed to extended trading hours for local businesses, and
      residents have noted an increased informal economic activity in areas with improved sidewalks.

(c) Tinkhundla and Urban Local Governments

     91% of participating urban local governments and 87% rural local governments are now scoring 80 or
      above on their final performance assessments with significant progress in their ability to complete
      budgets and audits on time;
     The reported estimated number of direct beneficiaries under all funded sub-projects is 110,710, of
      which 58% were females;
     The number of people provided with access to all-season roads within a 500-meter range under the
      project is estimated at 25,504, and 86% of respondents in the 2019 beneficiary survey are satisfied
      with the achieved infrastructure;


                                                                                                Page 6 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               SZ-Loc Govt SIL (FY11) (P095232)




                                  The 2019 beneficiary survey identified positive social and business impacts of improved access to
                                   services. The achieved infrastructure and services permitted (i) medical emergency service vehicles to
                                   come to the beneficiary homes, during all seasons and at any hour of the day, (ii) increased access to
                                   education by all school-age children, (iii) drastic reduction of students’ rate of absenteeism from
                                   school and improvements in enrolment rates and lower dropout rate, and (iv) provision of houses for
                                   teachers has also improved educational outcomes;
                                  The performance-based grants have directly contributed to improved efficiency, transparency, and
                                   accountability based on improved financial management and budgeting, planning, safeguards
                                   management, community consultation and accountability and implementation capacity including
                                   improved capacity on procurement, asset management and maintenance performance of both RLGs
                                   and ULGs;
                                  The summary of interviews conducted by the ICR team reported that improved institutional practices
                                   had become embedded in ULGs and Tinkhundla systems and activities. For example, consultations
                                   with the MHUD revealed that ULGs were submitting their narrative and financial reports promptly after
                                   the close of projects, and three City Councils have continued the use of independent auditors to assist
                                   in financial management.
                                  This Review concluded that the RLGs and ULGs had achieved substantial achievements in
                                   strengthening their institutions to plan and deliver infrastructure needs and services.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall, the project efficacy was substantial as evidenced by the key results summarized below:

                                  Communities in Tinkhundla and staff members of ULGs benefited from the capacity support and
                                   acquired new skills, and local governments have already embedded new processes into their
                                   operations to plan and deliver infrastructure needs and services;
                                  Most participating urban local governments and rural local governments are now scoring 80 or above
                                   on their final performance assessments with significant progress in their ability to complete budgets
                                   and audits on time;
                                  The project led to improved efficiency, transparency, and accountability based on improved financial
                                   management and budgeting, planning, safeguards, community consultation and accountability and
                                   implementation capacity, including improved capacity on procurement, asset management and
                                   maintenance.
                                  The achieved infrastructure permitted access to all-season roads for more people, led to increased
                                   social services, including medical emergency services, and to increased access to education services
                                   with improved educational outcomes.

                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SZ-Loc Govt SIL (FY11) (P095232)




         Finally, communities' ownership of the small-scale infrastructure led to improved community cohesion
          and participation.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic and financial analysis: No economic analysis was conducted at project appraisal, as this was
essentially a technical project and that the types, localities and number of infrastructure projects were unknown
at appraisal for either the RLGs or the ULGs. At project closing, the ICR asserts that while an economic analysis
could encompass equity, efficiency and quality, the ICR's economic analysis would be focused on
efficiency, emphasizing unit costs, cost comparisons and actual expenditure versus budgets between and
across different types of investments (Annex 4, page 42).

Tinkhundla projects numbered 88, of which school infrastructure, footbridges and water crossings, and fencing
accounted for 47 projects. School infrastructure, footbridges and water crossings, and four sports fields
accounted for 57 percent of total costs. According to the Annex 4 in the ICR, the actual cost of three sports fields
was almost 12 times the budgeted cost and the fourth, even after an upward re-estimate of likely expenditure,
still cost 50 percent more than the budget estimate. The estimation of footbridge costs was also a challenge;
eight of the last footbridges built were expected to cost 67 percent more than budgeted. This analysis of
Tinkhundla project costs were not measures of cost effectiveness and hence not an assessment of efficiency.

For the ULGs projects, funds were used for “road-related projects, which broadly included building of new roads,
upgrading of roads, drainage work only and the provisioning of street lights” (ICR, Annex 4, page 44). The ICR
noted that the largest portion of the 40.62 km road construction program in the ULGs was for 30.1 km of road
upgrades. Costs per kilometer for road construction varied according to designs and the circumstances. As the
ICR pointed out, “the average cost per kilometer only diverges for road upgrades, road and drainage and new
roads in year 4 of the project, with consistency in costs between these groups of projects in general. Whilst a
number of new roads were constructed in the early part of the project, the latter years saw a greater focus on
road upgrades. This reflects an acknowledgement that road upgrades could address more cost-effectively
pressing issues such as drainage challenges and even mitigate landslide risks (Annex 4, page 48). No evidence
is provided for this statement.

To summarize, the ICR provided no information on the efficiency of the project’s investments. It nevertheless
notes that “the project was essentially focused on capacity building, utilizing a grant approach to incentivize
participation and the infrastructure selection, design and implementation process as a learning ground. These
additional benefits and results from the project were not quantified in a cost-benefit analysis, but the project’s
infrastructure outputs do seem to have been delivered in an economically efficient manner” (Annex 4,page
48). Again the ICR provides no evidence to justify this conclusion and therefore this review rates the project’s
economic efficiency as modest.

Operational and administrative efficiency: This was a small project which took more than 8 years to
complete. It took more than a year for the project to be effective due to weak implementation readiness on the

                                                                                                       Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SZ-Loc Govt SIL (FY11) (P095232)



ground. According to the ICR, there were also delays during the earlier years as the communities could not
effectively meet their contribution obligations and due to lack of adequate community mobilization. Project
management on the ground was challenging due to capacity constraints within the micro-projects teams. Early
supervision was weak leading to delays in the construction of some projects such as footbridges. Contractors
were also not adequately supervised leading to poor workmanship on some structures which was not
discovered until an advanced stage of construction had been reached. To summarize, operational and
administrative efficiency was rated modest by this review.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives was substantial. The project's overall efficacy was rated substantial because RLGs
and ULGs institutions were strengthened to plan and manage rural infrastructure needs and services. On the
other hand, the project’s efficiency was rated modest. Overall, the project’s outcome is rated as Moderately
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR identified three risks to the project’s development outcome (paras 80-82):

The first risk to development outcome and sustainability is the turn-over of staff at local
governments. Staff members and the community representatives at Tinkhundla that benefited from the


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SZ-Loc Govt SIL (FY11) (P095232)



capacity support might move on without transferring knowledge and skills to new staff members, and the
benefits of the capacity training cannot be sustained over the long term.

The second significant risk for the completed infrastructure projects is the uncertainty of maintenance of the
infrastructure. Rural and Urban governments' own revenue remain very low, and access to the financial
resources, capacity, maintenance plans and management to ensure the necessary upkeep on the
infrastructure is a challenge.

Finally, the project was undertaken in an environment where key institutional and fiscal policy issues
remained unresolved. The 2006 Constitution mandates the establishment of a single country-wide system of
local government within five years, but the legislation to implement that constitutional mandate had not yet
been introduced, and the arrangements for the proposed new local governments were still to be determined.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (para 72), the Bank's project appraisal team responded to a real need to enhance
  the technical capacity of local governments following the decentralization mandate from the
  Constitution. The team worked closely with country counterparts during the period of project design to
  ensure that the project objective was relevant, including extensive consultations with key stakeholders,
  drawing on the lessons learnt from an earlier Bank's Urban Development Project. The Bank's team
  successfully worked with the Government to develop the project and activate in-country structures and
  mechanisms for the implementation of the project.

  The Bank's team also set up adequate implementation and monitoring arrangements to ensure the
  viability and feasibility of sub-projects, with the PST responsible for ensuring the design and construction
  of approved sub-projects in close collaboration with the community. The PAD incorporated specific
  measures to ensure fiduciary, social and safeguards compliance.

  In hindsight, two important issues were not correctly addressed at appraisal and they significantly
  affected the project: (i) the project implementation readiness was weak (ICR, para 54 and 55), and (ii) the
  20 percent of local government contribution (ICR, para 70) hindered a quick start of the project. These
  two elements caused delays in project effectiveness and in the launch of the project activities.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank's project team was, according to the ICR, fully engaged in the project
 delivery through regular supervision and support missions. The Bank also worked closely with the Project


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SZ-Loc Govt SIL (FY11) (P095232)



 Support Team (PST) to ensure that progress was monitored, and that potential obstacles to
 implementation were identified and addressed in a timely manner.

 The Bank's team organized several workshops with country partners on procurement matters that had to
 be handled carefully to ensure the selection of qualified contractors, competent technical specialists, and
 the project auditor, including the development of a contract register to be used for contract management.
 The Bank acted swiftly through a restructuring operation to assist in the removal of the 20% of local
 government contribution to the project.

 The Bank provided awareness training on the Government's and Bank's environmental and social policies
 and procedures, including the safeguard tools developed for the project. However, the ICR (para 78) noted
 the absence of ongoing training on the topic of environmental safeguards during the lifetime of the project,
 and while environmental management measures were mentioned in contract documents, they were not
 physically implemented by contractors.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The ICR summarized the theory of change and the M&E arrangements in the paragraphs 60 and 61. The
 theory of change set out the project's objectives and intended outcomes, and the
 M&E arrangements described the results framework with specific, measurable and achievable
 indicators. The PST was responsible for the monitoring and evaluation of the project, including the
 reporting of progress to the Bank's project team.

 Key indicators were to measure (i) the results of capacity building by way of performance assessments of
 local governments and (ii) the completion of infrastructure projects, which were the two main outcomes of
 the project. Baseline and targets were set for all the indicators, but the ICR noted in paragraph
 61 that some of the outcome indicators could have been expanded to measure the outcomes for capacity
 building in more detail. The final independent performance assessment of participating ULG’s and
 Tinkhundla included a review of the performance indicators used in the assessments, and most indicators
 were found to be relevant.




b. M&E Implementation


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SZ-Loc Govt SIL (FY11) (P095232)



  As noted in the ICR (para 62), the PST reported implementation performance using semi-annual
  progress reports and quarterly financial management reports, and the ISRs and aide-memoires were
  regularly prepared and corrective actions were identified and acted upon. Both Tinkhundla and ULGs
  provided the PST with a semi-annual report on actual progress against planned physical outputs under
  their capital budget, as well as progress with other key performance targets. In addition, there were
  formal mid-term and final evaluations. Separate independent reviews were also commissioned to
  examine overall impacts on local government institutional performance, service delivery and governance
  issues and training. Annual and independent performance assessments were conducted in each of the
  participating local governments to evaluate performance against the set criteria, and the results were
  latter communicated to the PST and the Bank.

  The performance indicators included in the Results Framework were assessed and included in the ISRs.
  Based on the semi-annual progress reports prepared by the PST, the MHUD undertook necessary
  corrective actions to improve progress. The ICR mentioned that the Bank's project team also monitored
  progress and achievement of intended outcomes at least once annually and intensively during the June
  2015 midterm review.

  However, the reports produced by the Urban Mobile team were, according to the ICR, too activity-
  focused and did not fully address the main challenges and how they are being addressed (para 63).
  Progress reporting required improvement and action early in the project, which were achieved by the time
  of the final supervision missions. Monitoring the project implementation was complicated by the lack of a
  consolidated M&E system, as reporting was done in several different ways and by different role players
  and consolidated at the PST level. This complicated the collection, interpretation and dissemination of
  information to monitor and evaluate project progress, and this was more so in the area of safeguards due
  to IT infrastructure constraints in the PST office.



c. M&E Utilization
  Aides-memoires and ISRs were the key instruments that prompted the initiation of restructuring
  operations that contributed to the resolving of implementation obstacles like the financial contribution to
  sub-projects from the participating local governments and communities. The ICR noted that at times, the
  Bank identified shortcomings in the initial ISRs and advised the PST that these were inadequate to
  address issues and inform all stakeholders on the status of the project. Some important indicators such
  as gender inclusion and the number of community beneficiaries were only measured through mid-term
  and completion studies, with no requirements to report on these during project implementation,
  making the initiation of timely corrective action virtually impossible.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SZ-Loc Govt SIL (FY11) (P095232)




a. Safeguards
  Social and environmental compliance

  The PAD classified the operation as a category B project, as potential adverse social and
  environmental impacts were assessed as limited. Three environmental policies were triggered as follows:(i)
  Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), (ii) Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and (iii)
  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). In accordance with the World Bank’s OP 4.01, an Environmental
  and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared in 2010, and environmental and social
  screening was done with support from the Urban Capacity Building Mobile Team (UCBMT), and
  Comprehensive Mitigation Plans (CMPs) were prepared for all ULG sub-projects. The contractors then
  prepared Construction Environmental Management Plans based on the findings of the ESMF, which were
  monitored by environmental officers in the ULGs as well as on the contractors’ teams.

  As the rural sub-projects became more complex with the construction of footbridges, market centers and
  sports fields, the Microprojects Program (MPP) relied on the Consultant Engineer to monitor and report on
  environmental safeguards. One of the main challenges was the capacity to prepare safeguards documents
  of acceptable standard, and to supervise and monitor incorporation of environmental safeguards, especially
  for rural projects. In this regard, a training workshop was carried out, targeting the PST, ULGs, Tinkhundla
  and micro-projects to understand the ESMF and its requirements.

  Implementation of safeguards on a day-to-day basis was handled by the implementing agencies under the
  supervision of the PST. In both Tinkhundla and ULGs, the selection of priority investments was discussed in
  public meetings, and engagement of local workers was prioritized to focus on the associated development
  benefits and minimize risks associated with potential labor influx. The PST received three complaints
  related to potential resettlement impact. All cases were timely investigated and documented following
  established procedures, and were concluded as unfounded.

  The ICR was not specific about compliance with regards to the triggered social and safeguards policies.
  However, given that the ICR did not pinpoint any unsettled social and safeguards claims at the project
  closing date, this review concludes that the project implementation was generally in compliance with
  triggered social and safegards policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  The fiduciary aspects of the project were assessed in paragraph 71 of the ICR. At appraisal, the financial
  management arrangements for the project were reviewed and found adequate. Procurement of works,
  goods and services funded under the project followed Bank's procurement procedures. The project
  financial management functions were handled by the PST. A suitable qualified accountant had overall
  responsibility for financial management of the project. The Government's Auditor General carried out

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SZ-Loc Govt SIL (FY11) (P095232)



   annual audits of the project financial statements at the end of each fiscal year. The project received an
   unqualified audit opinion for the final implementation year and for the final audit conducted after the closing
   date. Overall, the ICR concluded that the financial management implementation of the project maintained
   a satisfactory rating.

   Procurement

   The ICR reported that procurement of works, goods and services funded under the project followed Bank
   procurement procedures (para 71). Moreover, the Bank's project team held several workshops with
   country stakeholders on matters related to procurement. Projects which experienced delays were also
   concentrated in the latter years, because of a procurement rule that did not allow for multiple projects to be
   awarded to the same contractor. In some instances, multiple procurement attempts, and re-designs
   brought costs down. Ultimately, any individual project cost overruns were accommodated in the overall
   budget envelope due to savings realized elsewhere. Overall, according to the ICR, there was enough
   evidence of compliance with the World Bank procurement rules.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Participation, Ownership and Cohesion: The local Council in Motshane has set fines for different
   offences which include the absence from development meetings and vandalism of community assets. This
   is an example of how participatory planning and ownership of projects has found traction whereby
   communities were concerned about possible vandalism of infrastructure. A significant outcome of
   the project in the Tinkhundla was the strengthening and empowerment of local communities to conceive,
   plan and supervise the implementation of projects. As communities had to take ownership of the small-
   scale infrastructure projects and were collectively responsible for the maintenance of these projects, the
   projects have improved community cohesion and participation.



d. Other
   The ICR did not identify any other noticeable impact.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SZ-Loc Govt SIL (FY11) (P095232)



Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

This review agrees with the lessons identified in the ICR, which are summarized below:

(i) M&E efficacy requires an improved data management: For effective monitoring and
evaluation, it was important to have a central server with an archiving system that could provide a
repository for all reports and documents for easy access by all stakeholders. This instrument
generated the necessary support for the collection of PDO indicators, their regular update,
interpretation and sharing with all key stakeholders. The lesson is that improved data management
is important to ensure the sustainability of achieved outcomes, as updated information and data on
outcomes will allow good maintenance and eventual scaling up.

(ii) The mobilization of communities and their leaders is central to the sustainability of local
government projects (para 85). The participation of communities in the sub-projects improved
significantly during project implementation, but it was necessary to further improve community
responsibility in the implementation, operation and maintenance of sub-projects. Sports fields were
technically difficult to deliver and have limited value in terms of actual numbers of community
members using them. Similarly, the occupancy of market stalls remained relatively low, although the
significantly improved conditions for the limited number of traders (mostly female) who utilize them
was appreciated. The lesson is that to get the beneficiaries' support for sub-projects and achieve
a project's outcome, community mobilization is necessary and is only successful if sub-projects are
of sound quality and community mobilization is established at a high level (para)

(iii) Close supervision focused on adherence to construction quality, building standards, and
timeliness has to be the norm to ensure the satisfactory delivery of project results (para 86).
The quality of implemented projects in rural areas is highly dependent on the experience of local
contractors and to the adequate supervision of contractors by the authorities. In this project, the
overall quality of contractor performance was noted as acceptable from the functionality perspective;
however there were variations at the detailed level. The lesson is that close supervision and
standardized designs can mitigate some of the technical challenges facing contractors, but the
authorities need to guard against sites that are not suitable for standard designs, resulting in
unsupervised changes on site and during construction.(para )

(iv) There is a link between the success of local Government projects and the national-level
government system reforms (para 87). While decentralization triggered the launch of this project
at the time, much of the longer-term sustainability of the project results were rooted in national
government system reforms. The changing macro-environment could not have been clearly
foreseen, but the challenges and delays encountered in the project design and effectiveness periods
could have acted as early red flags. The lesson is that there could have been more explicit
consideration of how to better ensure sustainability of capacity building interventions at the local
level. Implementation of this lesson might have been the compilation of training manuals into a
handbook to serve as reference

(v) Implementation readiness is essential to move rapidly toward project results. In this
project, delays of project launch, and project extensions were caused by the lack of project

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SZ-Loc Govt SIL (FY11) (P095232)



implementation readiness at project approval. The lesson from the experience of this project was
that project implementation readiness is essential to start the project promptly and conclude it on
time.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and provides a candid account of the project design and implementation. The theory of
change and the evidence for project efficacy are well articulated. There is a good presentation of evidence for
achieved outputs, outcomes and impacts, including useful annexes providing detail on the key
PDO indicators and their assessment methodology. The lessons and recommendations formulated in the ICR
are relevant and were derived from the experience of the project implementation. However, the quality at entry
could have been better described, and Annexes 1 and 3 of the ICR were deficient in many respects, and the
latter was updated only upon request from IEG. Nevertheless, the ICR’s overall quality is rated by this Review
as substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 16 of 16
