     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022063

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P106735                                     AR Provincial Public Health Insurance

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Argentina                                   Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80620,IBRD-85160                       31-Dec-2015                                        600,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Apr-2011                                 31-Aug-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           400,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            600,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        600,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Salim J. Habayeb            Judyth L. Twigg               Joy Behrens                    IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement of 8/2/12, the objectives of the project were to: (a) increase utilization and
   quality of key health services for the uninsured target population; and (b) improve institutional management by
   strengthening the incentives for results in Participating Provinces and among Authorized Providers. The
   statements of objectives were identical in the PAD and ICR.




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)



   Project objectives were not revised, but associated outcome targets were revised downward in July 2015 at
   the time of additional financing. Therefore, this ICR Review applied a split evaluation methodology.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  06-Jul-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Supporting Provincial Public Health Insurance (Appraisal US$290 million; AF US$137 million;
   Actual US$427 million). The component consisted of capitation payments made by the National Health
   Ministry to participating provinces for the provision of (a) general health interventions; and (b) selected
   health interventions for catastrophic diseases, including congenital heart diseases.



   2. Institutional and Management Strengthening of National and Provincial Ministries of Health
   (Appraisal US$59 million; AF US$25.5 million; Actual US$84.50 million). The component provided for
   management improvement, governance, monitoring and evaluation. The component included: (a)
   development of information systems and instruments; capacity enhancement to manage the project,
   including the preparation and execution of annual performance agreements between the National Health
   Ministry and Provincial Health Ministries, and between provincial ministries and authorized providers; and
   service delivery, including outreach, for rural and indigenous peoples; (b) strengthening health workforce
   skills; (c) improving epidemiological information, financial monitoring and evaluation, and human resource
   management systems; (d) streamlining regulatory and planning capacities; (e) carrying out of studies on
   health system financing aimed at facilitating policy-making decisions of the national and provincial
   ministries; (f) improving communication strategies for disseminating information about health plans,
   changing behavior among health sector staff, and promoting social participation; and (g) supporting the
   establishment of an observatory of the Borrower's health system.



   3. Building Capacity of the National and Provincial Ministries of Health To Deliver Services
   (Appraisal US$50 million; AF US$37 million; Actual US$87 million). This third component was aimed at
   strengthening the supply capacity of national and provincial ministries of health through: (a) the provision of
   equipment (medical, transportation, information technology and communications); and (b) maintenance
   services needed to upgrade and expand national and provincial health ministries’ information and
   communication systems (excluding civil works).


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)




  Explanatory note on coverage: Health services organization and related financing in the country (24
  provinces, including the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires) largely consist of three clusters:

       i. the contributory social security sub-sector (57% of the total population);
      ii. the contributory private health insurance sub-sector (5.1% of the population); and
     iii. the public health sector (37.9% of the population), providing free health care for anyone requesting
         it, including the uninsured.



  The project (known as SUMAR) focused on the third cluster (the public health sector) and utilized a results-
  based financing approach. The project retained the essential features of the existing Plan Nacer, covering
  uninsured pregnant and lactating women, and children under 6, while concurrently expanding eligibility to
  new population groups, consisting of children aged 6 to 9 years, youth aged 10 to 19 years, and adult
  population aged under 65 without formal health insurance (ICR, p. 5). The PAD (p. 7) estimated that around
  9.5 million people would directly benefit from the project.



  Scale-up of components under the additional financing of 2015. The additional financing maintained
  the original project components to continue to finance health benefits for the original population groups (i.e.,
  children aged 0 to 9, youth aged 10 to 19 years, and adult females aged under 65 without formal health
  insurance) and their further expansion to also include men 20-64 without formal insurance, as this was the
  main remaining population subgroup that still lacked any form of coverage by insurance or risk-pooling
  mechanism (ICR, p. 8). The additional funds were allocated among components roughly in the same
  proportions as the original allocations at appraisal (ICR, p. 9).




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost and financing. The original amount of IBRD financing was estimated at US$400 million, and, with an
  additional financing of US$200 million, the actual cost amounted to US$600 million, including front end fees
  of US$1.50 million. The loan was fully disbursed.



  Borrower contribution. Counterpart funding was not elucidated in the main ICR report. However, the
  economic analysis (Annex 4, ICR, p. 45) stated that the actual project cost amounted to US$788.7 million
  when provincial counterpart funds were included. According to the Borrower Comments, (Annex 5, ICR, p.
  54), US$800 million were delivered throughout the project period, including Bank loans, Argentine Treasury
  contributions, and provincial co-financing.




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)



   Dates. The project was designed for a five-year implementation period. It was approved on 4/28/11 with a
   planned closing date on 12/31/15. The project became effective 18 months later on 10/17/12. Effectiveness
   was held off due to a delay in approving the Presidential Decree that was required for signing the Loan
   Agreement (Project Paper, Report No: PAD1397, dated 6/3/15, p. 7). According to the ICR (p. 21), the
   availability of funds from the preceding operation under Plan Nacer may have contributed to this delay. A
   Mid-term Review was undertaken on 11/7/14. In the context of additional financing in July 2015, the original
   closing date was extended by 21 months till 9/30/17. Effectiveness of the additional financing also
   encountered a delay of 11 months. Likewise, the ICR (p. 21) noted that the availability of funds from the
   original loan may have contributed to this delay. A level-2 restructuring on 6/16/17 extended the closing
   date by 15 months to 12/31/18 in view of delayed effectiveness, currency devaluation, and increased
   capitation payments. The closing date was further extended on 9/20/18 by eight months under a level-2
   restructuring to 8/31/19, at which date the project closed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objectives were responsive to the national long-term goals aiming at gradual development of universal
health coverage, initiated in 2004. Under the existing flagship Plan Nacer, maternal and child health
services were provided to uninsured pregnant and lactating women, and to uninsured children under
six. The Bank and successive national administrations supported these efforts (Provincial Maternal & Child
Health Investment Project - APL 1 & 2). While retaining the essential features of Plan Nacer, the project
constituted a logical next step in incremental coverage of new uninsured population groups, namely
children aged 6 to 9 years, youth aged 10 to 19 years, and adult population aged under 65 without health
insurance. The project also provided additional services, such as for cancer prevention, sexual health, and
prevention of non-communicable diseases (ICR, p. 10). At entry, the objectives were consistent with
Argentina’s Federal Health Plan 2010-2016 that reflected consensus among stakeholders for the need to
address large inequalities in health services across provinces, weak stewardship capacity, uneven quality
of care, and scarcity of resources allocated to prevention.



The ICR (p. 11) noted that the objectives were consistent with the Country Partnership Strategy FY2015-18,
in particular with the CPS outcome on the proportion of eligible people benefiting from effective
healthcare. The objectives were also aligned with the World Bank Strategy in support of the health sector in
Argentina (Report AUS 14), which calls for: (i) improved effective coverage (defined by the project as an
enrolled beneficiary who received at least one key health care service in the past 12 months according to
agreed protocols) of essential services among the poor together with structural reforms in the provincial
public subsystem; (ii) a focus on non-communicable disease prevention and control while maintaining the
support provided to maternal and child care; and (iii) reducing fragmentation and increasing coordination in
the country’s health system. The ICR also stated that the objectives were consistent with the World Bank
Group’s twin goals of alleviating poverty and boosting shared prosperity, and with the Sustainable
Development Goals, namely with SDG 3 to "Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages,"
and Target 3.8 to "Achieve universal health coverage."



                                                                                                  Page 4 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)




               This ICR Review notes that the objectives at project closing remained fully aligned with the Bank Group
               Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period FY19-FY22. Under Focus Area 2 (Addressing Key
               Institutional Constraints for Better Governance and Service Delivery), Objective 7 on ‘improving the service
               delivery model for effective health services’ is reflected by (a) the number of provinces actively
               implementing the universal health care system in the provinces; and (b) the increase in effective health
               coverage, both constituting CPF indicators 7.1 and 7.2.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Increase utilization of key health services for the uninsured target population.
                             (original outcome targets)

                             Rationale
                             Rationale



                             It was reasonably expected that:

                                        expanding eligibility for enrollment;
                                        results-based financial incentives;
                                        fee-for-service payments from provincial insurances to health care providers for the provision of health
                                         services according to established protocols;
                                        the provision of ambulances, medical equipment, including incubators, and information technology;
                                         and
                                        enhancing accountability mechanisms and technical assistance;

                             would increase the numbers of participating provinces, participating health care providers, enrolled
                             beneficiaries, health services provided, visits by provincial auditors, and external technical audits that would
                             assess the provision of services according to established criteria.

                             In turn, these outputs and intermediate results would plausibly contribute to increased utilization and quality of
                             key health services provided to the uninsured target population.


                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)




Outputs and intermediate results



Transfers from the National Health Ministry to Provincial Health Insurances aggregated at US$414 million;
and at US$54 million to the Solidarity Insurance Fund for health care services provided for catastrophic
illnesses.



Under incentives to health care providers, the project provided fee-for-service payments, and allowed related
expenditures that included medical and office supplies, medical equipment, infrastructure maintenance,
technical assistance, and training. In some provinces, staff recruitment and salary incentives were also
allowed.



16.7 million people were enrolled in the program by July 2019 (ICR, p. 54).



All 24 provincial jurisdictions and a total of 8,000 public health providers participated in the project.



The percentage of health facilities with a high proportion of indigenous people in their catchment areas that
comply with their work plan increased from a baseline of zero in 2014 to 82.8% in 2019, exceeding the target
of 70%.



The proportion of prioritized departments (administrative divisions below the provinces), where the infant
mortality rate was above the provincial average, with enrollment rate above the provincial average, increased
from a baseline of 10% in 2010 to 36% in 2019, short of the target of 70%.



The proportion of eligible indigenous population with effective coverage increased from a baseline of zero in
2010 to 16.1% in 2019, short of both the original target of 50% and the revised target of 30%.



Outcomes




                                                                                                       Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)



Note: The results below consisted of updated data in June 2019, as reflected in the ICR, Annex 6, while the
results framework data were generated in April 2019 (TTL clarifications, 2/26/2020).



The proportion of eligible children, youths, and women with effective coverage increased from a baseline of
7% in 2010 to 50.4% in 2019, short of the original target of 70%.



The proportion of eligible pregnant women receiving prenatal check-ups before the 13th week increased from
a baseline of 15% in 2010 to 41.5% in 2019, short of the original target of 52%.



The proportion of eligible children under 10 years of age receiving complete health check-ups according to
protocol increased from a baseline of 15% in 2010 to 69.8% in 2019, exceeding the target of 60%.



The proportion of eligible youths between 10 and 19 years of age receiving complete health check-ups
according to protocol increased from a zero baseline in 2010 to 37.8% in 2019, short of the original target of
47%.



The proportion of eligible women between 25 and 64 years of age with regular cervical cancer screening
following established norms increased from a baseline of 5% in 2010 to 25% in 2019, short of the original
target of 53%.



The proportion of eligible men with effective coverage increased from a baseline of zero in 2015 to 13.4% in
2019, exceeding the target of 10%.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Increase utilization of key health services for the uninsured target population.
(revised outcome targets)




                                                                                                  Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)




Revised Rationale
Rationale and outputs: The same as under the original Objective 1, above.



Outcomes



The proportion of eligible children, youths, and women with effective coverage increased from a baseline of
7% in 2010 to 50.4% in 2019, meeting the revised target of 50%.



The proportion of eligible pregnant women receiving prenatal check-ups before the 13th week increased from
a baseline of 15% in 2010 to 41.5% in 2019, above the revised target of 40%.



The proportion of eligible children under 10 years of age receiving complete health check-ups according to
protocol increased from a baseline of 15% in 2010 to 69.8% in 2019, exceeding the target of 60%.



The proportion of eligible youths between 10 and 19 years of age receiving complete health check-ups
according to protocol increased from a zero baseline in 2010 to 37.8% in 2019, exceeding the revised target
of 25%.



The proportion of eligible women between 25 and 64 years of age with regular cervical cancer screening
following established norms increased from a baseline of 5% in 2010 to 25% in 2019, exceeding the revised
target of 20%.



The proportion of eligible men with effective coverage increased from a baseline of zero in 2015 to 13.4% in
2019, exceeding the target of 10%.




Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)




Objective
Increase the quality of key health services for the uninsured target population.
(original outcome targets)

Rationale
Rationale: The same as under Objective 1, above.



Outputs



The same as under the original Objective 1, above. Also, the project developed a total of 700 clinical
protocols with a focus on prevention such as prenatal care, infant and child care, adolescent care,
vaccination, and non-communicable disease and cancer prevention, in line with the guidelines of the World
Health Organization and the Pan-American Health Organization. The application of the protocols was an
eligibility requirement for health care services payments.



Outcomes



Note on outcomes: The ICR stated that dimensions of both utilization and quality were simultaneously
incorporated in the outcome indicators, as health care services had to be provided according to defined
standards of care, such as clinical protocols and data recording. This ICR Review notes that setting standards
is a valuable measure that largely impacts the supply side of service provision, and would be reasonably
expected to contribute to quality improvements. However, there are other downstream determinants that
extend beyond technical quality and influence outcomes in the whole cycle of care. Hence, outcomes of
service quality improvements for an explicitly stated project objective are more fully assessed by additional
specific measurements, including for patient satisfaction. The project did provide some data on distal
outcomes, beyond the indicators that were set by the results framework.



Outcomes are the same as those illustrated under the original Objective 1/original Targets, above. In addition,
the following results were reported by the ICR: waiting lists for surgical treatment of congenital heart disease
were eliminated, from 324 patients in 2012 to none in 2018, and the average lag time between diagnosis and
surgery decreased from 28 days in 2013 to 16 days in 2019; patients who received treatment for congenital
heart disease under SUMAR reported high levels of customer satisfaction with a satisfaction index of 91%;
and the effectiveness of comprehensive neonatal care (reflecting survival of newborns with a low birth weight)
increased from 72% in 2013 to 85% in 2019. Nevertheless, the extent of unachieved targets (see original
Objective 1, above) indicates an overall low level of achievement.




                                                                                                  Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Increase the quality of key health services for the uninsured target population.
(revised outcome targets)


Revised Rationale
Rationale and outputs: The same as the original Objective 2/original targets, above.



Outcomes



In addition to the favorable results combining utilization and quality, shown under the revised Objective
1/revised targets above, the following outcomes were reported by the ICR: waiting lists for surgical treatment
of congenital heart disease were eliminated, from 324 patients in 2012 to none in 2018, and the average lag
time between diagnosis and surgery decreased from 28 days in 2013 to 16 days in 2019; patients who
received treatment for congenital heart disease under SUMAR reported high levels of customer satisfaction
with a satisfaction index of 91%; and the effectiveness of comprehensive neonatal care increased from 72%
in 2013 to 85% in 2019.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve institutional management.

Rationale
Explanatory note on the objective statement: As described in the ICR and the theory of change (ICR, p. 6),
improving institutional management was meant as that of the National Health Ministry, Provincial Health
Ministries, and health care providers, in terms of management functions related to project interventions.



Rationale


                                                                                                Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)




In addition to strengthening the incentives for results in participating provinces and among providers, as
described above under Objective 1, the provision of technical assistance in planning and human resources
management, training, information technology, goods, medical equipment and maintenance were reasonably
expected to increase related human resource skills and the number of trained staff, health facilities online
billing, and rightly equipped hospitals with maintenance plans, all of which would plausibly contribute to
improved institutional management in participating provinces and among authorized health care providers.



Outputs and intermediate results



The project provided the following inputs while considering the heterogeneous context in the provinces:

      technical assistance in overall planning and financial planning, human resources management,
       communications, and M&E;
      equipment and maintenance, including information technology and communications; and
      external audits (financial and technical) to ensure compliance with program eligibility and application
       of agreed protocols in the provision of health care services.



The percentage of provinces with at least 40% of participating health facilities visited by the provincial internal
auditors increased from a zero baseline in 2010 to 80% in 2019, short of the target of 90%.



The number of institutional staff trained in the provinces reached 23,491 in 2019, exceeding the target of
14,000.



The percentage of health facilities billing regularly online reached 70.1% in 2019, exceeding the target of
65%.



The number of participating provinces implementing actions to disseminate grievance redress mechanisms
reached 24, exceeding the target of 13 provinces.



The percentage of grievances responded to within the stipulated service standards for response reached
85.5%, exceeding the target of 70%.


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 22
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)




                              The number of participating provinces with a Provincial Health Insurance Unit included within the
                              organizational structure of the Provincial Ministries of Health increased from a baseline of 6 provinces in 2014
                              to 8 provinces in 2019, short of the target of 10 provinces.



                              The percentage of hospitals that received equipment and submitted a maintenance plan increased from a
                              zero baseline in 2010 to 60% in 2019, attaining the target of 60%.



                              Outcomes



                              The percentage of provinces meeting the targets of their Annual Performance Agreements increased from a
                              baseline of 17% in 2010 to 58.30% in 2019, attaining the target of 58%.




                              Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Under the original objectives and outcome targets, the project resulted only in partial increases in utilization
                            and quality of key health services for the uninsured target population, but saw improvement in institutional
                            management.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Under the revised objectives/revised outcome targets, the project resulted in increased utilization and quality
                            of key health services for the uninsured target population, often exceeding targets, and saw improvement in
                            institutional management. Along with a notable increase in beneficiaries consisting of poor and vulnerable



                                                                                                                                Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)



  population groups, the outcomes indicate a high level of achievement. Hence, the project advanced the
  agenda for universal health coverage while concurrently homogenizing service quality standards.




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  High



 5. Efficiency
The ex-ante cost-benefit analysis carried out by the PAD estimated health gains resulting from both direct
benefits of healthy life gained in five years and indirect benefits related to (a) cost savings associated with
reduced hospitalizations, consultations, and treatments; (b) benefits associated with reduced economic costs of
illnesses and deaths of working-age adults; and (c) positive effects on the quality of life. The analysis estimated
that 127,863 years of healthy life were saved or gained in five years. A discount rate of 10% was used. No
sensitivity analysis was mentioned. The analysis estimated that the net present value of benefits was about
US$395 million, with an internal rate of return estimated at 265%. However, this ICR Review notes that benefits
and returns have likely been overestimated, as enrollment in the program in the first several years of the project
was lower than anticipated. The second ex-ante cost-benefit analysis was undertaken in 2015 in the context of
additional financing, and suggested that the estimated internal rate of return was 21.8%.



The ICR conducted an ex-post economic analysis evaluation with similar parameters, but based on actual
implementation data (ICR, p. 17), and calculated direct and indirect economic benefits over the period 2012-
2019. The analysis suggested that the operation helped prevent 651,467 Disability Adjusted Life Years, and
rendered an estimated internal rate of return of 67.4%. According to the ICR, the results of the ex-post analysis
indicated that the project was very efficient from an economic standpoint. Also, in terms of fiscal impact, the
analysis reflected cost-effectiveness, as expenditures related to the project were less than 2% of the national
health budget (2018) and negligible for provincial cofinancing (0.12% of the aggregate provincial health budgets
in 2018).



The noteworthy economic returns were moderated by shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation. In
addition to long delays in effectiveness (1 ½ years for the original loan and 11 months for the additional
financing) and project extensions, the ratification of provincial participation in the program was slow, and it took
until July 2014 for all 24 provincial jurisdictions to be formally incorporated in the program. Enrollment of newly
included population groups was slow, and the ICR (p. 21) stated that slow project implementation prompted the
extension of the closing date of the original loan and the downward adjustment of several outcome targets as
part of additional financing in 2015. Insufficient technical capacity in planning, monitoring, and execution of
procurement processes resulted in low-quality procurement documents, procedural errors, and substantial
delays (ICR, p. 26). There were long delays in signing contracts. Procurement issues were encountered



                                                                                                       Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)



throughout most of the implementation period. Also, managerial changes and high staff rotation contributed to
weak procurement capacity (ICR, p. 26).



The project was implemented in a challenging macroeconomic environment, with Argentina's economy
experiencing negative GDP growth rates in some years. As a result of tight fiscal conditions, budgetary
restrictions were imposed. This limited annual disbursements and consequently contributed to slow project
implementation. There was a high level of uncertainty in planning implementation activities and the use of
funds. The impact on disbursements was compounded by currency devaluation. According to the ICR (p. 22),
the combination of these factors required a longer implementation period. In response to fiscal constraints, the
government instituted a hiring freeze at the national level from 2016 onward, resulting in understaffing of the
project coordinating units, particularly at the national level. The ICR (p. 22) stated that the lack of human and
operational resources limited the ability of the national coordinating unit to provide technical assistance to
provinces and to foster horizontal cross-fertilization, particularly through face-to-face interactions, and, as a
future recommendation, the ICR noted that restoring adequate levels of staffing was a necessary condition to
successful implementation of the follow-on operation.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                  265.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                               67.40
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the original objectives/outcome targets: Relevance of objectives is rated high across the entire project
in view of full alignment of the objectives with national plans and the Bank Country Partnership Framework at
project closing. Efficacy is rated modest, consistent with partly achieving the objectives. Efficiency is rated
substantial across the entire project in view of favorable economic returns, but with shortcomings in the
efficiency of implementation. These findings are consistent with an outcome rating of moderately
unsatisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)



Under the revised objectives/outcome targets: Relevance of objectives is rated high, as noted
above. Efficacy is rated high, consistent with fully achieved objectives. Efficiency is rated substantial, as noted
above. These findings are consistent with an outcome rating of highly satisfactory.



Overall Outcome: The following breakdown substantiates the overall Outcome rating: According to IEG/OPCS
guidelines, when objectives and/or associated outcome targets are revised, the final outcome is determined by
the weight of Bank disbursements under each set of objectives (36.3% under the original objectives/outcome
targets, and 63.7% under the revised objectives/outcome targets):



      Under the original objectives/outcome targets, the outcome is rated moderately unsatisfactory (3) with a
       weight value of 1.1 (3 x 36.3%).
      Under the revised objectives/outcome targets, the outcome is rated highly satisfactory (6) with a weight
       value of 3.8 (6 x 63.7%).



These add up to a value of 4.9 (rounded to 5), which corresponds to an overall Outcome rating of satisfactory,
indicative of essentially minor shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The strategic directions of the project in support of universal health coverage continue to benefit from strong
consensus among health sector leadership, providers, stakeholders, and the Bank, and from presidential
administration support. The project generated substantial strengthening of institutional capacity. However,
according to the ICR (p. 28), there are challenges in expanding results-oriented financing mechanisms, as
most national and provincial financing mechanisms in the country are based on traditional budgetary
allocations unrelated to actual performance. The changes required to introduce and expand results-based
financing are demanding. As such, substantial technical assistance and institutional support, including
adequate staffing, would be further required in the future.



The government embarked on a follow-on operation (Supporting Effective Universal Health Coverage
(P163345, 2018-2022, for US$658 million) to further strengthen effective and equitable health services
coverage and institutional capacity at national and provincial health administrations. According to TTL
clarifications (2/26/2020), the follow-on operation also intends to expand performance-based financing and to
promote integration with other programs.



                                                                                                      Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Preparation capitalized on the existing arrangements and political support under Plan Nacer. The main
  implementing agency was the National Health Ministry supported by its Project Coordination Unit, that
  was steering the implementation of Plan Nacer APL II. The coordination unit was responsible for working
  with participating provinces to implement the project while conforming to agreed-upon quality standards.
  Implementation and fiduciary arrangements were adequate and supported by an Operations
  Manual. Provincial financing was governed by an umbrella agreement between each province and the
  National Health Ministry (PAD, pp. 12-14). Lessons learned from the two previous phases of Plan Nacer
  and the Essential Public Health Functions Project were considered during preparation and reflected in the
  design, including the provision of substantial technical assistance to the provinces to cope with results-
  based financing mechanisms. M&E arrangements were strong and built on the existing National Health
  Ministry’s M&E system, complemented by independent technical audits, household surveys to determine
  utilization and equity in access, bi-annual project management reports, mid-term and final
  assessments. Safeguards were addressed, including for social safeguards under the Indigenous Peoples
  Planning Framework. Main risks were identified, and mitigation strategies were developed, including for
  the potential risk of delayed implementation due to possible lack of coordination among actors in some
  provinces (PAD, p. 58). Enrollment projections were optimistic (ICR, p. 27), and these were subsequently
  addressed under the additional financing in 2015. According to the ICR (p. 21), the original targets were
  set based on the positive experience of Plan Nacer with pregnant women and young children, where
  rapid gains were observed. The ICR stated that, in retrospect, such rapid gains were not fully transferable
  to the added population groups under SUMAR, including because pregnant women had higher incentives
  to seek health care with conditional cash transfers, and some health care providers had hidden biases
  against adolescents (ICR, p. 21).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision was reportedly thorough and regular with detailed Aide Memoires and ISRs (ICR, p. 27). The
 implementation support team was proactive and responsive, as demonstrated by 18 modifications to the
 Operation Manual and three project restructurings, including additional financing. The ICR stated that there
 was close coordination with the Borrower and the Bank team. In addition to implementation support
 provided by two Task Team Leaders, the operation benefited from the support provided by relevant
 specialists at the country office. During the Mid-Term Review, the team adequately identified mid-course
 challenges, including the need to adjust end-of-project targets. The Bank team was responsive to the
 Borrower's plans and was reportedly proactive in contributing to advancing progress toward the goal of
 universal health coverage in the country.




                                                                                                  Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)




 The operation was implemented under a challenging macroeconomic environment, which resulted in
 budgetary limits that were adjusted on a quarterly basis. In spite of a high level of uncertainty in planning
 implementation activities and the use of funds, both Bank and project teams maintained a proactive
 approach to ensure that project activities were ultimately implemented, with full disbursement of the project
 proceeds. The Borrower also recognized the value of Bank team interactions and described them as agile
 and fruitful (ICR, p. 55).




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change illustrating how key activities and outputs led to intended outcomes was plausible
 and reflected in the results framework. Development objectives were clearly specified. The indicators were
 measurable and reflected the statement of objectives, although more specific indicators to fully measure
 outcomes for the objective to increase the quality of key health services (see Section 4, Objective 2
 Rationale) should have been included in the results framework. Intermediate results indicators were
 adequate to capture the contribution of the operation’s activities and outputs toward achieving the desired
 outcomes. Baselines were available. M&E design and arrangements were well-embedded institutionally
 within a reliable existing system. The results framework was complemented with tracer indicators, including
 for tracking the performance of service providers and financial transfers to provinces (ICR, p. 23).




b. M&E Implementation
  Project data were collected and analyzed as planned. Information on enrollment and health services
  provision was collected and compiled at the provincial level. The information was part of the provincial
  reports submitted to the national level. Provincial reports were verified by the national Project
  Coordination Unit and by an independent external auditor, including crosschecking the rosters of
  beneficiaries against the social security database to validate eligibility. In addition, the auditor conducted
  randomly selected field audits to verify the delivery and quality of services provided (e.g. whether medical
  records reflected service delivery protocols). If discrepancies were identified, the external auditor
  proposed sanctions (fines and debits). The Project Coordination Unit conducted its own verification,



                                                                                                     Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)



  except for field audits. Based on the findings, the Project Coordination Unit made decisions about the
  transfers to be made (ICR, p. 23).



  M&E was supported by electronic systems. Enrollment and billing systems were developed at the
  national level and implemented at the service provider level, with over 67% of providers billing online in
  2019. In addition, M&E capitalized on other existing information systems, such as the electronic system
  for cervical cancer screening that was developed by the National Cancer Institute. Evaluation and
  research activities focused on three main areas: (i) strategic expansion of the program scope; (ii)
  operational fine-tuning; and (iii) institutionalization. Evaluation activities also included the completion of
  the impact evaluation of Plan Nacer (APL 1), that showed that the program had resulted in both an
  increase in the use and quality of prenatal care and related health outcomes (e.g. number of visits,
  tetanus vaccination, reduced low birth-weight, and lower in-hospital neonatal mortality).



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were used for project monitoring, and the ICR (p. 24) stated that M&E helped in promoting
  a focus on results, accountability and transparency. The ICR (p. 25) noted that data utilization extended
  beyond the project. For example, 22% of all transfers made under the Pregnancy Allowance Program
  were automatically paid for those who met the requirements of the SUMAR project database. Project
  data were also used to support research on various health issues, such as a study on child obesity that
  was supported by UNICEF.



  M&E findings were publicly available and used to inform project directions and the follow-on operation
  supported by the Bank (see Section 7). Monitoring and evaluation were robust overall, and related
  arrangements as designed and implemented were sufficient to assess the achievement of
  objectives. Therefore, the quality of M&E is rated high.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Both environmental and social safeguards were complied with.



   Environmental safeguards. At appraisal in 2011, the project environmental assessment was rated as
   Category C, based on a determination that the scope of potential adverse impacts was limited (PAD, p. 21).



                                                                                                       Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)




  The additional financing of 2015, based on the findings of an Environmental Assessment carried out in
  March 2015, triggered OP/BP 4.01 on environmental safeguards, and the project classification was updated
  from Category C to Category B – Partial Assessment due to potential environmental concerns around the
  handling of health care waste resulting from high complexity interventions, such as those associated with
  high-risk pregnancies and congenital heart surgeries (Project Paper on a proposed Additional Loan, Report
  No: PAD1397, 6/3/15, p. 12). The project adopted an Environmental Management Framework that focused
  on health care waste management nationwide. The framework built upon that of the Second Essential
  Public Health Functions and Programs II Project (P110599), whose technical staff assisted in the
  application of related activities under this project. The framework was disclosed both by the National Health
  Ministry and the Bank. In addition, the project adopted the Guide to Rational Vaccine Waste Management
  that was developed under the H1N1 Prevention and Management of Influenza Type Illness (P117377)
  Project. Implementation performance on environmental safeguards was rated satisfactory throughout the
  project cycle.



  Social Safeguards. The project triggered the Indigenous Peoples policy (OP/BP 4.10). The Indigenous
  Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was developed as a continuity to the one under Plan Nacer, and
  published in 2010. The IPPF included health services specifically tailored for indigenous people. It included
  training for indigenous sanitary agents and indigenous communities and communications support. The IPPF
  was updated on 4/9/15 and disclosed. The IPPF updates related mainly to the inclusion of additional eligible
  groups. The objectives of the updated IPPF continued to promote indigenous peoples’ access to project
  benefits and to adapt services in a culturally appropriate manner. Participating provinces prepared their own
  updated IPPF plans as part of the updated annual performance agreements between the National Health
  Ministry and the provinces (Project Paper on a proposed Additional Loan, Report No: PAD1397, 6/3/15, p.
  12)



  Project activities addressing indigenous people under OP 4.10 were adequately implemented overall, but
  with variability among provinces. Activities were implemented in concert with other Bank projects and IDB
  health projects, resulting in institutional progress regarding indigenous people health agenda (ICR, p.
  25). To ensure compliance in provinces that were reluctant to engage in the design and implementation of
  IPPs, national and other provincial teams provided additional technical assistance and close
  monitoring. Social safeguards performance was rated moderately satisfactory because of the challenges
  faced by provincial governments in the implementation of IPPs (ICR, p. 26).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. The Bank team and the National Health Ministry maintained a close and
  constructive engagement on financial management aspects throughout the implementation period.
  Supervision consistently rated financial management performance as satisfactory. The ICR (p. 17) noted
  that, overall, the national and provincial governments transferred resources in a timely manner. Interim
  financial reports were also timely, and all were found acceptable. Argentina's Supreme Audit Institution

                                                                                                 Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)



   was responsible for auditing. There were occasional delays, but audit reports were unqualified, with no
   accountability issues arising throughout the operation period (ICR, p. 26). In addition to financial audits,
   external technical audits, carried out on a sample basis to validate delivery and output documentation,
   were simultaneously submitted with the interim financial reports.



   Procurement. Performance in procurement was uneven throughout the operation's lifetime, including a
   rating of moderately unsatisfactory in 2016. Two Procurement Risk Assessments were conducted in 2015
   and 2018. Insufficient technical capacity in planning, monitoring, and execution of procurement processes
   resulted in low-quality procurement documents and substantial delays, even in the procurement of simple
   goods, as well as procedural errors (ICR, p. 26). Following the Bank’s “No Objection” notices, there were
   long delays in signing contracts. The Bank requested an action plan for performance improvement, and
   after delayed implementation of that plan, performance was upgraded to moderately satisfactory in
   October 2018. The ICR stated that managerial changes and high staff rotation contributed to weak
   procurement capacity (ICR, p. 26). To address these challenges, procurement supervision included, in
   addition to standard prior reviews, an annual post-review mission to identify areas for improvement and
   training that would strengthen implementation and shorten the learning curve of new staff.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   According to the ICR (p. 20), positive unintended impacts were observed. An e-learning platform was
   developed to support project training, collaboration activities, and working groups. The platform was
   adopted as the official e-learning platform for the National Health Ministry as a whole. It offered online
   courses and virtual working groups, with a total enrollment of 9,596 people and 8,494 active participants by
   the end of project (www.plataformavirtualdesalud.msal.gov.ar). The mechanism for grievance redress was
   used to respond to information requests from beneficiaries. Also, per TTL clarifications on 2/26/2020, data
   recording protocols and supporting information systems introduced by the project were adopted and further
   developed by the follow-on operation as digital medical records (historia clinica digital).




d. Other
   The ICR (pp. 60-61) discussed favorable long term-outcomes such as decreased infant mortality,
   decreased inequality in access to health services, and decreased inequality in health outcomes between
   2010 and 2018. While attribution depends on a large interplay of other direct and underlying determinants,
   contextual factors, and efforts of various stakeholders, it is not unreasonable to assume that the Bank-
   supported project had a partial contributory role to such ultimate outcomes.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment

                                                                                                     Page 20 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)



Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  High                   High

Quality of ICR                  ---                    High


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 28-29) offered several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons
restated by IEG:



The incorporation of new groups of beneficiaries into a public health insurance program can
be challenging and calls for tailored strategies specific to targeted groups to promote
enrollment. Under the project, youth required a more welcoming attitude on the part of health care
providers. In the case of adult men, overcoming reticence to seek preventive health care was
needed. In the case of indigenous persons, interventions were culturally sensitive, and the project
also sought to enhance awareness about the benefits of "indigenous self-identification" when
receiving health care.



Universal health coverage is facilitated by a carefully sequenced and incremental
expansion. In Argentina, Plan Nacer benefited during its early years from a relatively narrow focus
on its target population, consisting of pregnant women and young children with the likelihood of
quick and visible gains. By contrast, under this follow-on SUMAR project, the target population was
expanded to the remaining population groups that were diverse and required tailored strategies. The
project limited implementation complexities by focusing on cost-efficient preventive services.



The implementation of results-based financing mechanisms in health programs and related
organizational changes are demanding and, as such, they call for substantial technical
assistance and adequate staffing levels. Under the project, the project coordination unit strived,
despite its limitations in human and operational resources, to support the provinces that had uneven
institutional and technical capacity, and to promote communication efforts through national and
regional meetings, field visits, and thematic workshops.



Results-based financing incentives in health programs induce behavioral changes among
institutional actors and health care providers. Under the project, related incentives promoted
provincial buy-in into universal health care coverage, prioritization of preventive health care services,
and homogenization of clinical and reporting protocols. Incentives also helped in inducing behavioral


                                                                                                     Page 21 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AR Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735)



changes in providers, such as with timely referral of high-risk pregnancies to facilities equipped to
offer the appropriate level of care.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was results-oriented, clearly written, well-organized, and reasonably concise. The ICR adequately
illustrated the theory of change that was aligned to development objectives. It appropriately framed the project
in the larger context of the sector. The ICR’s analysis and evidence were of good quality. The ICR adequately
discussed outcomes that were sought by the project beyond the results framework, such as for service
quality. The narrative was aligned to the messages outlined in the ICR and supported its conclusions. The ICR
was consistent, both internally and with guidelines. Lessons were derived from project experience. As a minor
shortcoming, the main ICR did not illustrate the Borrower contribution, although the contribution was discussed
in the economic analysis.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                    Page 22 of 22
