     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0021916

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P125021                                     CN-Hunan Forest Restoration

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                       Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82150                                  31-Mar-2019                                         80,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Jan-2013                                 31-Mar-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            80,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             80,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         80,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hannah Mary Bleby          John R. Eriksson               Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Orford




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The statements of the Project Development Objective (PDO) in the Loan Agreement (LA), Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD) and Implementation Completion Report (ICR) are identical.

   The project development objective is to: enhance the resilience and environmental function of selected ice
   storm affected ecological forest plantations in Hunan Province by increasing forest species diversity and
   vegetative tree cover in those areas. (ICR p1, PAD p2, LA p5).


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



   Note that in relation to the PDO, the ICR uses environmental function and ecosystem function as
   interchangeable, confirmed by the Task Team. This ICR Review treats the following as the project objectives:

         PDO 1: enhance resilience of selected ice storm affected ecological forest plantations in Hunan
          Province
         PDO 2: enhance environmental function of selected ice storm affected ecological forest plantations in
          Hunan Province



   The ICR describes the purpose of the project to be: “to address forest resilience to natural disasters and
   climate variability, and improve the provision of ecosystem services such as soil water retention, soil
   conservation, and pollution control.” (para 5). Other indicators for environmental function, include carbon
   sequestration and soil erosion. Indicators of resilience include biodiversity wood tensile strength and
   resistance to biological pest, weeds and disease. (ICR para 29).

   The ICR defines resilience using the Bank's guidance for the evaluation of resilience‐building operations
   (2017) (ICR footnote 20): "climate and disaster resilience is about the ability of individuals, households,
   communities, institutions or higher-level systems to deal with shocks and stressors without undermining their
   welfare or functions." In the case of this project, the "community" is the ecological forest community, with
   functions defined by its ecosystem services. It does not provide a specific definition of environmental function.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The following summary is taken from ICR p9, and is a faithful summary of the PAD.

   Component 1: Reforestation and rehabilitation of damaged ecological forest plantations (cost at appraisal:
   US$98.22 million; actual cost: US$103.22 million) (ICR p47). This component had two parts:

        1. reforestation of ice storm-denuded forest areas through replanting; and
        2. rehabilitating ice storm-damaged forest areas through i) interplanting and ii) assisting natural
          regeneration (nursing spontaneous regrowth and partial replanting) (PAD p3).

   Component 2: Institutional support and technology enhancement (cost at appraisal: US$11.73 million;
   actual cost: US$11.70 million). This component had 5 parts:

        a. Nursery upgrading and planting material development: Improve nursery management techniques,
          increase seedling production (particularly of broad-leaf indigenous species), and upgrade facilities at
          three provincial nurseries.



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



       b. Forest cooperatives: Establish or Strengthen 22 farmer forest cooperatives through provision of
          office equipment, vehicles, construction of small roads, and technical assistance for development
          and implementation of forest management plans.
       c. Research, Technical Service and Extension: Applied research, capacity building and knowledge
          dissemination, covering: (i) nursery technologies and management, (ii) silvicultural management
          systems, (iii) ecological forest plantation management, (iv) enhancing and monitoring carbon
          sequestration in forest plantations, and (v) climate change impacts on forest ecosystems.
       d. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E): Establish and implement the project's monitoring and evaluation
          system.
       e. Project Management and Institutional Development: Capacity building and institutional strengthening
          for Project Management Offices (PMO) at provincial and county levels



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The ICR reports that project was completed on time and on budget (p1).

   Key dates: The project was approved on 17 January 2013 and became effective on 7 May 2013. The
   midterm review completion was 4 May 2016. The original and actual closing dates were 31 March 2019.

   Costs: IBRD loan of US$80M approved and US$79.8M disbursed (plus US$0.2 front end fees). The
   Borrower contribution at approval and actual disbursed was $US35.2M (PAD p4, ICR p2). The total project
   cost was US$115.2M, including US$5.05M contingency budgeted at approval, plus $0.2M front end fees.
   The IBRD loan represents 70.8 percent of the total project cost (including front-end fees) (ICR p107).

   Component I costs increased by US$5.08M. This increase was financed by the US$5.05M contingency plus
   a transfer of US$0.3M from component II (ICR p47). This was made possible by a reduction in upgrading
   nurseries from 3 to 2 (see discussion at Section 5).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The overall PDOs of enhancing resilience and environmental function of forests in Hunan Province were
highly relevant to the context of both acute instances of ice storm damage, as well as the longer-term
deterioration of China’s natural resources. These were clearly identified by both the Chinese government
and World Bank teams, and through independent research (see ICR e.g. p5 and 7). The project’s approach
took account of the capacity and previous experience of the implementing agency (e.g. PAD para 29 and
46) and the Bank itself (PAD Section IB).

The objectives were strategically aligned to and supportive of Hunan Province’s increasing focus on
diverse, indigenous, multifunction (i.e. of ecological and economic benefit) forests. This was expressed in
the Government of China’s 12th Five Year Development Plan (2012) and the Banks’s Country Partnership




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



               Strategy (CPS) China: 2013-2016. Specifically, the project aligned with the CPS strategic themes of
               support for greener growth and inclusive development.

               The project considered both immediate forest restoration requirements for direct environmental benefit, as
               well as the need for new and long-term silviculture techniques that would support better environmental,
               socio-economic and commercial benefits of the forests into the future (ICR para 24). The project built upon
               previous Bank experiences in China’s forestry sector and explicitly incorporated lessons from earlier
               projects into the project design and implementation (PAD p5).

               The components were highly complementary, combining direct reforestation and rehabilitation activities
               (Component I) with institutional strengthening and technology enhancement activities (Component II) to
               underpin achievement and sustainability of the PDOs. As discussed below (Section 9 M&E), however, there
               were some gaps in intermediate-level indicators against some Component II activities, which blurred links to
               some elements of sustainability of outcomes.

               The ICR points out that the project objective had ongoing relevance to both Bank and Chinese Government
               policies (including Hunan Province itself, ICR para 27). It was closely aligned with the Bank’s draft Country
               Partnership Framework 2020-2025, and China’s 13th Five Year Plan (2016-2020) (ICR para 25). The
               project informed upcoming World Bank and European Investment Bank projects in China (ICR para 24).
               Additionally, the project directly supported China’s climate policies, including its contribution to the Paris
               Agreement and its own National Plan for Climate Change (2014-2020) (ICR para 26-27).

               Relevance of Objectives is rated high, based on full alignment with the relevant Bank and Chinese
               Government strategies, close consideration of environmental, social-economic, political and institutional
               context and capacity, including shifting trends over time, and capitalizing on the Bank’s previous sector
               experience in China. The PDOs were appropriately ambitious, taking into account these contextual factors.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Objective 1: to enhance resilience of selected ice storm affected ecological forest plantations

                             Rationale
                             This sub-section (Objective 1) sets out the project's overall theory of change and summarizes outputs, then
                             discusses Objective 1 Outcomes.




                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



The following sub-section (Objective 2) discusses Objective 2 Outcomes and then overall cross-cutting
intermediate outcomes.

OVERALL THEORY OF CHANGE - PDOS 1 and 2

The Theory of Change (TOC) for the overall project was clearly evident and logical (although not explicit) in
the PAD’s Project Description (p3) and results framework (RF). Activities were linked to outputs and grounded
in the project’s implementation context. The ICR developed an explicit depiction of the TOC (Figure 2, p8),
which accurately reflected the PAD and clearly set out the relevant assumptions (ICR Annex 7).

According to the ICR (p8) and the PAD (Section IIC), the achievement of both PDOs was dependent on the
same set of mutually supportive outputs at the PDO and intermediate levels, without distinction – forest
resilience and environmental function would improve by increasing forest species diversity and vegetative
canopy cover.

Therefore, below, this ICRR first sets out the key outputs and targets for the project overall, then
discusses separately, outcomes against each PDO.

      Increased resilience would be basically indicated by: ‘increased diversity of species and tree
       structures in the replanted or rehabilitated forests’ (PDO level indicator 1) (ICR para 14)
      Increased environmental function would be indicated by: ‘increased tree canopy cover in (i) fully
       replanted forests, (ii) partially replanted forests, and iii) naturally rehabilitated forests’. (PDO level
       indicator 2) (ICR para 14).

       Component I activities (reforestation and rehabilitation) would apply to both PDO level indicators,
       including a community consultation model for site selection (ICR p8). Component II activities
       (institutional support and technology enhancement) would integrally underpin achievement of both
       PDOs, to ensure sustainability of plantations, as well as of the project’s concepts and techniques,
       even beyond the project’s sites (ICR para 12).



Outputs:

      43 species introduced (108% achieved: baseline 4, target 40). 44 percent were resilient, previously
       uncultivated, indigenous broadleaf species (ICR p32). This activity was positioned as both an output
       and an outcome of the project.
      61,986ha restored and/or reforested (105% achievement: target of 58,900ha from baseline of 0 –
       ICR p13). This comprised three types of reforestation:

    a. full reforestation target was 118% achieved (baseline 0, target 27,700ha, achieved 32,651);
    b. areas partially replanted was 117% achieved (baseline 0, target 18,600ha, achieved 21673ha);
    c. areas naturally regenerated with treatment (from the project) achieved only 61% of the target
       (baseline 0, target 12,600ha, achieved 7,662).




                                                                                                        Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)




      2 upgraded nurseries able to produce high quality seedlings of indigenous species (Target 67% met:
         Target 3, completed 2). The upgrades consisted of construction of facilities; new equipment and
         materials; and staff training.
        96.4 million seedlings produced for the project reforestation and rehabilitation (Target 159%
         achieved: baseline 0, target 60.5 million). 15.5 million of these were produced by the nurseries
         upgraded through the project, with the remaining coming from existing nurseries.
        22 forest cooperatives established or strengthened and able to complete operational plans (Target
         100% met: target 22). Support provided in the form of office equipment, vehicles, construction of small
         roads, and the provision of training for forest farmers and managers (ICR p36). After project close, all
         operational plans were satisfactorily completed (TTL interview).
        5 ongoing research programs established, producing extensive research work in five different
         areas closely related to the PDO, accompanied by publication of 20 scientific articles, a patent and
         two science and technology awards (ICR p 42) (Target 100% met: baseline 0, target 5) – an output
         and intermediate outcome.
        3 workshops delivered to disseminate project knowledge and experience (Target 100% met:
         baseline 0, target 3)
        14,070 person hours of training provided for management staff on project management and
         technical innovation (target exceeded by 102%: baseline 0, target 13,800).
        62,294 person hours of training provided for project beneficiaries on project concepts and
         techniques (overall target 103% met: baseline 0, target 60,200 person hours).
              o Of those, 11,598 person hours were provided to women (Target 114% met: baseline 0, target
                10,100).
              o Of the total person hours provided, 4,960 were to ethnic minority/indigenous peoples: (Target
                165% met: baseline 0, target 3,000)



OUTCOME:

Objective 1: Enhanced resilience

The indicator at PDO level (increased diversity of species and tree structures in replanted/rehabilitated
forests) was 108% achieved (43 species being introduced against a target of 40 and a baseline of 0). Most of
the contributing intermediate level indicators were also clearly achieved and some surpassed. The ICR
reports a survival rate of around 95% for trees planted (para 31). Of the 43 species introduced, 38 were
native to Hunan Province (ICR para 32), indicating a higher likelihood of resilience themselves (ICR para 42).

The ICR points to further tangible evidence of increased overall forest resilience (built into the project’s M&E
but not indicated in the results framework) such as: reduced pest and disease occurrence rates by 29-75
percent among afforestation models (ICR p41); and improved physical tree strength (density by 8-9 percent,
flexural strength (i.e. maximum bending stress able to be tolerated before breaking) by 65-68 percent,
elasticity by 71-73 percent, and compression strength 11-13 percent in most common species – ICR p42),
contributing to greater resilience to adverse weather. The ICR also notes that the project used the highest
number of species of any provincial forest project to date and could serve as a model for future projects (ICR
p32).



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



Overall, the efficacy under Object 1, increased resilience, as indicated at PDO level, was high, based on the
project exceeding its targets at PDO level (and most at intermediate level), and supported by evidence
collected through the project’s research activities.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Objective 2: to enhance environmental function of selected ice affected ecological forest plantations


Rationale
Please see detail above for Objective 2 Outputs summary

OUTCOMES

Objective 2: Enhanced environmental function

The PDO level basic indicator for this objective (increasing incremental tree canopy cover to improve
environmental protection function) was exceeded. This indicator had three sub indicators: Tree canopy cover
increased in:

(a) fully replanted forests by 232%, (Baseline of 0, target of 25%, achieved 68%);

(b) partially replanted forests by 127% (baseline of 32%, target 42%, 61% achieved); and

(c) treated naturally regenerated forests by 124% (baseline of 24%, target 50%, achieved 62%) (ICR p33).

Exceeding sub indicator (a) by such a large margin as explained by the project team as a combination of:
higher usage of sites with original vegetation, good quality and higher than expected survival rates of
seedlings, and more extensive use of indigenous broadleaf species, as their value was demonstrated to local
communities over time. Initial conservative estimates were reasonable, given the new approach for the local
area.

The ICR presents several types of evidence in support of increased environmental function broadly. It states
that the tree canopy coverage for all eight forestry models (in 8 pilot areas) under the project was higher than
that of the control forests (para 33). The project’s research activities further demonstrated the environmental
function of the forests through reduced rates of soil erosion (41-44 tons per ha for project forests compared to
48 tons per ha in control stands of forest) and runoff (225-243mm in afforestation models compared to
271mm in control stands over same five-year period). Soil water storage capacity was also higher. Taken
together, this was reasonably expected to lead to water catchment benefits (ICR para 36) into the
future. Relative to baseline conditions, improvements in soil quality were also recorded in contaminated ex-
industrial sites, indicating the positive potential of the reforestation to mitigate pollution (ICR para 37). None of
these elements were explicitly built into the results framework, although the PAD indicates that the

                                                                                                       Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



implementing agencies included them in their monitoring plan (P25), but they do offer convincing support to
achievement of PDO2.

Overall, the efficacy under increased environmental function as indicated at PDO level, was high based on
exceeding all targets and strong complementary evidence collected through the project’s M&E and research.

Cross-cutting Intermediate level Outcomes (i.e. outcomes that equally supported PDOs 1 and 2)

Component I (Reforestation and rehabilitation of damaged ecological forest plantations): At the intermediate
level, this component had one target (with three sub-targets): Area restored/reforested, which applied to
achieving both PDOs (see Project Results Summary table above). Overall, reforestation targets were
surpassed but the sub-target for natural regeneration was not met (61 percent achieved). However, the site
self-selection model for farmers anticipated that target predictions would likely shift (ICR p35). The natural
regeneration model proved least popular, due to being least well suited to individual circumstances. Thus, the
shortfall is understandable. Evidence in the ICR of achievements against Component I was strong, since the
nature of the indicators and outputs were quantifiable and measurable. There was a direct clear line of sight
between the inputs and both increased resilience and ecosystem/environmental function.

Component II (Institutional support and technology enhancement): This component had 7 indicators (plus
some sub-indicators), all at intermediate level (i.e. designed to support PDO level indicators). Evidence in the
ICR of the contribution of these outputs to achieving the PDOs is more mixed. There is sufficient evidence
that most of the indicators were met and some exceeded (see Key Outputs above). But the heavy quantitative
focus of the indicators (all output-based) makes it more difficult in some instances to see evidence of the
contribution to the PDOs, of broader qualitative elements of institutional strengthening and sustaining new
silviculture practices in particular.

See analysis of each intermediate indicator below, related to its efficacy in supporting achievement of both
PDO 1 and 2.

      Number of upgraded nurseries: although only two nurseries were upgraded, not the planned three
       (one was completed ahead of the project, making project financing redundant, resulting in informal
       target revision – no restructuring – ICR para 18), this does not seem to have adversely affected the
       project overall. The capacity and quality of seedling production from the upgraded nurseries
       increased (ICR p36) and was of high quality and the target for seedling production was exceeded
       overall (see below). The change afforded savings of around US$800k, largely absorbed by
       Component II activities, such as extra training that was provided, and some extra planting activities as
       part of Component I. Exact figures were not available (source: Task Team Leader
       (TTL) interview). The TTL also confirmed that upon project completion, seedling production from the
       upgraded nurseries exceeded expectations and requirements for PDO achievement, and contributed
       to broader Provincial production capacity beyond the needs of the project itself.
      Number of seedlings produced for the project reforestation and rehabilitation: Target 159%
       achieved): of 60.5m was exceeded by 159% (96.4m produced) – 15.5m were produced by the
       nurseries upgraded through the project, with the remaining coming from existing nurseries. Forty four
       percent of the total were the desired broadleaf species (central to enhancing resilience and
       environmental function (ICR p55)), which were previously unavailable (ICR para 42).
      Number of forest cooperatives established or strengthened with their operational plans completed
       (Target 100% achieved): This indicator was all output based and did not provide a qualitative picture
       of impact or quality of the activities. No further information is provided on the quality or impact of

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



                                       these. The ICR does indicate that 70.5 percent of surveyed households considered that the ‘capacity
                                       of forestry cooperatives had improved’ (ICR para 42), although it does not indicate by how much nor
                                       whether these improvements would be adequate for sustaining the PDOs.
                                      Research and technical services extension
                                             o Number of on-going research programs (Target 100% achieved): The ICR describes extensive
                                               research work in five different areas closely related to the PDO, accompanied by publication of
                                               20 scientific articles, a patent and two science and technology awards (ICR p37).
                                             o Number of workshops to disseminate project knowledge and experience (Target 100%
                                               achieved): The ICR does not assess the effectiveness or impact of these workshops.
                                      Number of management staff trained on project management and technical innovation (Target 102%
                                       achieved): Evidence of the efficacy of the training is presented as results from household interviews,
                                       showing that 92 percent of those surveyed reported obtaining skills and knowledge from the training.
                                       85 percent reported more efficient working practices as a result (ICR para 41). This underwrites
                                       achievement and sustaining of the PDOs.
                                      Number of beneficiaries trained (overall target 103% achieved). Of those:
                                             o Female: (Target 114% achieved). Given the target for training women (at around 16% of total
                                               farmers) was convincingly surpassed, but that the percentage of women in poor and ethnic
                                               minority areas specifically was 51% and 72% respectively, it indicates that the target for
                                               training women was perhaps, set too low at appraisal. There is, however, no data presented in
                                               the ICR regarding the percentage of female farmers overall, in relation to the target for training
                                               them.
                                             o Ethnic minority/indigenous: (Target 165% achieved): The TTL confirmed that exceeding this
                                               target was principally due to decisions to intensify training for these groups in order to meet
                                               identified needs and address risks. It was not that the training was necessarily extended to
                                               more people. Extra training was provided on economic and medicinal crop planting and
                                               management techniques to help income generation for poor farmers (TTL interview). The ICR
                                               notes that there were delays to implementation in ethnic minority areas, ‘due to labor and land
                                               shortages, outside the Bank’s control’ (ICR para 70). Perhaps these delays could also have
                                               been further minimized however, had data collection on these risks been stronger at appraisal.
                                      Indicator: M&E: system fully operational (Target 100% met). The ICR reports (p38) that the M&E
                                       system was fully functional from the first implementation status report (May 2013) and throughout the
                                       project.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            In summary, the ICR demonstrates the project surpassed both its PDO level indicator targets and sub
                            indicators. In the Results Framework, both these indicators were positioned to contribute to achieving both
                            PDO 1 and 2 (increase resilience and environmental function) without distinction.


                                                                                                                                   Page 9 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



  The overall efficacy rating of the project is high, based on strong evidence of having met or surpassed both
  PDO level indicators, and having links between the inputs, particularly of Component I, and the overall
  outcomes. Intermediate targets against Component II were also largely met, and some exceeded.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  High



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency:

The ICR’s Economic Efficiency analysis (Annex 4) states that cost-benefit analysis was undertaken at project
closure to re-assess the project’s economic viability at completion, using the same approach as at appraisal.
The higher Economic internal rate of return (EIRR) at completion (21.3 percent) than appraisal (17.6 percent)
(ICR para 46) is explained in the ICR (p49) as mainly due to increased carbon value. The ICR also notes the
assessment is considered conservative, given the exclusion in this analysis of ‘not-readily-quantifiable economic
benefits’ such as biodiversity conservation, landscape amenity improvements and contributions to agricultural
tourism.

Financial analysis undertaken to evaluate incentives for beneficiaries to participate in the project, calculated the
overall all financial internal rate of return (FIRR) as 8.3 percent (7.9-9.2 percent across models), slightly lower
than at appraisal (at 8.1-10.1 percent across models), due primarily to input price increases including labor (ICR
para 4.7 and 112). The ICR states that these were, however, ‘broadly in line with stakeholder expectations (para
112). All forestry models proved financially attractive to farmers, with effective FIRRs for individuals above 12
percent. This was supported by grants from Bank loan proceeds, provided to subsidize costs of establishing
forestation models.

Adjustments to component costs were managed within the existing overall budget (ICR para17) using existing
contingency funds and a transfer from Component II to I, of around $300K (2 rather than three nurseries were
upgraded – see Section 4). The changes were based largely on the success of and need for more
demonstration forests, and expected variations in preferred site selection by farmers (ICR paras 17-19).

Despite foresight in the PAD (table 3-2 p31) and resulting attempts to minimize issues, some relatively minor
counterpart funding challenges did occur, such as delays in the early years (ICR para 66, 88). These were
reportedly common in provincial level projects in China (ICR para 65). The ICR states they were relatively minor
and successfully addressed by the time of the MTR, through Bank team supervision and support (ICR para 88).

Administrative Efficiency:

According to the ICR, project implementation efficiency was high (para 114), citing most activity completion
ahead of schedule; loan proceeds disbursed a year ahead of schedule (p56); similar component costs at
appraisal and completion (components I and II were at 105.2% and 99.7% of approval estimates respectively);
and comparable costs to other forestry projects (presumably Bank projects).



                                                                                                      Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



The ICR also notes several other factors that likely contributed to efficient implementation, namely: that the
project actively incorporated lessons, recommendations and analysis from earlier Bank operations (ICR Figure
1, para 62 and footnote 40); clear, simple project design, well suited to the context and objectives (para 63); and
high local capacity and familiarity with project processes at the provincial level (para 64). The ICR also points to
a number of additional positive outcomes and impacts (p18-19) – discussed in section 10c below – suggesting
the efficient use of resources overall.

The project did, however, face some challenges regarding implementation (ICR para 66), such as: early stage
incomplete understanding of the project’s philosophy and techniques amongst farmers and at county level (ICR
para 67), resulting in for example, overly dense planting in early years, compromising biodiversity objectives.
This was satisfactorily addressed through increased training (with budget reallocated to training from items such
as vehicle purchase (rentals were used instead ICR para 48) and overseas trips; increased coordination
between planting and research activities (components’ I and II respectively); and increased use of
demonstration farms. A short severe drought caused 40-50 percent seedling mortality rates in some sites.
Delays in planned project activities in ethnic minority areas (due to rapid economic growth leading to labor
shortages; remote locations and market access concerns; and land constraints due to other government
programs – ICR para 67) necessitated an informal revision of targets in those areas. Both issues were
addressed in relatively timely and cost-effective ways (para 69 and 70).

The project’s efficiency is rated substantial, based on good EIRR, reasonable FIRR, minimal budget
adjustments (within project resources), reasonable and timely target adjustments, and clear evidence of meeting
project objectives in a timely way overall, within the planned and approved financial and human resources. The
moderate shortcomings (i.e. requiring shifting of resources to fully embed the project’s innovative approach)
were successfully addressed.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  17.60
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                               21.30
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s overall rating of highly satisfactory is based on high relevance, high efficacy and substantial
efficiency. The project was well suited to its context and the needs and capacity of stakeholders. Valid evidence
(according to the project’s results framework indicators) of increased resilience and environmental function is

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



strong, supported by extensive research output of broader and longer-term relevance. Project resources were
appropriately used in a timely way. Extensive focus and Component II resources were also necessarily given to
ensuring successful embedding of the innovative silviculture techniques introduced by the project. These
adjustments were central to achieving the very strong physical outcomes of the PDOs themselves.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Overall, the risks to the project’s development outcome are relatively low. The project’s outcomes face
environmental risks, such as storms, fire and pests but are relatively unlikely (ICR para 99-100). The project
itself also successfully focused on reducing these risks through PDO1. Some risks to sustaining the new
technical approaches introduced by the project may exist, since the challenge of embedding them was
significant and data to support the eventual depth of its uptake was somewhat thin (see section 9 below).

Institutional risks appear low, given: a) the alignment of the project with an established forest management
system, budget and set of expertise (ICR para 98); b) the commitment of the Government to continue the
program, demonstrated by the follow-on projects planned and the extension of the approach to other areas
(e.g. ICR para 59) (although not convincingly demonstrated by the project’s own RF, given the exclusively
output-based indicators in this regard – see section 9 M&E below); and c) strong incentives built into the
project over time, for continued engagement by farmers and stakeholders (e.g. ICR para 113).

The ICR reports that policy or market changes could affect the incentives for maintaining the project’s
approach, particularly given the need for ongoing public subsidy of these forests. These were considered
unlikely overall and the project’s incentive structure aimed to mitigate such effects (ICR para 101), although
these could not be assessed within the timeframe of the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR provides strong evidence to confirm good quality at entry. Comparison with the PAD
  demonstrates that all necessary and complementary elements for successful achievement of the PDO
  were established at approval (e.g. see PAD section III.A – Project Components). This was demonstrated
  by the fact that changes that took place through the course of implementation were both relatively minor
  and able to be accommodated within the existing plans, components and financing of the project. The
  inferred Theory of Change in the PAD remained relevant throughout, with the exception of the challenge
  of embedding the innovative practices being underestimated, although it was recognized (ICR para 102).
  Actual EIRR and FIRR estimates were relatively accurate against completion, demonstrating thorough
  initial economic analysis.



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



  The project was responsive to jointly identified needs (by the Bank and Chinese Government). It was
  context appropriate, aligned with country and Bank strategies and sector experience over time, and with
  current research (see ICRR section 3; PAD Section B; and ICR figure 1, p6). The ICR sets out ways in
  which the technical project design proved simple and sound (e.g. ICR Section C), with highly
  complementary, measurable and attainable activities, including M&E design and risk management (see
  ICRR sections 5 Efficiency and 9 M&E). Lessons from previous projects, e.g. the importance of
  demonstrating new approaches and the existing solid capacity in the sector) were deliberately
  incorporated into the design (see PAD Section C). Also supporting successful implementation overall
  were efforts to ensure a participatory design process (PAD para 21); and the location of project
  implementation arrangements at provincial level where there was appropriate capacity.

  The ICR also confirms (para 67) that the central challenge and risk of the project was ensuring sufficient
  understanding and embedding of the project’s innovative techniques – as identified in the PAD (e.g.
  paras 17, 18, 28 and 29), but the challenge exceeded expectations and required corrective action (ICR
  para 102 and 103), such as extra training, better connection between research and planting activities and
  increased use of demonstration sites (ICR para 68). But because the project RF did not provide
  indicators to drive assessment of how well these techniques were taking hold (e.g. behavior and
  perception change), these critical adjustments were made as a result of good management decisions –
  rather than being provided for in structure of the results framework. Inclusion of such indicators could
  have further minimized corrective action and risks to PDO achievement and sustainability that rested on
  embedding these techniques (see also section 9 below).

  Insufficiencies in socioeconomic baseline data collection, for example, substantial variation in samples
  between survey periods and low sample density (ICR para 78), especially in ethnic minority areas,
  hampered both efficacy and assessment of socioeconomic benefits (ICR para 68). This did not,
  however, affect the overall achievement of the PDOs (since this data did not affect the environmental
  data against which the PDOs were measured – see further discussion in ICR Section 9 M&E). Minor
  financial and contract management deficiencies delayed disbursement in the early years, but were
  subsequently adequately addressed (ICR para 88 and 90).

  Quality at entry is rated satisfactory, based on the ICR’s reporting of and confirmation at completion that
  appropriate plans, structures, risk and economic assessments were in place. The results framework,
  however, lacked indicators of behavior change related to embedding new techniques that were critical to
  both achieving and sustaining the PDOs. Neither did it allow for demonstration of the socioeconomic
  impacts of the project. Overall though, the project design coupled with good management decisions
  regarding adjustment of resources, was able to successfully address issues that arose. The theory of
  change remained relevant and the outcomes of the project met or exceeded targets.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reports that the Bank actively tracked progress; performance reporting, including safeguards
 tracking. Reporting was candid, comprehensive and timely (para 96). The Bank team used the mid-term
 review (MTR) and other monitoring to successfully respond to changes in context and made necessary

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



 adjustments to implementation, for example: decreasing planting areas in ethnic minority areas, due to
 labor and land shortages resulting from rapid economic development (para 22); increasing demonstration
 forest areas due to their effectiveness in engaging the beneficiaries; increasing training and connections
 between activities within the project to ensure knowledge transfer and better embed the innovative
 techniques of the project ((para 68) - the central challenge of the project. As such, the latter two examples
 were key to achieving the PDOs and increasing likelihood of sustaining them.

 The ICR points to the Bank’s supervision as key to resolving some minor financial management and
 procurement deficiencies (paras 88-90). The Bank team also mobilized external resources (such as Food
 and Agriculture Organization (FAO) forestry specialists) where needed (ICR para 96).

 The Bank team leader remained the same throughout and maintained strong relationships with the client.
 This is confirmed in ICR para 71 and annex 5 Borrower Comments, which commended the Bank task team
 for their ‘outstanding contributions’ to successful implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The ICR described the M&E design overall as thorough, realistic, practical and clearly indicative of
 achieving the PDOs (para 72), despite the lack of an explicit theory of change in the PAD. The indicators of
 PDO achievement were clear, measurable and achievable and the relationship to both PDOs was evident.

 The intermediate level indicators and sub indicators spanned components I and II. Against component I
 (reforestation and rehabilitation of damaged forests) in particular, indicators were clear, measurable and
 achievable, given their quantitative focus, appropriate to the related objectives.

 Against Component II (institutional support and technology enhancement), all indicators were likewise
 quantitative and all output-based. Although also clear, achievable and related to achievement of both
 PDOs, they did not allow for sufficient capture of some of the qualitative outcomes sought – such as
 evidence of institutional strengthening (not just inputs or outputs) through behavior or perception changes
 (e.g. socializing and embedding the new techniques of the project, described in the ICR as the central
 challenge of the project – paras 98 and 67). Neither is there discussion of the impacts on beneficiaries, of
 the project’s technological enhancements.

 Consequently, the lack of qualitative indicators or their proxies, meant the project results framework had
 limited scope to demonstrate the sustainability of its innovative approaches. Therefore, it was also limited in
 demonstrating the sustainability of the project outcomes.



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



 The M&E design did appropriately include surveys of various stakeholder groups during and at completion
 of the project that considered these issues, but did not link the results of these surveys to achievement of
 the PDOs in any way. Further, the ICR describes deficiencies in socio-economic data collection through
 these surveys (e.g. para 78). Had it not been for the other ‘unintended outcomes and impacts’ of the
 project, such as uptake of the approach elsewhere (ICR para 59), assessment of sustainability of the
 project’s approach and the project’s ability to have addressed its own ‘central challenge’ would have been
 much less convincing. (See also section 12 Lessons below.)

 The ICR describes minor gaps in the M&E design, being the absence of snow and wind event metrics,
 which could have been helpful in establishing likelihood of longer-term resilience of the forests to winter
 storms (para 78). This indeed appears to be a minor deficiency, given the other strong evidence provided
 and what was realistically within the project’s control to monitor.

 Other significant strengths of the M&E design which enhanced the quality of outcome assessments were:
 provision for continuous input from experts during project implementation (PAD p42) to manage risk and
 maximize benefits of project activities; control sites for comparison, drawing on extensive local data
 collection capability; and detailed additional metrics (e.g. soil water retention, erosion, pollution abatement)
 (ICR paras 74 and 75).



b. M&E Implementation
  Responsibility for implementation of M&E system was well placed with the Provincial Project
  Management Offices, which had the necessary capacity and expertise (ICR para 77). They were also
  appropriately invested in the project to carry out the responsibilities. County Project Management Offices
  (CPMO) were appropriately supported to build needed skills and capability, and largely carried out the
  responsibilities well. Overall, according to the ICR, reporting was regular and on time. Data collection was
  carried out as planned and methods were rigorous (ICR para 77).

  But the ICR identifies ‘significant shortcomings in socio-economic data collection’ which “prevented
  causal attribution of the project’s socio-economic impacts” (ICR para78), particularly in ethnic minority
  areas. This included ‘inadequate assessment of risks and opportunities’ (ICR para 65), describing this as
  a ‘missed opportunity’ to better target the project’s ethnic minority activities. This also infers possible
  deficiencies in data collection plans themselves (since data collection was reportedly carried out ‘as
  planned’ – ICR para 77). The socio-economic impacts and outcomes appears to constitute a blind spot
  for the project.

  The ICR also points out, however, that these deficiencies did not detract from measuring progress
  towards the PDOs (given the results framework focussed on quantitative environmental changes, not on
  socio-economic ones). But these shortcomings may have undermined assessment of some sustainability
  elements of the PDOs, such as the extent to which the innovative techniques were embedded locally
  (see sections 9a and 9b above, and section 12 below).



c. M&E Utilization
  Utilization of the data generated by the project appears to be strong: from consistent comparisons with
  control sites and traditional methods; incorporation into evaluation of the project’s own results, providing

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



  a basis for future projects; to broad dissemination of research results (including workshops and
  numerous publications – see ICR footnote 40) to a range of stakeholders (ICR para 80).

  The MTR resulted in several useful changes to project implementation to address identified challenges,
  such as: informal, mutually agreed adjustments to several targets – e.g. targets for area planted in ethnic
  minority areas were revised down from 810 ha to 676 ha (with no changes to the results framework) –
  which were subsequently met (see Section 4 Efficacy above); increases in training budget and changes
  to training plans to strengthen understanding of the project’s techniques; and increased coordination
  between component I and II activities (ICR para 68) to ensure knowledge transfer.

  The overall M&E Quality rating is substantial, based on good alignment of the results framework with
  demonstrating achievement of the PDOs as stated, several minor shortcomings in design, moderate
  shortcomings in implementation but good use of project generated data and information, including to
  inform other and future projects.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The safeguard policies triggered under the project were Environmental Assessment (operational policy (OP)
   4.01), Forests (OP 4.36), Pest Management (OP 4.09), and Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10). The project was
   classified as Category B (partial assessment). (ICR p26, PAD p12, 13, 38). Overall, the project’s safeguard
   compliance was rated satisfactory throughout.

   Environmental safeguards: Environmental protection was a priority of the project, evidenced by strong
   complementarity of safeguards with technical design (ICR p26) and incorporation of ‘environmental
   protection compliance rate’ as a criterion for execution of the Environmental Protection Guidelines (EPG)
   and Environmental Management Plan (EMP), and some activities exceeding EMP requirements (ICR para
   84). The ICR states that ‘the EMP, including EPG and the PMP, were generally well followed’ and that
   minor exceptions, such as burning of plant debris and use of some pesticides, were addressed quickly (ICR
   p 26).

   Social safeguards: Required safeguards, were in place at appraisal and compliance was satisfactory (ICR
   para 82). But the assessments of the social and cultural impacts (positive or negative) on the relevant
   social groups, including ethnic minorities, was neither part of the PDOs (see Safeguards data sheet ICR p5)
   nor possible. According to the ICR (para 86) and the PAD (paras 39-43) the project did ‘pay careful
   attention’ to ethnic minorities, beginning with a social assessment exercise during preparation, including an
   Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP), and adequate monitoring targets (ICR para 70, footnote 45). But
   the acknowledged poor socio-economic baseline data collection (specifically on ethnic minorities, including
   ‘inadequate assessment of risks and opportunities’ – para 65 and see section 9 M&E above) means that
   while compliance with safeguards was verified, causal attribution of the project’s socio-economic impacts –
   whether positive or negative – was not possible (ICR para78).



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Overall, the ICR concluded that fiduciary compliance was strong. All audits were unqualified and timely
  (ICR para 87), supervision was strong and minor issues (such as inconsistent contract management by
  some CPMOs) were identified early and addressed (ICR paras 88-90). Initially slow Bank disbursement
  (due to unfamiliarity at local level, with Bank processes) was caught up owing to close Bank supervision
  and capacity building for CPMOs. Initial delays in counterpart funding were also caught up by the time of
  the MTR (ICR para 94).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR provides clear evidence for three positive unintended impacts of the project, namely: the project’s
  approach was being adopted and scaled up in other provincial projects and had influenced national forest
  management guidelines (ICR para 59); the project had reduced the use of burning for forest site
  preparation, which would therefore support biodiversity, soil and air quality (ICR para 60); and the project’s
  comprehensive community consultation process was widely used and subsequently codified, which
  standardized this more comprehensive model across counties (ICR para 61).

  There are no negative unintended impacts evident in the ICR.



d. Other
  Gender

  The ICR points to modest evidence of improvements in women’s empowerment under the project, citing an
  increase from 10 to 21 percent of the proportion of women with income equal to men’s (para 51). 56 percent
  of surveyed participants believed the project had increased women’s employment opportunities (although
  no substantial changes were observed in the proportion of women employed) (para 51). It also states that
  82 percent of participants surveyed believed ‘women’s position at home had improved to some extent’
  under the project’ (ICR para 50).

  The ICR does not discuss changes in men’s employment opportunities or ‘position at home’. The project
  achieved 148 percent of its target for training women in the project’s techniques. It is not clear from the ICR
  or the PAD, on what basis this target was determined, although the PAD does describe active participation
  of women in the preparation process (PAD p13).

  Institutional strengthening

  Component II clearly focused on institutional strengthening activities, designed to underpin both PDOs of
  enhanced resilience and ecosystem/environmental function. The ICR points to met or surpassed output-
  based targets for increased capacity of nurseries, increased available knowledge through publication of



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



   research, numbers of participants trained and improved facilities for community cooperatives (e.g. ICR
   paras 39, 40, 42, 52).

   The ICR also indicates improved knowledge, skill levels and efficiency of farmers, as a result of the project’s
   research and training (para 41), reported in farmer household interviews and surveys. The extension of the
   project’s approach to other areas, as well as to forthcoming projects is also strong evidence of the effective
   training, demonstration and research activities.

   It is difficult, however, to assess the human or social qualitative improvements in that are important to
   underpinning long term institutional strengthening (and therefore, the PDOs). This is due to the
   acknowledged shortcomings in socio-economic data collection and lack of necessary indicators (see section
   9 M&E).

   Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity

   While the ICR indicates that poverty levels substantially reduced in the project areas during the life of the
   project, it is also frank in explaining that the project was only one small factor amongst many others, such
   as strong overall economic growth, government programs and special funding (para 56). Therefore, a level
   of attribution to the project’s effects on poverty reduction is not possible. The project did create jobs directly
   related to its implementation (ICR para 55) and the ICR points to potential for increased income generation
   (para 57), including in ethnic minority areas where commercial production plantations were permitted, and
   broader economic benefits over the long term. But the likelihood of these being realized was not discussed,
   nor indicated from the project results.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Highly Satisfactory    Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                   IEG considers there to be some
                                                                                   limited shortcomings in the
                                                                                   results framework, bringing
                                                                                   Quality at Entry (8a) rating to
Bank Performance                 Highly Satisfactory    Satisfactory               satisfactory. IEG rates Quality of
                                                                                   Supervision (8b) as highly
                                                                                   satisfactory. This necessitates
                                                                                   an overall rating of satisfactory
                                                                                   for section 8.
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    High


12. Lessons



                                                                                                       Page 18 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



Lessons directly from ICR:

The depth and quality of extension is critical for the success of a forest project's physical
works (para 102). The importance of extension was foreseen during preparation and budgeted for,
with recognition by both Bank and PMO staff that the greatest challenge would be changing
traditional forestry mindsets and methods. Despite this recognition and preparation, this challenge
exceeded expectations and corrective action was required (such as increased training and new
extension materials, among other measures, see Section III.B.). Substantial budgeting, early
preparation, and use of demonstration forests can help smooth the crucial adoption of required
mindsets and technical skills.

Early establishment of demonstration forests can maximize the effective promotion of the
project's objectives, intended benefits, and practical techniques (applicable to forest and
agriculture projects) (para 102). Demonstration forests, physical demonstration of techniques and
results were critical in convincing initially skeptical participants (ICR paras 21, 41, 59, 68).
Additionally, the project could draw on earlier plantings that exemplify a project's objective (i.e.
repurpose forests and pilot plots established using similar techniques).

Mechanisms to incorporate research activities with other project activities promote
knowledge spillovers and help ensure research is relevant (applicable to projects with
research components) (para 104). Requiring researchers to take part in extension activities (as in
this project) helps researchers produce materials that are timely and relevant to the project (such as
operational handbooks) as well as learn from field experience. Similarly, close integration of
research activities and monitoring and evaluation (for instance, by having M&E functions undertaken
by research units) likely increases the quality of M&E (through research staffs' understanding of
experimental design and commitment to rigor).

Geographic information systems (GIS) data would be a valuable addition to forest projects'
M&E programs (applicable to forest, environment, and agriculture projects) (para 105). Given
that such long-term monitoring is crucial in forest projects (which deliver ecological and landscape
benefits over many decades), GIS data of plot locations would allow for the use of publicly
accessible satellite imagery for evaluating long-term outcomes such as forest planation extent,
density and possibly diversity, providing a means of third-party verification (in addition to site-
inspections) and impact.

Additional lesson from IEG:

Where embedding innovative approaches is central to achieving project objectives, behavior
and/or perception-based indicators are needed to firstly, demonstrate their impact on PDO
achievement and secondly, make a credible assessment of PDO sustainability. Three of the
four lessons in the ICR (above) relate to what the ICR describes as the central challenge of the
project – embedding the innovative practices (paras 67 and 96) in order for project objectives to be
achieved and outcomes to be sustained. Therefore, indicators that capture the central role of
behavior and perception changes, can help ensure a) sufficient project resources for training,
demonstration and extension activities from the outset (see first three lessons above) and b)
stronger data generation in support of demonstrating sustainability of the PDOs.




                                                                                                  Page 19 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CN-Hunan Forest Restoration (P125021)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is exceptionally well written, structured and referenced. Clear, frank language and messaging feature
throughout. Terminology and intent of activities are explained clearly and systematically. Attribution of
outcomes and/or impacts to the project (or not) is clear. Coverage of the issues is thorough. Minor
inconsistencies in figures against component costs and percentages of targets achieved were satisfactorily
addressed in the Task Team Leader interview. These were outweighed by its solid reasoning overall, which
was consistently supported by presentation of relevant evidence including through the use of footnotes. While
the ICR does not identify shortcomings in the RF with respect to indicators of behavior change in support of
achieving and sustaining the PDOs, (see sections 8 and 9 above), it captures the issues well in Lessons
(section 12), offering insightful, practical recommendations, well aligned with the issues identified in the overall
analysis.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                       Page 20 of 20
