     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China HCFC Phase-Out Project (P115561)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021988

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P115561                                  China HCFC Phase-Out Project

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                    Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-13143                                 31-Dec-2017                                        162,104,169.65

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Nov-2012                              30-Jun-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          168,474,150.00                                168,474,150.00

 Revised Commitment                           168,474,150.00                                162,104,169.65

 Actual                                       168,462,524.00                                162,104,169.65




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl             Fernando Manibog            Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p.vi) and the Financing Agreement of November 28,
   2012(p. 7) the objective of the project was “to reduce Hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC) production and HCFC-
   141b consumption in the polyurethane (PU) foam sector in order to contribute to the Recipient's endeavor to
   comply with its Montreal Protocol phase-out obligations for HCFCs by 2015, as well as to reduce emissions of
   Greenhouse Gas (GHG) from the production and PU foam sectors”.



                                                                                                Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China HCFC Phase-Out Project (P115561)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included five components:

   Component 1: Investment in HCFC-141b Consumption Reduction in the PU Foam Sector (appraisal
   estimate US$204.3 million, actual US$ 105.9 million): According to the ICR (p. 55) the cost of this
   component was lower because the project’s actual mix of enterprises had lower conversion costs than the
   original ones identified. Many enterprises outside of the targeted sub-sectors were phasing out HCFC-141b
   under this project. These enterprises were larger HCFC consumers than the originally identified enterprises
   and therefore had lower per unit costs leading to a smaller total conversion cost.

   This component was to finance; i) the introduction of zero Ozone Deletion Potential (ODP) and low Global
   Warming Potential (GWP) alternative technologies to HCFC-141b to support phase-out of about 12,000
   metric tons (MT) of HCFC-141b in three subsectors in China: (1) reefers and containers; (2) refrigeration
   and freezers; and (3) small household appliances; ii) support to select enterprises in other sub-sectors,
   including without limitation insulation pipes and panels, solar water heaters, and block foam, to cover at
   least another 2,000 MT of HCFC-141b consumption in order to meet the overall reduction target of at least
   14,000 MT by 2015; iii) support to foam system houses to modify their production process, in order to
   provide hydrocarbon pre-blended polyol to enterprises that cannot adopt full-scale hydrocarbon technology.

   Component 2: Investment in HCFC Production Reduction (appraisal estimate US$260.4 million,
   actual US$360.4 million): The ICR (p. 12) stated that the total cost of US$360.4 million was the projected
   lost profit borne by HCFC producers under the project. The value was the profit per metric ton (using 2010
   figures) of each chemical multiplied by the actual phase-out of each chemical under the project through
   2030. The number was larger than the projected cost at appraisal as the reductions in HCFC-22 production
   were much larger than anticipated at the time, which therefore increased the total expected lost profit borne
   by HCFC-22 producers.

   This component was to finance: i) support to HCFC producers presently operating in China to assist them in
   reducing their production of HCFCs to the level of 29,122 Ozone Depleting Potential (ODP) tons in 2013
   and 26,210 ODP tons in 2015, representing production reduction of 3,833 ODP tons from the 2010 level of
   30,043 ODP tons, whereby compensation was to be made on the basis of reduced production levels
   through agreed production quotas; ii) support to the establishment of production capacity for new low-
   carbon alternatives. HCFC producers whose establishment/operation licenses were approved prior to end-
   December 2008 were to be eligible for financing under this component. The right to manufacture HCFCs
   was to be based on the actual production level in 2010. According to the ICR (p. 55) the total cost is the
   projected lost profit borne by HCFC producers under the project. The actual cost is larger than the projected
   cost at appraisal as the reductions in HCFC-22 production were much larger than anticipated, which
   therefore increased the total expected lost profit borne by HCFC-22 producers.

   Component 3: Technical Assistance and Policy Support (appraisal estimate US$16.35 million, actual
   US$7.75 million): According to the ICR (p. 12) due to the reduced grant funds approved for Component 3,

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    China HCFC Phase-Out Project (P115561)



  the technical assistance activities (especially those related to capacity strengthening of local ecology and
  Environmental Bureaus (EEBs) were reduced to about six local EEBs in the provinces that had a large
  number of foam enterprises and HCHC producers. This component was to finance: i) provision of technical
  assistance to support HCFC-141b phase-out in the foam sector, including training activities on the project
  cycle for sub-grants, identification and testing of low-carbon blowing agents, establishment of technical
  support centers, technical workshops on zero ODP and low-GWP alternatives, development of guidelines
  for use of hydrocarbons in different foam applications, and revision of existing foam standards to remove
  any barriers for HCFC-141b phase-out; ii) provision of support to activities related to identification and
  testing of potential substitutes for HCFCs; iii) identification of additional TA activities beyond mid-2013 for
  the production sector; iv) strengthening the capacity of Foreign Environmental Cooperation Center (FECO)
  and local Environmental Protection Bureaus to carry out workshops on technologies and new HCFC phase-
  out policies of the government, enforce HCFC phase-out regulations, and deliver financial assistance to
  small foam enterprises; v) introduction of a tradable HCFC production quota system in China in 2013; vi)
  strengthening the capacity of the Implementation Supporting Agency, to carry out its functions.

  According to the ICR (p.55) due to the reduced grant funds approved for this component, TA activities
  incorporated in the project, especially those related to capacity strengthening of local Ecology and
  Environmental Bureaus (EEBs) were reduced to about six local EEBs in the provinces with a large amount
  of foam enterprises and HCFC producers. However, a separate undertaking monitored by FECO and
  delivered by a local EEB was employed to fill this gap.

  Component 4: Project Management (appraisal estimate US$11.25 million, actual US$8.40
  million): This component was to finance provision of technical assistance to improve the capacity of FECO
  and the PMO to manage, supervise, coordinate, monitor and evaluate the implementation of the
  Project. The ICR (p. 55) stated that since this component was fee based, the difference between the
  appraisal and actual estimates was due to the change in total project financing.

  Component 5: Preparation of HCFC Phaseout Activities Post 2015 (appraisal estimate US$2.0
  million, actual US$0.47 million): This component was to finance scoping and preparation of activities and
  relevant studies as needed on HCFC phase-out beyond 2015. The ICR (p. 55) stated that the actual
  amount was less than estimated because the ExCom’s actual requirements were less stringent than
  expected for project proposals for subsequent phases of HCFC phase-out.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$494.7 million, actual cost was US$482.9 million.

  Financing: The project was to be financed by a grant from the Ozone Project Trust Fund of the Multilateral
  Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol in the amount of US$168.47 million. Actual
  disbursement was US$168.46 million.

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$326.3 million. The actual contribution was
  US$314.5 million.

  Dates: The project was restructured four times:




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China HCFC Phase-Out Project (P115561)



        On September 4, 2013 the project was restructured to process a reallocation of proceeds to allocate
         the additional grant financing in the amount of US$95 million by the Multilateral Fund which had
         been included in the appraisal design but was still pending when the project was approved. The
         amount was to cover the implementation of the production sector, related Technical Assistance and
         project management activities. These activities were included in the Grant Agreement but did not
         have any financing yet.
        On April 17, 2015 the project was restructured to increase the funding for the project by US$300,000
         to allow for the implementation of component 5 for which no financing had been allocated since the
         executive committee of the Multilateral Fund had not yet approved it.
        On August 2, 2016 the project was restructured to reduce the allocation for Component 3 by
         US$3.35 million and reallocate US$3 million to Component 2 and US$350,000 to Component 1 to
         allow for a reverse auction to provide incentives for additional HCFC producers to dismantle their
         idle HCFC production facilities. Also, component 5 received US$170,000 from the executive
         committee of the Multilateral Fund to support the preparation of Stage II of the production sector
         plan.
        On December 18, 2017 the project was restructured to extend the closing date by 18 months from
         December 31, 2017 to June 30, 2019 to allow for the implementation of conversion and sub-projects
         that were experiencing delays because the companies could not resume production unless they
         have met the inspection and certification requirements of local Ecology and Environmental Bureaus
         (EEBs) and firefighting departments. Also, more time was needed to implement technical assistance
         and policy support activities which were essential for ensuring the sustainability of the complete
         phasing out of the three targeted sub-sectors.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project supported China’s commitment to the Montreal Protocol. The Montreal Protocol requires
developing countries known as “Article 5” countries to gradually phase-out HCFC consumption and
production starting in 2013 and completely phasing-out of HCFC consumption and production by 2030.
Accelerated HCFC phase-out applies to developed and developing countries, with the latter being subject
to a freeze on baseline levels of HCFC consumption and production (2009-2010 average) in 2013 and a 10
percent reduction of the same in 2015.

According to the PAD (p. 1) HCFCs are ozone-depleting substances which were introduced as transitional
substances to chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) which are more potent ozone depleting substances. HCFCs are
mainly used as refrigerant in refrigeration and air conditioning equipment and as blowing agents for
insulation foam. In addition to HCFCs being ozone depleting substances, they are also potent greenhouse
gases (GHGs) whose global warming potential (GWP) ranges from several hundred to several thousand
times that of carbon dioxide.

The PAD (p. 2) stated that in 2009, China produced more than 70 percent of the global HCFC supply and
was responsible for more than half of the global HCFC consumption for manufacturing foam and
refrigeration products, producing solvents, and servicing existing equipment. HCFCs were also used in
China as a feedstock for its large production of Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) and pesticides, among other

                                                                                                 Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      China HCFC Phase-Out Project (P115561)



               substances. As developed countries phase-out their HCFC consumption and production (75% as of
               January 1, 2010 in accordance with the Montreal Protocol) and move to alternative technologies, China
               became the key producer in the global market for HCFC-based products and components. Therefore, the
               economic burden of the transition from HCFCs will be more severely experienced in China where a large
               number of industries and sectors along the supply chain are involved. According to the ICR (p. 6), at the
               time of appraisal, the annual revenue of the HCFC production sector was estimated at US$1.4 billion and
               the revenue from the consumption of HCDC was estimated at US$170 billion.

               The objective of the project supported China’s development of HCFC Phase-out Management Plans
               (HPMPs) for each sector which identified the necessary measures to control supply and consumption of
               HCFCs at target levels. Also, the objective of the project was in line with China’s 2015 Nationally
               Determined Contribution (NCD) and its section on ‘policies and measures to implement enhanced actions
               on climate change”.

               At the time of appraisal, the project ‘s PDO supported the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (FY13-16),
               particularly theme 1 “supporting green growth” and outcome (1.6) on “demonstrating pollution
               management”. At the time of project closing, the PDO was in line with the Bank’s most recent Country
               Partnership Framework (FY20-25) and its second engagement are on “promoting greener growth”.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To reduce Hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC) production and HCFC-141b consumption in the polyurethane
                             (PU) foam sector in order to contribute to the Recipient's endeavor to comply with its Montreal Protocol
                             phase-out obligations for HCFCs by 2015:

                             Rationale
                             The project’s causality chain from outputs to outcomes is highly technical (as verified within the Montreal
                             Protocol governing framework) and firmly based on principles of chemistry. In the project’s theory of change
                             (TOC), the targeted outputs – i.e., converting the manufacturing processes of domestic PU foam consuming
                             enterprises in the three key subsectors (refrigerators and freezers, reefer containers, and small household
                             appliances) – were expected to lead to the outcome of implementing non-HCFC-141b and low global
                             warming potential (GWP) alternatives. Moreover, the TOC also highlights the direct causality between the
                             project’s support for specific policies – i.e., the ban of the use of HCFC-141b – and the outcomes of (a)
                             reducing HCFC production and HCFC-141b consumption in the PU foam sector and (b) reducing GHG
                             emissions from the PU foam sector. The TOC also causally links outputs – such as the reduction in HCFC



                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   China HCFC Phase-Out Project (P115561)



supplies through production quotas on producers – with the outcome of achieving agreed targets, subject to
the provision of commensurate financial compensation.

Outputs:

      A total of 21 phase-out contracts were signed with HCFC producers (four contracts for closure of idle
       production lines, 12 contracts for quota reduction, and five contracts for production closure),
       surpassing the target of 15 phase-out contracts signed with HCFC producers. The ICR (p. 18) stated
       that the project ensured that the aggregated phase-out of these contracts met the overall limit for each
       chemical in a given year by putting in place a production quota system starting in 2013 for each
       chemical and for each enterprise producing HCFCs. An extensive independent verification process
       verified these results.
      The project financed 58 investment sub-projects in the PU foam sector including 55 foam conversion
       sub-projects and three sub-projects for system houses (suppliers of raw materials for foam
       production), not achieving the target of 100 enterprises being covered by contracts. According to the
       ICR (p. 43) the target was not met due to a lack of capacity at small foam enterprises to conform with
       the project processing requirements. However, the ICR (p. 19) stated that these sub-projects
       contributed to a HCFC-141b consumption reduction of 12,989 MT (equivalent to approximately 1,430
       ODP tons).
      The project supported the Ministry of Ecology and Environment (MEE) through technical assistance to
       put in place a quota system for HCFC consumption, covering the PU foam sector. This quota system
       started in 2013 and according to the ICR (p. 19) helped to ensure that the consumption levels stayed
       below the maximum allowable consumption limits. In 2018, MEE banned the use of HCFC-141b in the
       project’s three targeted sub-sectors (small electric appliances, reefer containers, and refrigeration and
       freezers). This resulted in a HCFC-141b reduction in the PU foam sector of approximately 3,900 MT.
       However, the three non-HCFC foam standards were not adapted since the Chinese domestic
       refrigerator and electric water heater industry decided to adopt energy efficiency performance
       standards which combined electrical and insulation performance rather than developing a standalone
       standard focusing only on insulation performance. Therefore, the target of implementation of a
       production quota system, banning the use of HCFC-141b in targeted sub-sectors and new non-HCFC
       foam product standards was only partially met.
      Compliance with project requirements were met, achieving the target. The project had three levels of
       reporting: at the overall program level, the Bank conducted independent verifications of maximum
       allowable production and consumption levels of all HCFCs listed in Annex C in 2017. At the project
       level, the Bank confirmed achievement of HCFC-141b consumption levels in the PU foam sector. At
       the sub-project level, sub-project appraisal and completion reports were prepared by enterprises on a
       rolling basis. Also, all semi-annual progress reports were submitted on time and the Bank team found
       them of satisfactory quality, achieving the target.

       Outcomes:

      The production of HCFC 141B, HCFC 142B and HCFC 22 was decreased from 29,122 ODP tons in
       2012 to 20,714 ODP tons in 2019, surpassing the target of reducing the target to 26,210 ODP tons.
       This allowed China to comply with its Montreal Protocol obligations.
      The consumption of HCFC141B decreased from 5,393 ODP tons in 2012 to 4,191 ODP tons in 2019,
       surpassing the target of 4,450 ODP tons. According to the ICR (p. 39) the target was met in 2015 and
       remained below the maximum allowable consumption levels (as confirmed by the independent

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   China HCFC Phase-Out Project (P115561)



       verifications of both, consumption and production) which allowed China to comply with its Montreal
       Protocol obligations.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To reduce emissions of Greenhouse Gas (GHG) from the production and PU foam sectors:

Rationale
Outputs:

      The financing of 58 investment sub-projects in the PU foam sector is also an output under this
       objective. The target of 100 enterprises being covered by contracts was not achieved, as stated
       above.

Outcomes:

      Climate co-benefits from reduced HCFC production based on 2010 level were equivalent to 182.7
       million tCO2eq per year, surpassing the target of 63 million tCO2. The Bank team stated (March 10,
       2020) that the project confirmed the actual amount and type of HCFC produced at an enterprise level
       through the third-party annual verification of each enterprise. Corresponding GHG emissions were
       then determined by multiplying the GWP of each HCFC by the amount of reductions of HCFCs
       produced from the level produced in the previous year.

       The largest contribution came from the rapid reduction of HCFC-22 production, which accounted for
       more than 119 million tCO2eq per year. The reduction from HCFC-141b and HCFC-142 b production
       contributed to 24.9 million and 38.8 million tCO2eq per year, respectively. The 58 foam conversion
       sub-projects accounted for 12,989 MT of the HCFC-141b phased out. The ban prohibiting the use of
       HCFC-141 b as a blowing agent in the three targeted sub-sectors accounted for an elimination of
       3,900 MT (which was previously consumed by enterprises that were not eligible for funding from the
       Multilateral Fund).

      According to the ICR (p. 42) the investment and policy measures financed by the project generated
       GHG emission reductions of more than 12.2 million tons of Co2e per year. The Bank team stated
       (March 10, 2020) that GHG emission reductions were determined by first confirming the actual phase-
       out of HCFCs and the alternative foam blowing substitute adopted by each foam enterprise. The net
       amount of GHG emission reductions is calculated from the difference between the amount of HCFCs
       phased out by all enterprises in GWP terms (metric tonnes multiplied by GWP) and the amount of new
       alternative consumed in GWP terms (metric tonnes multiplied by its GWP).



Rating
                                                                                                Page 7 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               China HCFC Phase-Out Project (P115561)



                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of both objectives was Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   According to the PAD (p. 12) it was not possible to conduct an economic analysis to capture the project’s impact
   on the entire economy because it would have had to include, besides the foam sector, other productive sectors,
   consumers, the Government, and other aspects of risks and benefits to the Chinese society. Since the project
   did not have data on the impacts of other productive sectors and of ozone depletion and climate change on
   health and other aspects of life in China, the PAD did not include a quantitative analysis of these aspects.
   However, it was assumed that the cumulative impacts were to be positive and therefore reduce the conversion
   cost to society.

   The ICR included a cost-effectiveness (CE) analysis which compared the cost of per kg of HCFC consumption
   phased out with the project cost at appraisal and MLF thresholds. Under the ExCom, CE was defined as the
   amount of MLF grant per unit weight of HCFC phased out in kg.

   The ICR (p. 21) calculated that for HCFC-141b consumption reduction in the PU foam sector and grant financing
   of US$72.8 million, the project phased out 16,889 metric tons of HCFC-141b, resulting in a CE of US$4.31 per
   kg of HCFC-141b. At appraisal, the MLF established a CE threshold of US$9.79 per kg for conversion of HCFC-
   141b to low Global Warming Potential technologies in the PU foam sector. When the analysis included the costs
   to beneficiary enterprises, which were not covered by the grant, the CE was US$6.85 per kg of HCFC-141b.
   This value was lower than the CE threshold.

   According to the ICR (p. 21) the production sector with grant financing for production reduction and closure of
   US$91.5 million, the project phased out 116,692 metric tonnes of HCFCs (including HCFC-22, HCFC-141b, and
   HCFC-142 b) or 8,470 ozone depletion potential tonnes which resulted in a CE of US$0.78 per kg of HCFCs.

   The ICR also conducted a benefit-cost analysis which calculated for the PU foam sector a Net Present Value
   (NPV) of the GHG emission reductions (12.2 million tons of CO2e per year) through 2030 of US$3.4 billion to
   US$6.8 billion, using the low and high shadow prices of carbon and a discount rate of 12 percent. For HCFC
   production reduction, the ICR calculated an NPV between US$50.6 billion and US$102.1 billion using low and


                                                                                                                Page 8 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       China HCFC Phase-Out Project (P115561)



high values for the shadow price of carbon and a discount rate of 12 percent. These calculations indicate that
the project was a worthwhile investment.

Operational efficiency:

The project’s closing date was extended by 18 months from December 31, 2017 to June 30, 2019 to allow for
the implementation of conversion and sub-projects that were experiencing delays due to the inspection and
certification requirements of local Ecology and Environmental Bureaus (EEBs) and firefighting departments
before companies could resume production. However, the ICR (p. 22) stated that the closing date extension did
not have a negative impact on project management costs since PMU costs were financed by a fee, based on
the total amount of grant financing.

Overall, the project’s efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?           Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective was High given its alignment with the most recent Country Partnership Framework.
Efficacy was Substantial and Efficiency was Substantial resulting in an overall outcome rating of Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main risks to development outcome can be categorized under the following categories:



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China HCFC Phase-Out Project (P115561)



Government risk: According to the ICR (p. 36), the government passed the ODS Management Regulations
in 2010. These regulations prohibit the production and consumption of ODS without government approval. In
case of a violation of the regulation, a substantial penalty will be implemented. However, even though the
ICR (p. 35) states that production level for HCFCs are currently lower than the quotas assigned to each
producer, once the production quotas are being substantially reduced to meet the Montreal Protocol
compliance schedule, strong implementation support as part of Stage II and Stage III will be necessary. The
government and the Bank are implementing a follow-on project (P156397, effectiveness March 2019 with a
financing of US$164.47 million), which objective is to reduce HCFC production and consumption, as well as
to avoid and reduce the use of high global warming controlled substances in the consumption sector and the
emissions of greenhouse gases from the production sector.

Technical/Financial risk: The ICR (p. 35) stated that the project outcomes face the risk of illegal production
of products with HCFC-141b for Small Medium Enterprises (SMEs) as alternatives are currently more
expensive and perform worse. Under Stage II, FECO is closely monitoring illegal production through prices
for HCFC-141b (an increase in price increases the risk for illegal production). The Bank team stated (March
10, 2020) that a variety of measures are being implemented by the government to improve the overall
monitoring, reporting, and verification to prevent illegal production and consumption of HCFCs. These
include:

      Expansion of atmospheric monitoring stations to detect emission of ODS controlled substances
       whether they are in line with reported production and consumption information or not;
      Requiring producers of key raw material for making CFCs and HCFCs, to install real-time monitoring
       of their production with a direct link to the government online system. This requirement is being
       considered for all HCFC producers for real-time monitoring of their production as well.
      Conducting random inspection of PU foam enterprises to check whether their raw materials and
       products stem from illegally produced substances or not.
      Additional measures that contribute to confirming whether there are anomalies in an ODS sector, for
       example periodic mass balance (comparing levels and proportions) of key raw materials such as MDI
       (isocyanate) which is an input unique to foam manufacturing.

       Environmental risk: The ICR (p. 35) stated studies identified the risk of illegal CFC-11 production in
       China. In order to address this risk, China suggests the establishment of a network of CFC, HCFC,
       and HFC monitoring stations in several Chinese provinces which are expected to be established in
       2022 and would allow the international community to identify significant emission of banned CFC.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR (p. 32) stated that the project benefited from the Bank team’s diverse international expertise.
  According to the ICR (p. 33) the project was built on a previous Bank project, the China ODS IV project,
  and continued what worked well from this project such as project management and institutional
  arrangements, performance-based HCFC production reduction contracts, where funding was released
  based on verification of meeting agreed production targets, the system of production and sales quotas to
  restrict the supply of HCFCs for non-feedstock, or controlled applications and the sectoral model of

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China HCFC Phase-Out Project (P115561)



  combining and coordinating investment, technical assistance, policy and regulatory support interventions
  for sustainable results.

  Also, the Bank’s experience in conducting HCFC-141b consumption surveys was incorporated into the
  project’s design. According to the PAD (p. 12) the Bank team identified relevant risk factors with the key
  risk factor being related to the byproduct of HCFC production, HFC-23. About 30 percent of HCFC-22
  producers receive CDM credits for HFC-23 emission mitigation. These credits make HCFC- 22
  production extremely profitable and thereby were a hindrance towards eventually obtaining cooperation
  of the producers in the reduction and phasing out of HCFC-22 production. To mitigate this risk,
  Component 2 was to commence in 2013 when CDM crediting of carbon emissions from the destruction of
  HFC-23 became ineligible under the European Union (EU) Emission Trading System (ETS). According to
  the Bank team (March 10, 2020) the mitigation of this risk was effective. Producers of HCFC-22 complied
  with the production quota issued by MEE for allowable production for controlled uses which in turn
  controlled HFC-23 byproduct generated at these producers.

  The design of the project’s Results Framework was adequate (see section 9a for more details).
  According to the ICR (p. 33) the project’s environmental and social safeguard instruments benefitted from
  previous Bank projects. Also, the Bank team provided advice to FECO in regards to specifications for PU
  foam enterprises’ sub-projects



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 33) the Bank conducted 12 formal implementation support missions on a bi-annual
 basis. In addition, technical visits for launch, completion and training workshops and audio/video
 conferences took place which allowed for a timely identifying and addressing of implementation
 bottlenecks. For example, the ICR (p. 33) stated that the Bank team used initial results from the
 independent verifications to identify shortcomings in the monitoring of HCFC exports. This allowed FECO
 and the import/export office to change the reporting procedures for exports by distributors. Also, the results
 showed that small foam enterprises did not participate at the beginning of the project which led to the
 government addressing HCFC phase-out in small foam enterprises through system houses. According to
 the ICR (p. 34) the Bank reviewed all verification reports to ensure that any suggested recommendations
 were implemented by FECO, the import/export office, and the MEE.

 Also, on an annual basis the Bank organized regional ODS workshop to provide the opportunity to learn
 from policy makers, industry representatives, experts and Bank staff working on MP projects in the region.

 The ICR (p. 33) stated that the Bank team ensured compliance and provided support in areas such as
 financial management, procurement, and environmental and social safeguard policies. Any issues in those
 areas were addressed in the project’s 58 PU foam enterprises, which received financing, and in the 21
 facilities that were closed, reduced their production capacity, or dismantled their idle capacity. The Bank
 also conducted trainings in financial management and procurement.



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China HCFC Phase-Out Project (P115561)



 Also, according to the ICR (p. 34) the Bank was a critical intermediary between the government and
 ExCom and oversaw the preparation of the annual implementation plans and submitting them on behalf of
 the government to ExCom.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change and how project activities would lead to the intended outcomes were sound
 and reflected in the Results Framework. The objectives were sufficiently specified, and the selected
 indicators encompassed all outcomes of the PDO statement. Also, the indicators were sufficiently specific
 and measurable. The majority of indicators lacked a baseline.

 According to the PAD (p. 11) the reporting framework included three levels: First, the Bank was to conduct
 an independent verification of the maximum allowable production and consumption levels of all HCFCs
 listed in Annex C, Group I, of the Montreal Protocol; second, the Bank was to confirm the achievement of
 HCFC-141b consumption levels in the PU foam sector against agreed targets by independently verifying a
 random sample of at least 5 percent of the manufacturing lines which have completed their conversion
 within a calendar year; and third, Sub-project appraisal reports and completion reports were to be required.



b. M&E Implementation
  FECO was responsible for the project’s M&E monitoring. According to the ICR (p. 29) FECO monitored
  progress towards the PDO in a timely and appropriate manner. Also, FECO submitted semi-annual
  project progress reports to the Bank each year to provide information on implementation progress and
  disbursement status. These reports were found to be of satisfactory quality. Also, FECO produced
  technical and financial reports in accordance with Bank guidelines on a semi-annual basis.

  The ICR (p. 28) stated that the verification reports on national HCFC consumption and production for
  2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, and 2017 were submitted by FECO to the Bank who submitted them to ExCom.

  According to the ICR (p. 29) the project produced an online reporting platform for producers to report
  quarterly on their monthly production levels. A third party was contracted by FECO to conduct feedstock
  user verification of their consumption in 2013, 2014, and 2015. In regards to the consumption sector, an
  approach developed under the ODS IV project was continued. Once a company submitted a request for
  funding, FECO assigned a team to check baseline and eligibility of the company to receive MLF grants.




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China HCFC Phase-Out Project (P115561)



  The ICR (p. 28) stated that the Mid-Term Review identified indicators included in the Results Framework
  that could be modified. However, the Bank team decided not to make the changes since they would not
  have had an impact on the quality of project implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 29) the project’s M&E data was used at the national for planning MP
  compliance and at the international level for assessing MP compliance. HCFC data was monitored and
  verified on an annual basis.

  The Bank team (March 10, 2020) stated that project management found M&E data useful for identifying
  new measures to maintain and reinforce effective project implementation. For example, the delays in
  signing small foam enterprises as beneficiaries led project management to explore a new approach to
  reach out to small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs). In this case, additional system house
  subprojects were introduced to supply HCFC-alternative foam system to foam SMEs thereby increasing
  project coverage. In addition, the delays experienced in completing the final steps of conversions at the
  enterprise level resulted in devising new measures to expedite full scale production with HCFC
  alternatives without compromising on the safety objectives of the project. For example, FECO
  mandated third party safety audits by foam safety experts which assured FECO that new manufacturing
  would proceed in a safe manner while awaiting local government clearances.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment) and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). According to the ICR (p. 30)
   project activities were expected to have site-specific minor or moderate adverse environmental and social
   impacts. FECO prepared an Environmental Management Framework which was to be used by the PU foam
   enterprises and for HCFC production facilities during implementation. Also, the ICR (p. 31) stated that a
   Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared based on surveys of a dozen sample project enterprises to
   provide information for the due diligence review of prior resettlement and preparation of new land
   acquisitions. Some production facilities and PU foam companies moved to industrial land that were based
   on land which was purchased before the project. A due diligence review was conducted, and it was found
   that the land acquired complied with China’s regulations. Furthermore, no new land acquisition took place
   under the project. Employee compensation action plans were developed for all enterprises involving labor
   lay-off which followed China’s labor law. According to the ICR (p. 31) the project did not encounter any
   compliance issues.




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China HCFC Phase-Out Project (P115561)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (p. 32) the project’s accounting and financial reporting was in line with the
   requirements specified in the grant agreement. Also, the project’s financial management system provided
   accurate and timely information. Furthermore, the withdrawal procedure and funds flow arrangement were
   adequate. The ICR (p. 32) stated that the project did not encounter any significant issues related to
   financial management . The Bank team (March 10, 2020) stated that FM weaknesses were primarily
   related to slight delays in the submission of a few Interim Financial Reports (IFRs). These delays were
   due to staff changes or the time-consuming information exchange procedure in between departments
   within FECO. The issue was addressed by FECO during project implementation through improvement of
   its inter-communication channels and back-up system for designated staff. Finally, all audit reports had
   unqualified opinions.

   Procurement:

   The ICR (p. 32) stated that the project followed the Bank’s procurement rules and its procurement
   performance was rated Satisfactory throughout implementation. The project befitted from the Foreign
   Environmental Cooperation Center’s (FECO) experience in working on similar projects in China before.
   During project preparation the Bank team identified the capacity of beneficiary enterprises as a Moderate
   risk. FECO addressed this risk by contracting an Implementation Support Agent. Also, some enterprises
   hired procurement agents to support their capacity. According to the ICR (p. 32) the project experienced
   some delays in the procurement of consulting services for the technical assistance (TA) component.
   However, the ICR stated that this was related to changing TA needs during implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   NA



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial



                                                                                                 Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       China HCFC Phase-Out Project (P115561)



Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 36-37) provided several lessons learned which were adapted by IEG:

        Increasing local capacity to manage and monitor ODS-phase out is essential for
         achieving sustainable phase-out targets. In this project, strengthening the capacity of
         local EEBs has supported China in its efforts to monitor the use of HCFC-141b in the
         consumption sector by registering foam enterprises consuming HCFC-141b.
        Increasing access of SMEs to alternative technology, reducing costs and safety risks,
         and increasing market access of cyclopentane technology can be effective through
         the participation of system houses in the supply of cyclopentane pre-blended polyol.
         In this project, the public-private partnership between FECO and system houses allowed for
         the transfer of technical assistance and technology to a large amount of smaller foam
         enterprises through existing market networks.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a detailed overview of project preparation and implementation and was sufficiently candid.
The ICR included an adequate economic analysis, was internally consistent and sufficiently outcome driven.
Also, the ToC was logical and well explained. The ICR included useful lessons learned Overall, the ICR’s
outcome rating is Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
China HCFC Phase-Out Project (P115561)




                                                                      Page 16 of 16
