     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project (P128644)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021918

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P128644                                   Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Sudan                                     Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-13351                                  28-Feb-2017                                        76,472,764.09

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Mar-2013                               15-Feb-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           76,500,000.00                                  76,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            76,500,000.00                                  76,472,764.09

 Actual                                        76,472,764.09                                  76,472,764.09




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz        Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Behrens                   IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Emergency Project Paper (page 10) and the Global Fund for Education Grant Agreement
   (page 5), the project objectives were as follows:

           To improve the learning environment in targeted areas;
           To increase the availability of textbooks;
           To strengthen education planning and management mechanisms in Sudan.


                                                                                                Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project (P128644)



   The project development objectives remained the same throughout the project period; however, targets for
   several key project indicators were revised downward during a project restructuring in 2017. Therefore, a split
   rating is assessed.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Improving the learning environment for schools (Appraisal: US$ 36.2 million; Actual: US$
   46.7 million): This component aimed to improve the learning environment for children in targeted rural
   disadvantaged states (marked by low gross enrollment rates, low completion rates, large numbers of out-of-
   school children, and high poverty) and within those states, communities marked by (i) minimum population
   in the village; (ii) existence/absence of a school; (ii) gap between the number of school-age children and the
   number of children going to school; (iii) proportion of non-durable buildings in the school; and (iv) maximum
   student/classroom ratio. Activities included: construction or rehabilitation of classrooms; and provision of
   grants to schools for operational expenditures such as learning supplies, furniture, equipment, and some
   recurrent costs such as water supply (with the goal of reducing the burden on communities to pay out of
   their household funds).

   Component 2: Increasing the availability of textbooks (Appraisal: US$ 25.8 million; Actual: US$ 17.8
   million): This component aimed to improve the policy framework for textbook provision. Activities included:
   development and distribution of textbooks, development of teacher guides, and teacher training on the
   teaching material.

   Component 3: Strengthening the monitoring and management mechanisms of the education system
   (Appraisal: US$ 14.5 million; Actual: US$ 12.0 million): This component aimed to strengthen systems to
   deliver education services and to build the Ministry of General Education's (MoGE) capacity to collect,
   analyze, and use data for evidence-based planning. Activities included: launch of a National Learning
   Assessment; development of a teacher management system; enhancement of the education management
   information system; and development of the Education Sector Strategic Plan for FY2012-2016.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


   Project cost


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project (P128644)



         The project cost at appraisal was US$76.5 million; the actual project cost was also US$ 76.5 million.
         Component 1 (Learning Environment) costs were higher than appraised due to increased school
           construction costs. Component 2 (Textbooks) costs were lower than appraised due to efficiencies in
           the textbook procurement and distribution. Therefore, project funds were reallocated from
           Component 2 to Component 1 to ensure completion of construction activities.



   Financing

         The project was financed entirely by a Global Partnership for Education (GPE) grant of US$ 76.5
           million, which disbursed in its entirety.



   Borrower contribution

         There was no planned Borrower contribution.



   Dates

         January 2015: The project results framework was modified such that the wording of indicators was
          more precise and measurable. For example, “Number of direct beneficiaries with access to
          textbooks” was changed to “Number of textbooks purchased and delivered to basic schools.”
         February 2017: The project was restructured to reallocate US$8.0 million from Component 2
          (Textbooks) to Component 1 (Learning Environment) and also US$ 2.5 million from Component 3
          (Project Management) to Component 1 (Learning Environment). The project closing date was also
          extended from February 2017 to February 2018.
         February 2018: The project closing date was extended from February 2018 to February 2019.



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At the time of project appraisal, the country of Sudan was emerging from a period marked by civil conflict,
the secession of South Sudan, uncertainty in the fiscal environment, and slow restoration of public goods
and services. Although basic school enrollment, including in communities affected by conflict, had been
increasing (5.7% average annual growth between 2004/05 and 2008/09), the gross enrollment rate for
the first six years of basic education was 76% for the 2008/09 school year, which was low compared to
other lower middle-income Sub-Saharan African countries (105%). The quality of education delivery was
also considered poor, according to national learning results, which the multi-donor Status of the Education




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project (P128644)



               Sector in Sudan report (2011) attributed to ineffective teacher deployment and textbook utilization, and low
               quality learning environment and health status of students.

               The government of Sudan developed an interim Basic Education Strategy for 2012-14 that identified the
               immediate need to improve education service delivery (both to increase access and improve quality) as well
               as the longer-term need to strengthen the education system as a whole. Priorities in the strategy included
               improved access, consistent delivery of quality education, and overall systems strengthening. The Bank's
               Interim Strategy Note for Sudan (FY2014-15) was the sole formal strategy produced by the Bank during the
               project period, identifying equitable service delivery in education and health as a focus area under Pillar 2
               (Addressing Socio-Economic Roots of Conflict), with improved access to quality basic education as an
               expected outcome. Given the emergency context marked by major adverse economic and social impacts
               arising from the impending fiscal shocks and the instability caused by conflict in parts of the country, the
               Bank applied its guidelines for response to crises (OP/BP 8.0) to enable a rapid response. The project
               objectives were appropriately modest, given this country context and limited Bank engagement in the sector
               up to this point.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the learning environment in targeted areas (ORIGINAL OUTCOME TARGETS)

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was overall sound. To improve the learning environment, the project activities centered
                             on improved conditions of school facilities (classrooms, kitchens, latrines, water points, etc), provision of
                             grants to schools to purchase learning materials, furniture, equipment, etc., as well as the provision of
                             textbooks (including training on the content). These outputs were likely to increase access to schools and
                             improve the learning conditions in schools. Girls' schools and rural schools were specifically targeted
                             to increase participation of girls.



                             (Note: Key project indicator #1 - Number of direct project beneficiaries - was an aggregate measure of results
                             from both objectives 1 and 2. Therefore, this outcome indicator is applicable for both Objectives 1 and 2, as is
                             the split rating methodology due to the downward revision of the target.)




                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project (P128644)



Outputs

      Construction/rehabilitation of 1,226 classrooms, including latrines, water points, and fencing (original
       target: 2,000; revised target: 1,112). Although at the time of project closing, the target had not been
       met, the target has since been nearly achieved, as the government financed construction/rehabilitation
       of another 340 additional classrooms thereby bringing the total number to 1,566.
      Provision of training on school construction management to 300 communities (original target: 500;
       revised target: 149). According to the ICR (page 14), the community empowerment model (CEM)
       initially got off to a slow start due to low support and capacity for this decentralized approach, in which
       delegates for the communities took full responsibility to implement school construction (including
       community contracting for procurement of civil works through local competitive bidding, technical site
       supervision, and financial management of the contract costs). To address this initial low capacity, the
       project provided additional support to the project implementation unit, clustered communities into
       procurement and financial management agreements, and improved training modules for the
       communities. Implementation of the CEM approach improved significantly thereafter and "proved to be
       a highly effective approach that was not only implemented widely in education but also expanded to
       other sectors such as health."
      Provision of school grants to 6,399 communities in 83 localities, which were used for the purchase of
       furniture, lab equipment, and other teaching and learning materials (original target: 750; revised target:
       1,500). The number of students benefiting from school grants was 1.46 million. The school grant
       system was initially piloted in 19 localities to ensure that lessons from the early experience would
       inform scaling up strategies. Intermediary support providers were initially used to manage school
       grants and financial flows until sufficient capacity was developed at localities. According to the ICR
       (page 15), the communities still contributed to the schools out of their personal funds once the grants
       ran out, thus demonstrating their strong commitment to education.
      Provision of training to 66,000 teachers in 189 localities on the revised textbook content, practice
       assessments, and related teaching methodologies. Each locality developed at least two master
       trainers in Math and Arabic for grades 1 to 3.



Outcomes

      The number of students with access to the additional classrooms funded by the project was 66,320.
       This fell short of the original target of 80,000.
      The number of project beneficiaries (for construction, school grants, and textbook activities) - defined
       as the number of students enrolled in primary schools in project areas (the number of classrooms
       multiplied by the average class size) - was 6.02 million, an increase from the baseline of 5.05
       million. This surpassed the target of 5.3 million. Of these, 48.0% were female (original target: 48.0%).



Achievement is rated Modest due to partly achieved outcomes in the number of students with access to
classrooms.




                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project (P128644)




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve the learning environment in targeted areas (REVISED OUTCOME TARGETS)

Revised Rationale
Outputs

See outputs reported above under Objective 1.



Outcomes

      The number of students with access to the additional classrooms funded by the project was 66,320.
       This surpassed the revised target of 44,480.
      The number of project beneficiaries (for construction, school grants, and textbook activities) - defined
       as the number of students enrolled in primary schools in project areas (the number of classrooms
       multiplied by the average class size) - was 6.02 million, an increase from the baseline of 5.05 million.
       This essentially achieved the revised target of 6.08 million. Of these, 48.0% were female (original
       target: 48.0%). The average number of girls enrolled in schools that received the school grant
       increased by 3.3 percent over the lifespan of the project (140 in 2015 to 144 in 2018) compared to a
       decrease of 8.6 percent in schools that did not receive grants (129 in 2015 to 118 in 2018).



The ICR (pages 19-20) reported additional outcomes that indicate positive impact:

      The average number of students enrolled in project schools increased 6.7 percent between 2015 and
       2018, compared to a decrease of 6.4 percent in non-project schools in similar localities.
      On average, students in grades 1-4 benefitting from project interventions (new classrooms and school
       grants) had lower repetition rates (5%) in 2018 compared to rates in 2015 (7%).
      The proportion of students in grade 3 who improved from Level 1 (less than 30 words per minute) to
       Level 2 (31-60 words per minute) increased by 5% from 2014 to 2018. In addition, the proportion
       of students who could not read decreased by 7%.



Achievement is rated Substantial due to achievement of outcomes in increasing access, along with evidence
of improved education outcomes.



Revised Rating

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project (P128644)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Increase the availability of textbooks (ORIGINAL OUTCOME TARGETS)

Rationale
The theory of change discussed under Objective 1 is applicable here.



Outputs

      Technical assistance in developing textbook procurement and management capacity, and in revising
       textbook content. As reported in the ICR (page 16), the project faced some challenges in the
       procurement of the second batch of textbooks, in which the supplier failed to provide quality
       assurance testing prior to shipment of the first eight containers. Deviations from the specifications
       (such as binding) were not discovered until the shipment arrived in country.
      Provision of training to 66,000 teachers in 189 localities on the revised textbook content, practice
       assessments, and related teaching methodologies. Each locality developed at least two master
       trainers in Math and Arabic for grades 1 to 3.
      Publicity campaigns were conducted in the daily news to sensitize parents about upcoming book
       deliveries.



Outcomes

      The original indicator on the number of direct beneficiaries with textbooks was dropped due to lack of
       measurability. Instead, the indicator was revised to the number of textbooks purchased and delivered
       to basic schools, which reached 22.0 million (original target: 9.0 million). There were significant cost
       savings realized through procurement of international printing services, which also produced higher
       durability textbooks.
      The textbook policy was adopted in 2017, along with procurement and management strategies that
       were developed in consultation with stakeholders on content, gender, and conflict sensitivity.
      Core subject (Arabic, Math, Science) textbooks for Grades 1-5 were revised, including development of
       teachers guides (target: Grades 1-4).
      The number of project beneficiaries (for construction, school grants, and textbook activities) - defined
       as the number of students enrolled in primary schools in project areas (the number of classrooms
       multiplied by the average class size) - was 6.02 million, an increase from the baseline of 5.05
       million. This surpassed the original target of 5.3 million. Of these, 48.0% were female (original target:
       48.0%).




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project (P128644)



Achievement is rated High due to surpassed targets in the number of textbooks delivered.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Increase the availability of textbooks (REVISED OUTCOME TARGETS)

Revised Rationale
Outputs

See outputs reported above under Objective 2.



Outcomes

        The number of textbooks purchased and delivered to basic schools reached 22.0 million
         (revised target: 13.0 million).
        The textbook policy was adopted in 2017, along with procurement and management strategies that
         were developed in consultation with stakeholders on content, gender and conflict sensitivity.
        Core subject (Arabic, Math, Science) textbooks for Grades 1-5 were revised, including development of
         teachers guides (target: Grades 1-4).
        The number of project beneficiaries (for construction, school grants, and textbook activities) - defined
         as the number of students enrolled in primary schools in project areas (the number of classrooms
         multiplied by the average class size) - was 6.02 million, an increase from the baseline of 5.05
         million. This achieved the revised target of 6.08 million. Of these, 48.0% were female (original target:
         48.0%).



Achievement is rated High due to significant surpassing of targets.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthen education planning and management mechanisms



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project (P128644)




Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was sound, with technical assistance expected to develop capacity of
the federal MoGE to effectively manage the school system, particularly using evidence-based planning
approaches. Capacity building activities focused on the administration of a national learning assessment,
development of a teacher database, and enhancement of the Education Management Information System.
These outputs were critical for evidence-based planning and management such as the use of data to inform
strategic targeting, budget allocations, teacher deployment, and textbook distribution. At the school level, the
results from the national learning assessments were to be used to inform teachers and adjust teaching
pedagogy to match students’ learning levels.



Outputs

      Technical assistance in developing a teacher management system (demographics and qualifications,
       years of experience, career grades, and teaching assignments) and conducting national learning
       assessments (nationally representative sample-based assessments of early grade learning).
      Training on the collection of annual school census data.
      Training on administration of learning assessments to students.
      Preparation of an Education Sector Analysis.



Outcomes

      The teacher management database was completed in 2016 and was able to produce data for policy
       and strategy at the local, state and federal levels. The data was also reported on in the teacher
       management chapter of the Education Sector Analysis (i.e. analyses on the distribution of teachers by
       school and state, the share of assignment by school, locality, and state).
      A system for learning assessment at the primary level was developed. The National Learning
       Assessment (NLA) test was conducted twice (2014/2015 for third grade and 2017/2018 for third and
       sixth grade). The first NLA was administered by a third-party firm, with the second NLA administered
       by the MoGE. The 2015 NLA results were disseminated, including being used to inform targeting of
       the school grants program.
      The annual school census/rapid survey was conducted regularly for the last four academic years of
       the project period (2015/16, 2016/17, 2017/18, 2018/19), collecting data on school type, location,
       student enrollment by grade, teachers, qualifications, school facilities and infrastructure, availability of
       learning materials, and funding contributed by communities.
      A full Education Sector Strategic Plan was developed in October 2013, with a subsequent Plan for
       2018-2022 finalized in December 2018.



Achievement is rated Substantial due to fully achieved outcomes.




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project (P128644)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy under the original targets is rated Substantial due to surpassed outcomes for Objective 2 and fully
                            achieved outcomes for Objective 3, but partly achieved outcomes for Objective 1.

                            Efficacy under the revised targets is also rated Substantial due to surpassed outcomes for Objective 2 and
                            fully achieved outcomes for Objectives 1 and 3.

                            Therefore, the overall Efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The economic analysis at appraisal (Project Paper, Annex 10) identified areas of inefficiencies in the school
   system that the project intended to address and also laid out economic justifications for investing in education.
   There was no project-specific quantitative analysis, i.e. cost-benefit or internal rate of return estimate.

   The ICR did not provide any project-specific quantitative analyses, but it discussed various aspects of project
   implementation efficiencies. There were two project closing date extensions, adding two years to the project
   period, which were necessitated by issues with construction activities. These activities had been initially delayed
   due to project management unit staffing delays, weak procurement capacity, and slow uptake of the community
   empowerment model. Construction costs were higher than expected (due to high levels of inflation, deterioration
   of currency exchange rates, and unanticipated VAT charges to project contracts; also, initially, architectural
   adjustments were made to the construction design (use of more expensive roofing materials, and the use of rain
   water harvesting to provide drinking water in schools, all of which slightly increased costs) requiring additional
   project fund allocations. However, these cost increases were counterbalanced by significant cost savings from
   efficient textbook procurement. Following project restructuring, the project adhered more strictly to construction
   design specifications, used standard grade materials, and discontinued rainwater harvesting. Also, the
   government reimbursed the VAT charges, and the exchange rate improved.

   In addition, the pilot approach for the school grants activity, given the low capacity at the local level, helped to
   ensure that implementation lessons from the initial round of school grants were applied to subsequent rounds to
   ensure effective and efficient scale-up of this activity. The target for number of schools receiving grants was, in
   fact, greatly exceeded by project closing. The ICR (page 21) also reported that the CEM approach "proved to be
   highly successful and cost-effective after the initial learning curve," although the only data provided to verify


                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project (P128644)



cost-effectiveness was that the CEM model led to a cost savings of 12 percent on average compared to the
conventional model (ICR, page 35).

Lastly, textbook production was outsourced internationally, leading to significant cost savings. The textbooks
had an average unit price of US$0.58, compared to the original estimate of US$1.8. Although there were initial
procurement issues with the textbooks, the target for number of textbooks delivered was greatly exceeded.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Project under original targets - Satisfactory

Relevance of the project objectives is rated High. Achievement of the project objectives under original outcome
targets is rated Substantial. Efficiency is rated Substantial.

Project under revised targets - Satisfactory

Relevance of the project objectives is rated High. Achievement of the project objectives under revised
outcome targets is rated Substantial. Efficiency is rated Substantial.



Overall project outcome is therefore Satisfactory, consistent with only minor shortcomings in the project's
preparation and implementation.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project (P128644)



7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to sustaining outcomes is high primarily due to the uncertain political/governance situation, insecure
environment, and volatile economic/fiscal conditions. A new government was recently formed to lead a
transition phase over the next three years, as the country continues to face high inflation, currency
devaluation, and increasing arrears on international debt, with only modest prospects for economic growth. A
follow-up GPE-funded project (Basic Education Support Project, P167169) is under preparation and
will continue many of the same activities including classroom improvements, provision of textbooks, school
grants, teacher training, learning assessments, and the school census. Local capacity to implement the CEM
has been developed, evidenced by its use in non-project localities and other sectors, although sustainability
of newly constructed/rehabilitated classrooms is uncertain due to a lack of maintenance arrangements and
also the risk to natural hazards such as floods. Procurement capacity still needs to be strengthened as well.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At the time of appraisal, the Bank had been engaged in the country's education sector for five years, as
  one of the donor partners supporting development of the sector status report and strategic plan. Given
  this engagement, the Bank took on the supervisory role for the GPE-funded project, applying crisis
  response guidelines under OP/BP 8.0 to address urgent needs in the education sector. Hence the project
  design focused on delivering immediate outputs (i.e. classrooms, textbooks), building on existing
  institutional arrangements, and simplifying monitoring. The project design also recognized weak capacity
  at both the central and local levels: the project was designed to roll out in phases in order to allow the
  project to learn from piloting activities prior to scale-up. The project used alternate approaches
  (conventional procurement methods for construction, independent intermediary for school grants) until
  communities reached sufficient levels of capacity, and it drew project management staff from experienced
  units. The results framework was overall sound, with the M&E design notable for the building-in of
  feedback loops (pilot activities, school census data, learning assessment results).

  However, despite these mitigation measures, construction still faced initial delays, and textbook
  procurement also had initial shortcomings.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project implementation period was marked by significant external pressures, including international
 sanctions and escalating violence. International sanctions were imposed on the Bank of Sudan, which was
 service provider for the Bank, in December 2015, leading to severe cash flow shortages and delayed
 issuance of letters of credit (the project role was eventually taken over by the Bank of Khartoum in June


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project (P128644)



 2016, which allowed the project to move forward). Increased violence and protests in Khartoum, due
 to hikes in fuel prices, and the ongoing conflict in Darfur also led to implementation risks for school
 construction and school grant activities, as well as delayed Bank missions and supervision due to delays in
 receiving visa approvals for Bank staff travel to Sudan.

 Project delays were also caused by weak capacity, which the Bank team addressed by providing additional
 support to the project management unit, clustering communities for fiduciary agreements, and improved
 training modules for the communities. The CEM approach was slow to take hold, but following the initial
 learning curve, it "proved to be a highly effective approach that was not only implemented widely in
 education but also expanded to other sectors such as health." Project restructurings were used
 effectively to maintain realism of the results framework and targets, while also reallocating funds to
 ensure achievement of outcomes. The ICR (page 33) noted that "many of the aide memoires provided
 useful action plans and checklists of what needed to be done and by when to keep the project on target,
 and to show what had been completed." M&E implementation was effective, particularly notable given the
 fragile context. The ICR (page 32) noted there were some shortcomings in safeguards monitoring: "quality
 of supervision with respect to environmental safeguards dipped a bit during implementation due to
 inconsistent monitoring and reporting by the Client, as well as spotty supervision reporting from the World
 Bank team." Overall safeguards performance, however, was reported by the ICR (page 32) as satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was overall clear and straightforward, focused on key immediate outputs and
 intermediate outcomes (though lacking an indicator for teacher training) given the emergency context, while
 also laying the groundwork for strengthened capacity to improve learning outcomes. The M&E design
 included activities with a longer term view, namely setting up systems to measure learning outcomes and to
 better manage the education sector. The project design also built in feedback loops to inform
 implementation - for example, rolling out of several activities in phases in order to allow the project to learn
 from piloting activities before scaling up, school census data to inform school grants and teacher
 deployment, and learning assessment results to inform teaching methodology - and included recruitment of
 an independent monitoring agent to conduct random spot checks to physically verify delivery of outputs.



b. M&E Implementation
  Although the results framework intentionally had modest targets, given the emergency context, the
  groundwork was laid to be able to measure and report on additional outcomes to demonstrate impact (i.e.
  progress on learning outcomes). Project restructurings were used to refine the results framework, for

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project (P128644)



  example modifying the wording of key indicators for more precision and adjusting targets for more
  realism. The project implementation unit also hired a senior M&E specialist in November 2014 to support
  development of an M&E plan and to ensure regular monitoring, data collection, and reporting to track
  activity progress.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project team regularly reviewed the M&E data to track whether the project was progressing and to
  make adjustments to the results framework, design, implementation arrangements, and funding
  allocations. More specifically, M&E findings were used to: address shortcomings in the textbook
  development and procurement process; inform how the school grants program should be scaled up;
  identify poor performing schools for the school grants program; and use learning outcome information to
  guide policies and program implementation. The project also launched and institutionalized a rapid
  survey data collection methodology using tablets that eventually replaced the Education Management
  Information System as the source of data on schools (for example, identifying school sites for
  construction, candidates for the school grants program, and textbook distribution). Also, data from the
  teacher management database was used to prioritize the areas most in need of in-service and pre-
  service training.

  Overall, M&E arrangements enabled assessment of project performance, particularly notable in
  the fragile context.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project, due to school construction. An
   Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework, required under OP/BP 8.00, was
   prepared accordingly. The ICR (page 32) reported that supervision with respect to environmental
   safeguards "dipped a bit during implementation due to inconsistent monitoring and reporting by the Client,
   as well as spotty supervision reporting from the World Bank team." However, by the end of the project
   period, there was closer attention given to safeguards issues, and on-the-ground environmental and social
   impact was reported as minimal.

   The project also triggered safeguard policies on Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). There was no land acquisition. Instead, the project used existing school foot
   prints in alignment with ecological and cultural needs.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project (P128644)



   Financial management: Initial weaknesses in fiduciary performance included delays in submission of the
   first Interim Financial Report (IFR, which was returned due to errors and issues), annual work plan, and
   training program; lack of an approved 2013 budget; delayed authorization of the 2014 budget; delays in
   implementing the computerized accounting system and the audit plan with the national audit chamber;
   and inefficiencies in the financial management information system. However, financial management
   performance improved over the course of the project period, through implementing a "skills transfer
   strategy." Subsequent financial management reviews noted that there was "reasonable assurance that the
   World Bank proceeds were used for the intended purposes and that the project was performing budget
   monitoring on grant funds, counterpart funds and the incentive funds accumulating from the sale of foreign
   currency" (ICR, page 31). IFRs, audit reports, and withdrawal applications were also submitted in a timely
   manner by the close of the project period. Internal controls were strengthened through staffing actions,
   such as the secondment of accountants in the finance department and the assignment of a resident
   Internal Auditor. The ICR did not report on whether there were any qualifications in audits.

   Procurement: The project's procurement design included multiple methods, International Competitive
   Bidding, National Competitive Bidding, and simplified procurement methods for local competitive bidding
   and community contracting. However, the project faced some challenges early in the procurement
   process concerning the second batch of textbooks. The textbook supplier had failed to provide quality
   assurance testing prior to shipment of the first eight containers (per the contractual agreement with the
   printing company), and upon arrival in-country, it was determined that the books did not meet the quality
   criteria for triple binding. The company reimbursed the funds, but this led to some delays. However, the
   project team revised the procurement process moving forward and split the letter of guarantees for later
   batches so that payments were made by batch instead of all at once. The project team also carried out
   annual Procurement Post Reviews to ensure that all procurement activities were in accordance with Bank
   guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Expansion of the Community Empowerment Model (CEM): The project strengthened the capacity of local
   communities to implement the procurement and management of construction of their classrooms and
   schools. The approach was deemed successful and subsequently used in other non-project localities and
   sectors. Specifically, the CEM approach was used to build classrooms and schools in Aldaba and
   Almafaza, as well as to construct a health center in Jabrat Alshikh.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory             Satisfactory


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project (P128644)



Quality of M&E                   Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn by the ICR, adapted by IEG:

        The Community Empowerment Model (CEM) for school construction can be effective in
         building local ownership, sustainability, and capacity, given the right design elements. In the
         case of this project, the CEM approach included community mobilization, training, and
         sequencing of construction agreements (two successive contracts for one-block classrooms
         rather than one contract for a two-block classroom) to ensure learning-by-doing, and radio
         advertising to attract small-size local contractors.
        Communications campaigns can help improve monitoring of textbook distribution and
         accountability. In the case of this project, publicity campaigns were launched to prepare for
         the arrival of the books, letters were sent to the State-level Ministries of Education with the
         itemized number of books per school, advertisements were taken out in national newspapers
         to alert parents to the upcoming deliveries, and a paper trail of the distribution process was
         created from states to localities to administrative units to schools to enhance accountability.
        Rapid results surveys can be effective and cost-efficient in a low capacity context, as a
         supplement to more in-depth, sophisticated data collection for an education management
         information system. In the case of this project, responses to simple questionnaires were
         submitted electronically via tablets, thereby increasing the timeliness and quality of data
         collection to inform project decisions.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was commendable for strong quality of evidence and results-orientation. The analysis of evidence
was particularly notable for going beyond the official results framework, providing additional data on outcomes
(i.e. long-term data on learning outcomes, comparison of project vs. non-project schools). Lessons were
specific and informative for similar project approaches in fragile contexts. However, the Efficiency section would
have been strengthened with an economic rate of return estimate. Also, the ICR did not report on whether there
were any qualifications to financial audits.




                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project (P128644)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                  Page 17 of 17
