     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Education RBF Project (P163608)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022048

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P163608                                    Ethiopia Education RBF Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Ethiopia                                   Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A5268                                   30-Jun-2019                                        21,801,212.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Jun-2017                                30-Jun-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            30,000,000.00                                  30,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             30,000,000.00                                  21,801,212.00

 Actual                                         21,801,212.00                                  21,801,212.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Behrens                   IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Grant Agreement (page 6) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, pages 14-15), the
   project objective was as follows:




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Education RBF Project (P163608)



         To contribute to improvement of learning conditions in primary schools in targeted regions
          including in pre-primary classes.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Improving Learning Conditions in Primary Schools in Targeted Regions (Appraisal: US$ 10.0 million;
   Actual: US$ 8.4 million): This component aimed to test a comprehensive intervention model in the Afar
   region, which had one of the highest shares of low-performing primary schools in the country, according to
   2016-17 school-level inspection data. The project was to support upgrades in 80 of the low-performing
   schools, based on their School Improvement Plans. This component was also to support development of a
   new early childhood education (ECE) curriculum package for pre-primary classes ("O-classes") and training
   of pre-primary teachers in the Benishangul-Gumuz and Gambella regions, which were selected based on
   strong engagement in the design and implementation of ECE services.



   2. Strengthening Equity and Inclusion in Education (Appraisal: US$ 10.0 million; Actual: US$ 8.4 million):
   This component aimed to increase equity with regards to gender and to children with special needs. For the
   former, this entailed increasing the number of female school principals, as a means of demonstrating an
   equitable education profession and gender inclusive system. Activities included prioritization of women
   applicants for school leadership training and deployment for new openings of school principals. Regarding
   inclusive education, the project was to provide a financing mechanism to support special needs students
   through per capita school grants, for which the regions would need to report on the utilization of the grants.



   3. Improving Internal Efficiency of Primary Schools in SNNP Region (Appraisal: US$ 10.0 million; Actual:
   US$ 5.0 million): This component aimed to reduce the Grade 1 dropout rate in the Southern Nations,
   Nationalities, and Peoples Region (SNNPR), which had the highest drop out rate. Activities to improve
   attendance and reduce drop outs included: sensitization of communities on the importance of attendance in
   the early years, teacher training, provision of textbooks, and improved monitoring mechanisms.



   An overarching purpose for all components was to test new approaches and learn lessons to inform the
   national scale-up of these activities. The project design also featured the first ever results-based financing
   modality in the education sector in the country, under which disbursements were linked to the achievement
   of pre-agreed results.




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Education RBF Project (P163608)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

         The appraised project cost was US$ 30.0 million and the actual project cost was US$ 21.8 million.
           Due to the disbursement-linked approach, shortfalls in achieving agreed targets at the time of
           verification meant that disbursements were not released.



   Financing

         The project was financed entirely by a Global Partnership for Education (GPE) grant of US$ 30.0
           million, of which US$ 21.8 million. The remaining undisbursed amount was in the process of being
           cancelled at the time of ICR preparation. Financing was initially envisioned as part of the GPE-
           financed flagship $100 million Education Sector Program Implementation Grant (Additional
           Financing to the General Education Quality Improvement Project, GEQIP-II); this project was
           eventually broken off as a separate project in keeping with GPE's requirement for 30% of funding to
           be in the form of a variable grant aimed at the achievement of stretch targets to improve education
           efficiency, equity, and quality.



   Borrower contribution

         There was no planned Borrower contribution.



   Dates

         The project was approved in June 2017 and closed in June 2019 as planned.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Ethiopia is a large, geographically and ethnically diverse country which, despite significant economic growth
in recent decades, remains among the poorest countries in the world. It had made significant progress in
meeting the Millennium Development Goals with regards to primary school enrollment, child mortality, and
access to clean water. It now strives to achieve lower middle income country status, the attainment of which
will depend on accelerated human capital development.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Ethiopia Education RBF Project (P163608)



               The government's Education Sector Plan V (2016-2020) aimed to improve quality education equitably
               across all levels, in support of the goal to achieve middle income status. The government's share of budget
               allocated to education had been around 20 percent, with a recent expansion of the national school system
               increasing access to school for many. The focus then shifted to improving learning and completion rates,
               with key areas identified as curriculum development, teacher and school leader development, school
               improvement, system management, use of information technology, and program planning and evaluation.
               Quality of schools, in terms of school inputs, processes and outcomes, is variable across regions, with the
               Afar region having by far the highest percentage of below-standard primary schools. Quality has also been
               negatively impacted by the lack of training for pre-primary education service delivery and low enrollment
               rates for children with special needs. Efficiency of the school system, due to high level of dropouts, and
               readiness for school through pre-primary programs, were also key areas identified for improvement.



               These focus areas were also consistent with those identified in the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy
               (FY18-22), which was in place at the time of appraisal and also at completion. Building resilience and
               inclusiveness was a key focus area, with improved basic education learning outcomes identified as a key
               objective and scores on proficiency tests, completion rates, dropout rates, and proportion of qualified
               teachers as indicators. Given the Bank's significant engagement in the education sector in recent decades,
               the project objectives were also appropriately challenging to accelerate improvements in these areas of
               education quality.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To contribute to improvement in learning conditions in primary schools in targeted areas

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was sound, with the key activities selected in response to an assessment of the most
                             urgent needs in the most vulnerable regions of the country. The main outputs included development of school
                             improvement plans to upgrade learning materials and school facilities, implementation of a new ECE
                             curriculum, recruitment and training of female school leaders, supplemental grants to schools for children with
                             special needs, teacher training, and communications campaigns on the importance of school
                             attendance. These outputs were likely to lead to the intended outcomes of improved learning conditions in
                             targeted areas, including in pre-primary classes. Most of these activities were implemented as pilot
                             interventions, in order to test new approaches prior to scaling up nationwide. A results-based approach, with



                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ethiopia Education RBF Project (P163608)



ambitious targets, was also employed to further incentivize the government on results and performance in
improving efficiency, equity, and quality.



Outputs



Afar region

      Analysis of school-level inspection reports and support to 80 low-performing schools to develop
       School Improvement Plans (including training of school officers and local education office staff on
       inspections and improvement plans). Support to the 80 schools included provision of teaching and
       learning materials, blackboards, desks, and water tanks.



Benishangul-Gumuz and Gambella regions

      Development of O-class curriculum package (including child-friendly, play-based focus) and provision
       of learning materials and training in local languages to O-class teachers.



SNNPR

      Development of mechanism to monitor dropouts and activities to mitigate dropouts, including:
       sensitizing communities on the importance of student participation/attendance in early years of
       schooling, school feeding, and strengthening the links between the school improvement plans and the
       inspectorate system to ensure focus on improved school attendance/completion.



All regions

      Recruitment and training of female school leaders.
      Update of special needs school grant guidelines.



Outcomes

      The share of low performing primary schools ("Level 1") in Afar region decreased from 46.5% in
       2015/16 (179 out of 385 schools) to 31.9% (123 out of 385 schools) in 2017/18. This fell short of the
       target of 25.7% (70% of the target achieved). 56 primary schools had upgraded to "Level 2" schools
       (compliance with 50% or more of standards) and another 38 schools were close to the
       threshold (compliance with 45-49% of standards) and were "expected to be upgraded in the next few

                                                                                                 Page 5 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Ethiopia Education RBF Project (P163608)



    years" (ICR, page 11). Taking into account these latter 38 schools that were nearly upgraded to Level
    2 schools, the share of low performing schools would be 24.4%.

  In Benishangul-Gumuz, 489 O-class teachers were trained, surpassing the target of 447. In Gambella,
    218 O-class teachers were trained, surpassing the target of 160. More than 90% of the O-classes in
    these two regions were using the newly developed curriculum.

  2,124 females were appointed as primary school principals or vice-principals during the project period,
    falling short of the target of 3,060 (69% of target achieved). The total number of female school
    principals or vice-principals in the country reached 5,274, falling short of the target of 6,210 (85% of
    target achieved). The shortfall was attributed to several factors, including stipulations in the
    Implementation Manual that the trained females should be assigned to leadership positions either in
    the same or nearby schools, which was not always possible given available positions; trainees were
    not always willing to relocate from their homes; Ethiopia’s civil service regulations required that
    vacancies in public sector positions be open to competition, that is by both males and females; some
    regions in which there had never been women school leaders were resistant to hiring female leaders
    due to cultural influences; and some experienced trainees preferred continuing their work as teachers.
    Further, the increased work hours required for school leaders did not always include a commensurate
    increase in salary. Findings from the qualitative analysis of the impact of female school principals on
    girls' experience included the following focus group discussion comments (ICR, page 14): female
    school leaders empower girls, support their self-confidence, and motivate them to work harder and
    aspire for a better future; girls more openly discuss their problems with female school leaders than
    with male leaders; girls' participation in extracurricular activities such as girls’ clubs, remedial classes,
    and other school activities increases with the assignment of a female principal or deputy principal;
    female leaders tend to advise girls to continue their schooling and play a role in the prevention of
    gender-based violence and early marriage. No specific data or methodology for the focus group
    discussion are reported in the ICR.

  All regions submitted detailed reports on the utilization of the 4% supplemental school grants to
   support children with special needs. Grants were used to hire medical experts to assess hearing and
   visual impairment levels and provide learning materials to the students with special needs. 46% of
   principals responded that the program is "very effective" and 36% "somewhat effective." 70% of
   respondents reported that the received support made it easier for them to meet the needs of students
   with certain disabilities. Although regional bureaus also noted that the amount allocated was too little
   to sufficiently cover costs, the financing was important in raising awareness for special educational
   needs and helped regions implement different strategies to strengthen their inclusive education
   programs.
  The Grade 1 dropout rate in SNNPR decreased from 25.2% in 2014/15 to 16.6% in 2017/18. This fell
   short of the target of 13.0% (70% of target achieved). This shortfall was in part due to social unrest
   that led to the closure of schools and the displacement of people and also to a deterioration in the
   reliability of data because of difficulties in delivering updated data. The decline in dropout is
   nonetheless favorable compared to the national trend in dropout rates, which decreased at a slower
   rate from 21.4% in 2014/15 to 19.5% in 2017/18.




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Ethiopia Education RBF Project (P163608)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Achievement is rated Substantial based on fully achieved outcomes in improving learning conditions in pre-
                            primary classes and for children with special needs, and mostly achieved outcomes in the reduced share of
                            low-performing schools in Afar, number of female school leaders appointed nationwide, and reduced Grade 1
                            dropout rate in SNNPR.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The economic analysis at appraisal (PAD, Annex 4) discussed the expected economic impact of the project,
   including the improved learning environment leading to higher skills of students and therefore higher future
   productivity and earnings. A cost-benefit analysis was also presented, with benefits quantified as
   increased earnings. The analysis covered only one of the five results areas - reduced Grade 1 drop out rate in
   SNNPR - for which disbursements were appraised at US$10.0 million, or 33.3%, of the project costs. The
   benefits were calculated based on the number of additional students who would be retained in the education
   system and progress to Grade 2, and then those students who would graduate from primary or secondary
   education. The costs were calculated as total project cost of $30.0 million (although project costs for this results
   area were for Component 3 only, or US$10.0 million), plus costs of additional teachers hired to maintain existing
   student-teacher ratio, and cost of per capital school grants. The estimated benefit-to-cost ratio ranged from 2.8 -
   3.4; the net present value ranged from US$ 213.1 million - US$ 318.6 million; the internal rate of return ranged
   from 13.7% - 15.7%. The analysis noted that additional non-quantifiable positive externalities would further
   increase benefits, such as lower crime rates, better health outcomes, higher tax receipts, and increased
   economic growth.



   The economic analysis at completion (ICR, Annex 4) discussed the internal inefficiency of the education system
   due to high dropout rates and the potential economic gains through investing in education, particularly pre-
   primary education. The cost-benefit analysis, similar to the approach taken in the PAD, only covered one of
   five results areas - reduced Grade 1 dropout rate in SNNPR - and estimated benefits based on the number of
   additional students who were retained in the education system and progressed to Grade 2, the students who
   graduate from primary and secondary education, and higher expected earnings. The costs are actual project
   costs of US$ 21.8 million (although project costs for this results area were for Component 3 only, or US$5.0
   million), primary and secondary education public expenditures, cost of additional teachers, and per capita school

                                                                                                                          Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ethiopia Education RBF Project (P163608)



grants. However, the updated benefit-cost ratio was lower than appraised because of shortfalls
in reaching disbursement-linked indicator (DLI) targets during the second year of project, due to ethnic clashes,
regional instability, drought, and insufficient regional budgets for the school feeding program. According to the
updated analysis, the benefit-to-cost ratio was 2.5; the net present value was US$ 183.2 million;and the internal
rate of return was 12.1%. There were no data on benefits from the remaining four results areas, although it was
presumed that there would be non-quantifiable benefits due to improved learning outcomes: higher lifetime
earnings and increased economic growth, as well as positive externalities from more inclusive education (girls
and children with special needs).



There were some implementation inefficiencies, despite effective harmonization of donor support and project
coordination. There were delays in procurement of inputs for upgrading schools in the Afar region and issues
with data collection, which resulted in reporting delays and thus delayed disbursement of grants. There was also
unrest in the SNNPR which led to school closings. US$21.8 million of the grant was disbursed, while the
remaining US$ 8.2 million remained undisbursed due to shortfalls in meeting DLI conditions for upgrading
schools in Afar, appointment of female school leaders, and reduction in the Grade 1 dropout rate in SNNPR.



Efficiency is rated Modest based on lower than appraised cost-benefit ratio/internal rate of return/net present
value, also some implementation inefficiencies.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 13.70
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              12.10
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the project objective is rated High based on strong alignment with country conditions and Bank
strategy. Efficacy is rated Substantial based on fully and mostly achieved outcomes/indicators to improve
learning conditions in primary schools in targeted areas. Efficiency is rated Modest based on lower than

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ethiopia Education RBF Project (P163608)



appraised cost-benefit ratio/internal rate of return/net present value, and also some implementation
inefficiencies. These ratings indicate moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation,
leading to an Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment to improving learning conditions in primary schools, particularly for hard-to-reach
regions and populations, remains strong, as reflected by the priorities identified in the next Education Sector
Development Plan VI and the follow-on GEQIP-E project (P163050) for US$ 2.2 billion. Interventions
supported by the sector plan and the Bank project build on those implemented by this project, including: the
introduction of a Quality Enhancement and Assurance Program for the O-class program; the provision of
supplementary school grants (in place of the 4% budget top-up) to transform 687 cluster center schools to
inclusive education resource centers; national level school-based monitoring of student
attendance; incentives for schools to improve performance on two specific internal efficiency indicators (the
ratio of grade 2 enrollment to grade 1 enrollment and increase in survival rates to grade
5); targeting communications to raise awareness of issues related to grade repetition and readmission,
absenteeism, and dropout; and expansion of the program for training female teachers for leadership
positions. However, a significant risk remains due to ethnic conflicts and violence.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project objective and theory of change were highly relevant to country conditions and the sector
  agenda. Quality-at-entry was strong as project preparation was based on the Bank's prior and ongoing
  engagement in the education sector (Education Sector Development Plans, General Education Quality
  Improvement Project I (P106855) and II (P129828)) and effective coordination with donors. This project,
  and the sister GPE operation (Additional Financing for the GEQIP-II), moved the sector agenda forward
  on quality issues by focusing on low quality of schools in disadvantaged areas, low quality of pre-primary
  programs, inequity with regards to gender and children with special needs, and high dropout rates. This
  project also introduced new approaches to accelerate quality improvements, including pilot testing of new
  interventions in disadvantaged areas; establishing the first results-based financing modality in the
  education sector, in which disbursements were linked to the achievement of agreed results; and setting
  "stretch" targets to accelerate quality improvements. The project design therefore included measures to
  learn from pilot interventions in a timely manner to inform the sector agenda. The ICR (page 27) noted
  that the ambitious "stretch" targets were required by GPE, particularly with a very short implementation
  period; however, the Bank made a decision to proceed with this results framework "given the associated
  external financing and the fact that these could be seen as incentivizing achievement of results."



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Education RBF Project (P163608)




  Lessons learned from previous results-based operations were applied, including the need for strong M&E
  arrangements and precise protocols (technical aspects of the verification exercise) to determine the
  achievement of DLIs, agreed and endorsed up front to ensure transparency. The risk assessment
  identified the overall risk as "Moderate," although more substantial risks were identified as political and
  governance issues, technical design of the project, and fiduciary risks. Capacity building support was
  included to address the latter two risks. The M&E design was overall sound with a clear results chain and
  monitoring arrangements and third party verification (albeit with some gaps in capacity at the
  decentralized level).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Project supervision benefited from continuity in the project coordination unit, which helped ensure smooth
 implementation and effective coordination with other sector operations. Fiduciary and M&E functions were
 effectively carried out, although given the critical importance of project monitoring to trigger disbursements,
 the M&E arrangements were heavily reliant on decentralized entities (which needed fundamental change in
 mindset from the traditional input-based financing to results-based financing for which quality and
 timely data were needed) and volatile regions (in which disruptions in services and data collection
 were a significant risk). DLI targets were ambitious, in line with GPE's variable grant model, with the ICR
 (page 27) noting that "the implementation period was too short in which to achieve them." The Bank team
 provided intensive support to the third party verification agent, but issues with timeliness of reporting and
 quality of data remained throughout the project period.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The key project indicators were specific and monitorable, included baseline and target data, and
 were clearly linked to each of the key activities. The DLIs, which were not directly measuring results but
 used to trigger disbursements, had detailed protocols to ensure transparency and accuracy. The Central
 Statistical Agency, which was designated as the third party verification agent for DLIs, was provided with
 detailed instructions for the technical aspects of verification. Project monitoring arrangements were


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Education RBF Project (P163608)



 clear, with regional education bureaus reporting on data on implementation progress. Given the pilot nature
 of several of the key activities, evaluative activities were included in the M&E design to draw lessons.



b. M&E Implementation
  The third party verification agent, with intensive support from the Bank team, was able to provide reports
  on DLIs, albeit with frequent delays. As noted in the ICR, this was the first results-based financing
  operation in the education sector, and there was a steep learning curve for both the Ministry of Education
  and the verification agent. Data quality was a concern, mainly due to manual data collection and entry at
  the local education bureau and school level, thereby delaying data reporting to the regional education
  bureaus. Social unrest in some regions also contributed to data reporting challenges.



c. M&E Utilization
  The monitoring data was used to trigger project disbursements, as well as to identify areas that needed
  improvement. The ICR cited numerous lessons learned from the pilot interventions to inform future
  operations, specifically GEQIP-E, including the following: ensuring quality of school improvement plans;
  importance of timely delivery of funds for school improvement plans; adapting pre-primary curriculum
  into local languages including finding qualified translators; need to inform school leaders on pre-primary
  programs to ensure integration into school budget, programming, etc,; modification of top-up
  supplemental budget for children with special needs into supplemental grants; and implementation
  of school-based monitoring system to track dropout rates.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "C" project. No safeguard policies were triggered.



   However, a social assessment was conducted for the parallel GEQIP-II project, and the conclusions and
   recommendations from that assessment were consistent with this project. These included: providing O-
   Class education in local languages in pastoral and agro-pastoral areas; providing support to children with
   special needs, and incentivizing girls’ education through increased appointment of female school principals.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Education RBF Project (P163608)



   Financial management: The project's financial management arrangements relied on the country’s existing
   public financial management system for the budget process, classification system, and compliance with
   financial regulations, and for expenditure management and control. Four financial management reviews
   were conducted over the project period. The audit report for the Ministry of Education as a whole was
   received on May 6, 2019, with a month delay, and contained an adverse audit opinion on the ministry's
   financial statements due to weak documentation of several expenditures and internal control, weak
   monitoring of advance and payable balances, and unsupported variation orders on various constructions.
   However, the audit findings related mostly to construction of universities that were outside the scope of this
   project. The Bank requested an update on the audit by June 30, 2019, and as a result of the review,
   excluded questioned expenditures from the project’s eligible expenditure plan.



   Procurement: As the project was a results-based financing project disbursing on the basis of eligible
   expenditure plans covering mostly recurrent expenditures, there was limited procurement of goods. Any
   procurement under the project was largely carried out under the sister operation GEQIP-II.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                 Quality of Supervision is rated
                                                                                 Moderately Satisfactory due to
                                                                                 difficulties in ensuring mitigation
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    of issues with timeliness of
                                                                                 reporting and quality of data,
                                                                                 given weak regional capacity
                                                                                 and volatility.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   High


12. Lessons



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Ethiopia Education RBF Project (P163608)



Lessons drawn by the ICR, adapted by IEG:



        A project involving pilot interventions can draw upon synergies with broader projects
         supporting sector programs. In the case of this project, the parent operations provided
         implementation support such as project coordination, procurement, and monitoring, while this
         operation took a more ambitious approach in its innovative design, financing modality, and
         stretch targets. Important lessons were learned from the pilot interventions, despite some
         shortcomings in project performance, that could then be applied to the sector program.
        Clearly defined indicators and protocols for verifying the meeting of targets, along with
         intensive technical support, are essential elements of a successful results-based financing
         operation. In the case of this project, significant support was provided by the Bank to change
         the client's mindset from an input-based to results-based approach, as well as to implement
         the precise process for verifying achievement of targets. Also, specific timetables for meeting
         DLIs were a constraint to accessing full financing.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR articulated a clear theory of change for each discrete area of support, emphasizing the distinct,
differing nature of each intervention implemented in different regions with varying aims. The ICR was overall
consistent with guidelines. The quality of evidence and analysis was strong; of note, given the pilot nature of
several interventions and the "stretch" nature of several targets, the ICR presented additional evidence
beyond reporting on key project indicators and targets to provide a more comprehensive picture of project
achievements. Lessons were specific, and thus informative given the innovative features of this project. The
ICR was particularly notable in analyzing each pilot intervention and how the learning was applied.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Ethiopia Education RBF Project (P163608)




                                                                        Page 14 of 14
