     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022007

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P127543                                      MR-Local Government Development Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Mauritania                                   Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52720,IDA-H8610                          30-Jun-2019                                            23,641,343.23

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Jun-2013                                  30-Jun-2019

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             25,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                              25,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                          23,641,343.23                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero         Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p.7) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 12),
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to strengthen the institutional performance of Mauritania's
   targeted local governments in order to improve their capacity to deliver services."

   This review will assess the following objectives:

           to strengthen the institutional performance of Mauritania's targeted local governments

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



         to improve the capacity of Mauritania's targeted local governments to deliver services.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Conditional Performance Grants for Local Governments (US$70 million at appraisal with US$42
   million from the Government, US$15 million from IDA, and US$13 million from the EU; actual disbursement
   was US$50 million with US$35 million from the Government and US$15 million from IDA). This component
   financed performance based grants to 100 local governments. These local governments were from 10 of
   the 13 regions of the country and included 32 urban department capitals, and 68 rural local governments.
   These local governments were covered under the Government's National Integrated Program for
   Decentralization, Local Development, and Employment (or Program National Intégré pour la
   Décentralisation, le Développement et l’Emploi or PNIDDLE). Financing was divided into a basic grant and
   a performance grant. The grants were used for construction, maintenance, and supplies for local roads,
   primary school buildings, clinics and maternal and child health facilities, water supply and public lighting,
   urban transport, health and education, fire prevention, sanitation, garbage collection, markets, abattoirs,
   sports and cultural facilities, parks and gardens, cemeteries, assistance to the poor and development and
   management of areas granted by the central to the local government.

   2. Targeted Capacity Support to Targeted Local Governments, Deconcentrated and Central
   Institutions and Agencies (US$19 million at appraisal with US$4 million from the Government, US$6
   million from IDA, and US$9 million from the EU; actual disbursement was US$14 million with US$4 million
   from the Government, US$7 million from IDA and US$3 million from the EU). This component financed
   capacity building training and technical assistance for the 100 participating local governments, and
   institutional support to national, regional, and deconcentrated agencies. This component financed
   customized training in core aspect of local government management such as local government regulations
   and laws, financial management, procurement, planning and budgeting, own source revenue management,
   and sustainable natural resources management. Training was delivered to staff coming from different levels
   who met minimum qualifications. This component also financed mobile teams of consulting firms staffed
   with key personnel to provide rapid response or just-in-time on the job training and assistance. The capacity
   support to national agencies and their decentralized offices at the regional and department levels, including
   the department based treasury offices of the Ministry of Finance funded training and technical assistance to
   strengthen their capacity to operate the performance grant program; monitor the local government system
   and the performance of each local government; regulate the decentralization operating framework; develop
   and modify legislation, as appropriate; and identify and deliver support to local governments where needed.
   Activities financed included regular coordination on planning and budgeting; regular monitoring visits to
   track progress and submit reports to the national level, and technical support to local governments as they
   implement subprojects. With regard to supporting the Ministry of Finance's treasury offices at the
   department level, activities such as oversight in timely submission of completed local government financial
   reports to the national level and supporting the quality of local government financial reporting.



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



   3. Project Management Support and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$11.3 million at appraisal with
   US$6 million from the Government, US$4 million from IDA, and US$3 million from the EU; actual
   disbursement was US$6 million with US$2 million from the Government, US$3 million from IDA and US$1
   million from the EU). This component financed overall program management and oversight of project
   implementation. Among the activities financed were biannual audits of the quality of the performance
   assessment; a baseline, mid-term, and end of project satisfaction survey of residents from participating local
   governments; an assessment of the effective use of mobile teams at mid term; and assessment of the
   effective use of investment resources by participating local governments at mid term and end of project.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The total project cost was US$102 million. Disbursements reached US$70 million, with the
   balance attributable to changes made to the financing scheme (see below).

   Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) financed this investment financing project with
   both an IDA grant and IDA credit. The European Commission pledged US$25 million and disbursed US$4
   million, after reducing its commitment by EUR16 million (US$21 million equivalent). Total project financing
   was reduced from the original US$102 million to US$70 million at closing. At appraisal, the European
   Commission agreed to parallel finance the project with the Bank managing its contribution. The EU global
   partnership framework, however, was updated just before the legal agreement was signed and the EU had
   to look for local actors to manage their contribution, in accordance with the new framework. The EU
   requested Bank participation a month before the EU financing expired. After preparing the legal
   documentation, another EU administrative condition for the Government could not be met. The financing did
   not materialize beyond the US$3 million under component 2 and US$1 million under project management
   (ICR, footnote 4).

   Borrower Contribution: The government committed US$52 million and disbursed US$41 million. The
   government disbursed US$11 million less than its original commitment due to exchange rate fluctuations
   since the original commitment was in local currency (ICR, paragraph 23 and Table 1).

   Dates: The project was approved on June 18, 2013 and became effective on February 24, 2014. The Mid
   Term Review was conducted on November 7, 2016. The project closed as originally scheduled, on June 30,
   2019. There was one restructuring, on April 10, 2017, to reallocate resources among disbursement
   categories. After the EU withdrew its parallel financing, the team decided not to restructure to request
   additional financing because of limited local absorption capacity (see Section 5 Efficiency, and Section 8,
   Assessment of Bank Performance, subsection (b)Quality of Supervision).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



               The PDO was highly relevant to the country's key national policy documents and strategies, which
               highlighted the importance of its decentralization agenda. One evidence of the importance the government
               placed on the PDO was its strong ownership of the project, contributing over half of the overall project cost.
               In addition, the PDO was relevant to the country's Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Shared Prosperity
               (Stratégie Nationale de Croissance Accélérée et de Prospérité Partagée or SCAPP) for 2016 ‐2030, which
               emphasized a strengthened decentralization agenda for better access to basic services and the efficient
               use of public resources. The new President, elected in 2019, emphasized local development as one of his
               priorities and renewed government engagement on decentralization.

               In addition, the PDO contributed to strengthening the Sahel Alliance’s commitment to decentralization as a
               means to deliver multi‐sectoral infrastructure and services in areas of the country - the South and East of
               Mauritania - where the rate of poverty and the level of vulnerability were most pronounced. The Sahel
               Alliance is a donor-led organization launched in July 2017 by France, Germany, the European Union, the
               World Bank, the African Development Bank and the United Nations Development Program. Italy, Spain, the
               United Kingdom and Luxembourg later joined the Alliance. The following form the Sahel member countries -
               Mauritania, Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso and Chad(ICR, footnote 5)

               The PDO was also highly relevant to the Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Mauritania for
               2018 - 2023. The CPF consisted of three strategic pillars: (i) Promote Economic Transition for Diversified
               and Resilient Growth; (ii) Build Human Capital for Inclusive Growth] and (ii) Strengthening Economic
               Governance and Private Sector‐Led Growth. The PDO supported pillars 1 and 2. Under pillar 1, priority was
               to “promote the development of productive cities and adjacent territories in the context of decentralization”
               through the devolution of administrative competencies, and the transfer of financing to local
               institutions. Under pillar 2 the PDO was relevant to improving the socio‐economic environment of
               intermediary cities for increased access to basic services.

               However, while there was clear alignment between the project's development objectives and the country
               and World Bank strategies, the relevance of the objectives was pitched at a level that did not adequately
               reflect a potential solution to a development problem. Focusing on a "strengthened institutional
               performance" and "improved capacity" alone was not outcome focused and did not help in understanding
               what development results were expected as a consequence of the project, whether those results were
               improved service delivery that would positively affect community livelihoods. These may be longer term
               targets but tracking them and identifying them was an important aspect of a successful development
               operation. The PDO only captured strengthened institutional performance and improved capacity and did
               not capture improved service delivery although the project did report on that.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                                                                                                                        Page 4 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)




Objective
• to strengthen the institutional performance of Mauritania's targeted local governments

Rationale
Theory of Change: Incentives were used to improve local government capacity to deliver its services to
constituents. These incentives took the form of achieving local government performance scores to become
eligible for grants that supported local government Infrastructure investments and services. One hundred
urban and rural local governments from 10 of the 13 regions that were in the government's PNIDDLE program
participated in this project. Local governments were eligible to receive grants after signing Grant Participation
Agreements and meeting the following minimum conditions: (i) the functioning of the local government and its
council, and (ii) having the minimum staff. Each local government received a score following annual
independent Performance Assessments that determined further eligibility to qualify for an additional
conditional performance grant for the coming budget year. The score was based on the assessment of the
local government's performance in (i) planning and budgeting; (ii) organization and human resources; (iii)
financial management and revenue collection; (iv) procurement management; (v) asset management and
maintenance; and (vi) transparency and accountability. Capacity building technical assistance was then
customized according to each local government annual performance assessment. Inputs such as technical
assistance and the performance grants led to outputs such as the subproject investments in infrastructure
and services, and performance reviews. Additional inputs such as capacity support to agencies both at the
local, regional, and national levels that were covered by signed Memoranda of Understanding between the
Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and the relevant agencies specified the collaborative framework
and expected annual outputs. The intermediate outcomes were strengthened local government performance
to deliver infrastructure such as roads, school buildings, health centers, maternal and child health facilities,
markets, abattoirs, sports and cultural facilities such as parks and cemeteries. Intermediate outcomes also
included services such as water supply, public lighting, urban transport, health and education, fire protection,
sanitation, garbage collection, and assistance to the poor. Capacity of the local governments to prioritize and
deliver services to their constituents used indicators from the Results Framework (see below). Higher level
outcomes were excluded in the PDO formulation, thus making it difficult to measure and report on the
project's effect on beneficiary lives.

OUTPUTS:

      91 percent of participating local governments (target 100 percent, target mostly achieved) produced
         timely and acceptable final accounts at the end of the fiscal year.
        93 percent of local governments in 2018 that received audits that were either unqualified or, if
         qualified, only with minor comments (target 100 percent, target mostly achieved)
        The indicative allocation of Conditional Performance Grants to local governments were published in a
         timely manner every October 1st, from 2013-2018. There were some delays for the 2018 allocations.
         Target mostly achieved.
        4 mobile teams with four members each covered four geographic areas and reached at least 90
         percent of their performance targets against work programs (achieving target). The local Project
         Implementation Units (PIU) hired “mobile teams” to support them in performance evaluation, financial
         management, planning, procurement, safeguards compliance (in particular environmental
         management and Grievance Resolution Management or GRM), and investment contract supervision
         (ICR, footnote 8).
        Conducted 290 training events reaching 1,312 persons or 16,341 training days in the areas of public
         financial management, local government administration, procurement, maintenance, environmental

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



        and social safeguards, overall project implementation skills. Additional training was completed with
        targeted training on safeguards and service management commissioned directly by the PIU with an
        ending 1,817 persons trained (target 2,000 persons, target mostly achieved).
       Delivered training and technical assistance to 11 local governments to help improve their own-source
        revenue mobilization as targeted.
       Implemented Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) between the PCU and 3 (target 3, target achieved)
        entities (i.e., the Department of Local Government, Department of Local Finance, and the Ministry of
        Environment and Sustainable Development) who achieved at least 70 percent of their performance
        targets. After the Mid Term Review (MTR) this indicator was reduced (from 12 to 3) because of the
        complexity in managing collaboration with 12 entities.
       The following were prepared as planned: (i) a consultative Strategy for Decentralization and Local
        Development, (ii) recommendations for sustaining and improving the implementation of the Regional
        Development Fund, and (iii) several unidentified decrees.
       The following were piloted as targeted: (i) the implementation of the decree on local government
        human resources, and (ii) decentralized procurement commissions at two department levels.

OUTCOMES: (According to the Results Framework)

     77 percent of participating local governments achieved 75 of 100 points in the annual performance
      assessment (target 75 percent, target exceeded). The Local Government Department conducted a
      national evaluation and found that 39 eligible local governments formed part of the 50 best performers
      out of 209 local governments, not including the regional capitals. 10 local governments could not be
      evaluated during the 2018 local election period because the mayors were not available. The 2018
      local elections caused delays in the approval of local government budgets. 87 local governments were
      evaluated during project closing and 5 local governments failed to approve their 2017 budgets.
     94 percent (target 100, target mostly achieved) of participating local governments met the minimum
      conditions to access the Conditional Performance Grants. The indicator was established as a number
      (output). Only 87 local governments could be evaluated at closing. Some local governments could not
      be evaluated because 1 or 2 localities were hard to reach during the rainy season, one local
      government never passed its budget due to political conflict in its council, and 10 mayors were not
      available because of the 2018 local election. This indicator unit was converted to percentage.
     According to the ICR, 781,549 direct beneficiaries benefited from the project (target 456,000, target
      exceeded), of which 52 percent were women (target 51 percent, target exceeded). The project
      provided limited gender disaggregated information (ICR, paragraph 55). This 52 percent female
      beneficiaries only reflect the share of women in the general population. The performance of the project
      with regard to gender was not captured. Women formed 16 percent of those trained in local
      government administration. The ICR acknowledged the low rate of women participating in local
      administration or locally elected positions. Women were mandated to be part of the local election lists
      and were mandatory participants in councils or committees but their voice in these institutions were
      not assessed after project closing (see Section 12. Lessons). According to the ICR, the target was
      established at appraisal when the types of infrastructure investments were not yet known. The access
      catchment area is large for health centers (88), markets (53) and other funded infrastructures, which
      supported the number of beneficiaries beyond half of the entire population of those 100 communes
      (about 1.3 million people).
     The Tintane local government now has improved its tax collection and own source revenue was now
      larger than the transfer from the state budget. However, 10 local governments who benefited from
      similar technical assistance in the second half of the project did not fare as well because of the timing

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



       of the 2018 local election. The fiscal database was shared with the newly elected local government
       teams.
      The Strategy for Decentralization and Local Development has not yet been adopted.
      A new procurement law was informed by the experience under the 2 piloted decentralized
       procurement commissions implemented at the department level. According to its May 15 email to IEG,
       the task team clarified that "the decentralized procurement commissions were discontinued at the end
       of the project due to the limited number of activities they would review and because of a 2019
       procurement reform." This experience would inform the follow on operation to establish new,
       sustainable commissions in the regions as part of the reform. In addition, after all communes adopted
       the decree describing the responsibilities and roles of the General Secretary of the communes, the
       position proved difficult to retain competent staff because of the living condition and the salary. A
       General Secretary shared among communes was tested in several Departments (Moughataas).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
• to improve the capacity of Mauritania's targeted local governments to deliver services.

Rationale
The Theory of Change above applies to this objective as well.

OUTPUTS:

      553 subprojects were completed at project closing from a list of 558 subprojects (original target 563,
         target mostly achieved) implemented in 100 local governments. The remaining sub projects were to
         be completed with Government financing.
        Constructed 243 schools (original target not available because subprojects were identified during
         implementation using a framework arrangement agreed at design stage)
        Constructed 86 health facilities (original target not available because subprojects were identified
         during implementation using a framework arrangement agreed at design stage)
        Constructed 10 abattoirs (slaughterhouses) (original target not available because subprojects were
         identified during implementation using a framework arrangement agreed at design stage)
        Created 490,550 person‐days of employment under the implemented sub‐projects (original target
         established at mid-term was 800,000 person days, using unconfirmed numbers. This target was not
         formally updated following the EU exit. Target mostly achieved at 86% using available financing).

OUTCOMES:

      Conditional grant financing financed social infrastructure (education and health), economic
         infrastructure, and sport and cultural facilities. Local governments selected these subprojects based
         on a consultative approach, starting with the Commune Development Plan, followed by the
         consultative committees, and finally, a budget vote. Some priority investment subprojects were

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



   ineligible under the project such as waste management due to its high environmental and social risks.
   Some water projects required lengthy feasibility studies. Town halls were initially ineligible but were
   later authorized due to high demand and the poor condition of existing buildings. Despite overall
   improvements in service delivery, the large number of participating local governments (100) with low
   densities diminished the impact of these sub‐projects. These outcomes demonstrated improved
   service delivery, which is positive. However, due to shortcoming of the PDO formulation, improved
   service delivery was not captured in the PDO.

  Financed subprojects were functioning and continued to deliver services to constituents one year after
   project closing. As of December 15, 2019, 96% of infrastructure delivered were operational. Note that
   the project closed on June 30, 2019. At that point, 83 percent of the subprojects were operational
   (target was 90 percent, mostly achieved by project closing and eventually exceeded). The functionality
   of financed subprojects was linked to the installation of equipment and delivery of related supplies,
   such as school benches, tables, executive offices, books, and teaching material. Some sub‐projects
   were reported operational before formal turn over, such as some sport fields. Some subprojects
   remained unused for an extended period of time, such as a day care center at Mbagne, due to the
   local elections, and then a failed consultation for contracting the necessary staff to operate the center.
   According to the ICR, the center was reported up and running at closing.

  The subprojects led to improved access to services reaching almost 800,000 direct beneficiaries or 70
   percent of the population of all 100 participating local governments. 52 percent of these direct
   beneficiaries were women (target was 51 percent, exceeded). The ICR acknowledged that design and
   implementation did not inform either a gender assessment or gender action plan (see Section 12,
   Lessons). The total population of the 100 eligible local governments was 1,114,000 residents (target
   456,000, target exceeded). According to the ICR, it was not feasible to estimate the target number of
   direct beneficiaries because the list of subproject investments was only identified during
   implementation following a framework arrangement.

  Overall, those subprojects contributed to improving service delivery in the eligible communes.
   A positive impact on social development was evident in the reported increase in the number of
   patients visiting the new health centers. Underserved areas were provided with increased access to
   health facilities and services. The Bank team conducted site visits, which confirmed, for example,
   shops rented in the markets and new businesses that sprouted around the markets indicating a
   positive impact on the local economy. In a survey conducted at the end of the project, 90 percent of
   project funded markets were occupied. In the case of schools, more classrooms showed that greater
   densification of the school map, reflecting increased enrollment. The number of students per class and
   the number of multi-grade classes were reduced. Absenteeism was reduced. The increase in
   enrollment rates and reduced absenteeism were used as proxy to indicate improved delivery of
   education services. In its May 15, 2020 email to IEG, the task team clarified that while there were no
   MoUs with either the Ministry of Education or the Ministry of Health, the subproject planning process
   systematically sought their endorsements, evident in the increased use of the schools and health
   centers at project closing. However, the team confirmed they did not have statistics to support this
   claim. A fair number of the investments replaced old inadequate buildings and were not expected to
   have an increase in the number of staff. The national policy changed in the second half of the project
   when the government prioritized full schools and close single class room schools. The project stopped
   funding single class rooms. For health centers, there were no policy change that would impact the use
   of project investments. Most of the 10 abattoirs built by the project were underutilized a few months or


                                                                                               Page 8 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



                                   years after delivery (ICR paragraph 42). According to the May 15, 2020 email to IEG, the task team
                                   clarified that the capacity and willingness to pay for the service were not assessed during the planning
                                   for these abattoirs. This project stopped financing this infrastructure type in the second half of the
                                   project until a national strategy for abattoirs was established. There is none to date.

                                  The local government sub‐projects created 490,550 person‐days of employment (target of 800,000
                                   person days, target mostly achieved at 86 percent of target). The target, introduced at mid‐term
                                   without a robust methodology, used unconfirmed numbers of a per US$ estimate using available data
                                   at that time. This indicator and was not formally updated after the withdrawal of EU funding. However
                                   this indicator, employment generation, was not included as an outcome indicator.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The efficacy rating was substantial. All the PDO outcome indicators were achieved, mostly achieved, or likely
                            to be achieved. The high share of participating local governments that achieved 75 points in the annual
                            independent assessments, the population benefiting from access to improved services, and the rate of
                            functioning infrastructure sub projects, all contributed to substantially achieving the PDO.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency: At appraisal, no cost benefit analysis was carried out. Benefit‐cost ratios,
   net present values (NPVs), and economic rates of return (ERRs) from other World Bank funded projects in
   Mauritania were collected to identify hypothetical gains from investments in water, sanitation, and roads. There
   were 558 sub‐project investments but very few in water, sanitation, or roads. The ICR did not conduct a
   cost‐benefit analysis because the average size of the subproject (US$90,000) was small.

   The ICR instead conducted an efficiency analysis using administrative, allocative, and targeting efficiencies.
   The improvements from the sub project investments were used as evidence of improved planning and
   administration with clear downstream links to services delivered by participating local governments. Allocative
   efficiency referred to whether subprojects were allocated according to the needs of beneficiaries. The technical
   or productive efficiency analysis was not applied because of the small size of the subprojects. In addition, the
   subprojects were not similar and could not be normalized across representative beneficiaries.


                                                                                                                             Page 9 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



Analysis of allocative efficiency concluded that investments were tailored to the needs of the population since
subproject investments were taken from the Commune Development Plan (CDPs) of each participant local
government. The Consultation Committees prepared these CDPs with priority subproject investments following
consultations to access conditional grants. Final investment priorities with accompanying budgets were
published, showing transparency of financial management. Beneficiaries prioritized water and waste
management projects but were not submitted for financing under conditional grants because of expected lengthy
feasibility studies and high risks associated with environmental and social safeguards compliance.

Administrative efficiency analyzed the effective use of the 21 criteria (further detailed in Annex 5 of the ICR) to
assess the eligibility of participant local governments to receive conditional grants. These criteria evaluated the
capacity of the local government to implement the grants and included basic institutional capacity factors such
as better planning, budgeting, service delivery, revenue management, accountability, and sustainability. With the
support of mobile teams, improvements in institutional capacity facilitated a steady disbursement rate and timely
implementation of subprojects. This process led to efficient and timely utilization of both IDA and government
resources. On average, around 70 percent of the local governments qualified to receive performance after
meeting the capacity building criteria. The predictable, transparent grant system strengthened local government
administrative capacity to deliver basic services.

The targeting efficiency considered the ability of the project to target poorer segments of the population. The
project targeted 100 local governments out of a total 216. These were located in the poorer areas, based on the
2008 household survey and reconfirmed under the 2016 World Bank poverty assessment. The analysis
concluded that the project targeted its decentralized government spending on the poor.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: At appraisal, the Bank and the European Commission agreed that
the Bank would execute the EC's parallel financed components on its behalf. However, just before signing the
agreement, a new governing global partnership framework for the EC became effective. The new framework
required administrative conditions that could not be met under the project. According to the May 15, 2020 email
to EIG, the task team clarified that they did not receive detailed information on the framework and were advised
that financing could not be triggered because a deadline had passed. The EC then withdrew its parallel
financing commitment to the project. As a result, the number of investment subprojects and some technical
assistance activities were reduced without affecting the original Theory of Change nor the Results Framework
except for the reduced target of the labor intensive employment indicator. This indicator was not an outcome
indicator associated with either objective (see Section 4 Achievement of Objectives above). The reduced
financing, however, was welcomed because of observed low absorption capacity of the local governments
during implementation. No additional financing was contemplated when the parallel financing from the European
Commission fell through. A new operation was prepared instead.

The project helped the administrative efficiency of government institutions, both at the national and local levels.
The PCU signed Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) with the Department of Local Governments, the
Department of Local Finance, and the Ministry of Environment. For example, as part of improving its
administrative oversight, the Ministry of Environment conducted site visits of sub project investments.
Administrative efficiency at the Ministry of Finance’s local offices was assisted by equipment and training in local
government financial resources management. According to the ICR, other informal collaborative activities were
made with other entities but were not monitored or reported, such as the case for the national Court of Accounts,
which audited several local governments in the last 3 years of the project although the results were not made
public.




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



Neither the PAD nor the ICR reported project ERRs or FRRs. Efficiency was substantial arising from the
evidence provided in concluding the administrative, allocative, and targeting efficiencies of the project.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective was rated substantial. The efficacy of both objectives was rated substantial as was
Efficiency. The overall outcome was therefore rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following posed risks to development outcome:

       Technical Risk that performance considerations, budgeting improvements, and resource
        mobilization introduced under the project would not be carried forward: Capacity building
        considerations determined the eligibility of participating local governments to receive conditional
        grants. These grants financed priority investments. In addition, local government capacity to raise
        revenues, operate and maintain the assets built were supported under this project. Performance of
        local government revenues was the least performing criteria achieved according to performance
        assessments. For example, in the 2016 assessment, about half of the local governments increased
        their revenues. The land property tax and the communal tax were tracked, with a target at 5%
        increase over 3 years. The project offered technical assistance to 11 local governments to help
        improve their fiscal base to yield additional own source revenues. Those additional revenues were
        not yet realized at closing but could be directed for O&M needs of the infrastructure investments.
        Budgeting for O&M received 20 points out of 100 to qualify for performance based grants indicating

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



  that submitted budgets included O&M for infrastructure investments. Government commitment to
  continue to use the eligibility criteria for future distribution of conditional grants may be discontinued
  after closing. However, the follow-on project currently under preparation is designed to build upon the
  results of this project for continuing support and sustainability of outcome.

 Risk of National Government wavering in their commitment and ownership of the project
  outcomes. This project together with the PNIDDLE program showed strong government ownership
  of this project. The Government committed and disbursed a substantial share of total project
  cost. The project generated studies related to the decentralization policy, municipal governance, and
  public financial management, including the national decentralization strategy. However, there were no
  concrete actions or strategies to support the decentralization reform agenda. The newly elected
  President indicated renewed support for decentralization. A new operation under preparation aims to
  strengthen the tools to implement the decentralization policy.

 Governance and Institutional Support Risks: The project addressed capacity gaps of the local
  governments and the supporting national agencies but recognized the low technical qualifications of
  the staff and staff turnover that negatively affected gains in capacity. At closing, mobile teams were
  disbanded, further lending to uncertainty in local capacities. After project closing, the Local
  Government Department and the Ministry of Finance planned to organize delegations to support the
  local governments. To mitigate the risk of lack of training or capacity in this effort, France's Agence
  Francais de Developpement (AFD) is financing two projects to support five local
  governments from the 13 regions who participated in this project. In addition, the new operation under
  preparation would finance the reform of local government use of human resources such as sharing
  competent critical staff among rural local governments.

 Financial Risk: Primary project beneficiaries lauded strong local government ownership. 96% of the
  local sub projects were operational and functional as of December 2019. Required furniture and other
  materials and equipment (including solar panels) for all built infrastructures were delivered. The
  project, through the mobile teams, supported the preparation of operational plans for each
  infrastructure, for example management contracts for the markets or use agreements for sport fields
  with youth associations, etc. The mobile teams also supported the local governments to make
  decision on tariffs, whenever relevant. Those fees aimed to improve infrastructure O&M. Local
  governments depended on the Regional Development Fund (RDF) for O&M. The law required RDF to
  be at 3 percent of total annual national budget but has only peaked at 1.4 percent in 2010 and
  remained static for the next 3 years (PAD, paragraph 9). The RDF's small operating budget meant
  little space for infrastructure O&M. Lack of O&M funds could reduce the expected life of those
  investments. Further support will be provided by the new operation under preparation by improving
  local financial management (the highest priority of the technical assistance component of the new
  operation) and reforming the RDF.

 Environmental and Social Risks. Some priority subprojects outlined in the CDPs were not included
  for financing under this project because of time required to meet environmental and social safeguards
  requirements and lengthy feasibility preparation. These CDP priority subprojects would need to be
  eventually financed. There is a risk that these priorities may remain unfunded and contribute to a
  backlog that may then require intervention outside of the regular process. The ICR was silent on this
  risk but likely to be considered in the follow on project currently under preparation.



                                                                                                 Page 12 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



     Risk from Natural Disasters. According to the ICR, one or two localities were unreachable due to
      rains and were not assessed (see Note below the Table in paragraph 33). This risk from inundation
      could prevent the completion of assessments of eligible local governments to receive conditional
      grants. The current follow-on project under preparation may need to consider this risk in its design.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank identified, and prepared this project with a focus on achieving the PDO. Project components
  were adequate to meet the PDO. Lessons learned from three prior local government operations projects
  were relevant: (i) the Urban Development Program; (ii) the Community Based Rural Development
  Program; and (iii) the Public Sector Capacity Building Project (PAD, paragraph 40). Four lessons from
  these operations were adopted in this project's design: (1) Capacity building measures, such as systems
  development in areas such as financial management and planning, and training could be more effectively
  linked to a system that creates local government demand; (2) Maintaining the integrity of the performance
  grant system was critical. Integrity was reflected in (i) the measurability of selected performance
  indicators; (ii) the local governments' capacity to deliver on those indicators; (iii) adequate funding; (iv)
  credibility of the national government's commitment; and (v) real but realistic local government efforts to
  achieve these indicators. (3) Mainstreaming a robust, clearly understood, and well supported
  implementation arrangements into core government functions is important. (4) Flexibility is needed when
  introducing a grant system with novel requirements to be met by both the national and local governments.
  Sustainability would be achieved by strengthening the capacity of both the national and local
  governments to deliver decentralized basic services (PAD, paragraphs 43-46).

  The technical, financial, and economic aspects of the project were adequately assessed, and adopted the
  framework nature of the subproject investments. This framework arrangement meant that subprojects
  were to be identified during implementation and led to a lack of baseline data in its M&E design. Poverty
  and social development aspects were adequately considered by targeting poorer rural local governments
  together with urban capitals. Social development focused on basic service delivery as eligible sub-
  project investments. The results framework indicators did not have a gender focus because this was not
  required at the time of preparation. According to the ICR, design did not consider how gender could have
  affected the project even through there were mandates incorporated in local administration and elective
  offices. Fiduciary aspects and safeguards were eligible capacity building activities financed under the
  second project component. Timely completion of annual budgets and submission of audits were factors
  that determined eligibility for financing under the performance based grants (ICR, paragraph 90).

  The government’s ownership of the decentralization agenda was evident in its support to the PNIDLLE
  program and this project. The Government committed and disbursed its local financing commitment.
  Many design features were well thought out to achieve the PDO, such as the recruitment of four “mobile
  teams” to support the participant local governments after dividing the country into four regions. Targeting
  100 local governments to participate in the project expanded the reach and results of the project,
  although the risks associated with implementing a project with a wide geographic scope were not fully


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



  appreciated at preparation. Some risk issues in coordination, for example, may not have been evident
  during the design stage. Mauritania's density at 3.87 inhabitants per square kilometers, compared to the
  rest of African countries with 400 - 600 inhabitants per square mile was low. Some areas were isolated
  and lacked access. The road network was poor.

  Implementation design features and M&E arrangements proved to be a challenge. The institutional
  arrangement for implementing Component 2 was covered by an MOU between the Local Government
  Department of the Ministry of Interior and the PIU. A late start for some activities - as late as after the
  mid‐term review - affected the ability to evaluate performance to inform next steps, as designed.
  Implementation arrangement also called for the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Decentralization to
  oversee local project implementation. There was limited gender disaggregated information to assess the
  perception and acceptance of the different sub‐projects, perception on service delivery, and employment
  generated for women.

  There were only minor shortcomings in identification, preparation, or appraisal leading to a satisfactory
  rating.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted regular, semi-annual supervision and implementation support. Issues were
 monitored and addressed to ensure that the outcomes were achieved as designed. For example, the surge
 in subprojects early in the project overwhelmed the capacity of the national procurement commission
 slowing down project disbursement, leading to low implementation ratings after the first year of
 implementation .Training in financial management and procurement to meet challenges were delivered to
 national and local government staff. These efforts aided local governments to complete annual budgets
 and submit audit reports on time. According to the ICR, candor in reporting was evident in the detailed
 action plans prepared at the end of each mission, with attention to corrective measures for the government
 and the implementing entities to consider in response to implementation constraints. The Bank team
 suggested the adoption of M&E tools such as the disbursement tables (see M&E implementation in Section
 9 below) to help achieve the PDO. Based on the analysis of these tables, for example, the team concluded
 low absorption capacity for more training and subproject investments that they agreed with the PCU not to
 pursue additional financing after the EU parallel financing fell through and some targets reduced. After the
 November 2016 MTR, the Bank team recommended a decentralization expert be hired to help supervise
 critical studies and pilot activities to inform future reforms, particularly in the preparation of the Strategy for
 Decentralization and Local Development.

 The Bank also addressed ongoing environmental and social safeguard compliance issues. The team
 adopted a flexible solution to execute and monitor the detailed action plans.

 In 2018, when the EU left the PNIDDLE program as parallel financier, resources were reduced leading to
 uncertainty in achieving the objectives and targets. The conditional investment fund was reduced from
 US$70 million to US$38 million. The Bank team used this time to assess the local absorption capacity, and
 determined that any additional funding would not be approved before project closing. The Bank team

                                                                                                        Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



 focused on the timely completion of the project, cancelling subprojects at risk of delays, and implementing
 smaller works (e.g., water connection to existing public trunk infrastructures) and equipment. Those
 measures did not reduce the impact of project outcomes, other than the outputs (number of subprojects).

 The World Bank prepared and completed the project satisfactorily. During supervision, the World Bank
 proactively identified and solved issues to support the government in achieving the development
 outcomes. Only minor shortcomings were noted in the proactive identification of opportunities and
 resolution of challenges to the implementation arrangement such as in the lack of oversight by the Inter-
 Ministerial Committee that met only once during the last 4 years of the project instead of every year.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO formulation focused on improved institutional strengthening and improved capacity but did not
 include improved services delivery although the project clearly was designed for improved service delivery.
 This resulted in some ill-defined indicators and difficulties for the project to measure and report on some of
 the positive outcomes of the project. The results framework that supported this theory of change contained
 vague indicators, non-specific ones, and proved difficult to monitor such as:

       The indicator for assessing the performance of collaboration with other entities as provided in the
        MOUs was vague and not specific.
       The indicator to monitor local government performance in making sure that sub‐projects were
        functioning and operational one year after completion was difficult to assess because of a lack of
        institutionalized additional layers of local government reporting. There was no measurable annual
        target.
       The framework approach adopted for the project did not establish baseline targets at appraisal.

 Other intermediate results indicators were specific, measurable, relevant and time bound. Local
 government performance indicators were simple, clearly defined, and realistic and was used to assess
 eligibility for the conditional grants. With minor adjustments at mid-term, the indicators of local government
 performance captured its contribution to achieving PDO level outcomes, The indicators were designed to
 be simple and easy to monitor because both the central and local governments had limited capacity to
 report and coordinate the monitoring of these indicators. Gender disaggregated information was not
 included in the design because this was not required at the time of appraisal but could have been easily
 included since there were existing institutional mandates for increased participation by women in local
 administration and local elective offices. Mid-term and final evaluations were be conducted as well as



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



 independent reviews by third parties in specific areas of the project such as in procurement, financial
 management, and value-for-money audits (PAD, paragraph 53).



b. M&E Implementation
  The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) implemented the overall M&E supported by a monitoring and
  evaluation expert. However, as mentioned above, some data collection methods were not in place. There
  were no established baselines (ICR, paragraph 72) although obtaining a baseline was an eligible activity
  under the third component of the project. The performance of some indicators could not be properly
  analyzed against an absent baseline. Gender disaggregated information could have allowed gender
  related impacts of the project for future use in design.

  An independent performance assessment was conducted to determine the eligibility of local governments
  to the conditional grants and was used to monitor the performance of the results framework of the project.
  The annual performance evaluation of the local governments determined their eligibility for conditional
  grants in the following year. The performance evaluation was conducted for three fiscal years – 2015,
  2016 and 2017 – and was based on two main parameters: (i) measurement of the minimum conditions
  for accessing the conditional window, and (ii) the level of achievements of the performance criteria. The
  performance conditions and criteria were stipulated in a partnership agreement between the PCU and the
  participant local governments. Evaluations were conducted following the Municipal Performance Manual
  and validated by the PCU. after a slow start, full data were collected and analyzed in 2017 and 2018.

  Apart from the two indicators noted above that were not measured and reported, the indicators appearing
  in the Results Framework were monitored. The weaknesses mentioned, however, were not addressed
  during implementation because the required level of local government reporting needed was not yet in
  place. The ICR did not report on a mid-term and final evaluation. However, the ICR reported independent
  reviews by third parties in procurement, financial management, and audits as planned. The
  annex pointed out that a technical audit of the subproject investments was conducted at mid-term and at
  closing and found a few malfunctions that were corrected. Continuation of the M&E processes from this
  project would depend on its incorporation into the M&E system of the follow-on project.



c. M&E Utilization
  The PCU monitored the M&E indicators and distributed timely quarterly reports. The independent
  assessments were used to assess the eligibility of participating local governments to receive
  performance based grants. M&E data was used to provide evidence of achievement of outcomes and
  were used to inform the follow-on project. For example, the software established to link the different
  steps of the project with respect to the investment component was operational in the last 2 years of the
  project. Contract payments used this software and could generate tracking reports. It is planned to keep
  using the tool in the new operation.

  The M&E system used some of the indicators from the annual performance evaluations, which triggered
  the conditional grant allocation decisions. The PCU used the results of the annual performance
  indicators to customize capacity support features to further improve local governments performance.
  The performance of the collaboration MoUs with agencies was also tracked and the results used at



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



  midterm review to reduce the target. Different departments also employed M&E tools to improve project
  implementation arrangements including:

        the use of disbursement ratios per year or per local government to assess the pace of
         sub‐project preparation and implementation and as proxy to assess local government financial
         absorption capacity. Results were used to conclude that no additional financing was needed after
         the EU parallel financing fell through.
        The PCU also shared a list of problems encountered in implementing subprojects.
         Consequently, making land available prior to signing a contract was adopted for subproject
         implementation during the last months of the project.

  M&E reports at MTR led to the following adjustments in implementation:

        the mobile teams reduced direct intervention and instead provided advice and control to lower
           local governments' dependency on the teams (ICR paragraph 36
          the target for the number of agencies achieving at least 70 percent of their performance targets
           per signed MOUs with the PCU was reduced from 12 to three, i.e., the Department of Local
           Governments, the Department of Local Finance, and the Ministry of Environment.
          the target for the number of person-days employment created was not revised even as the EU
           parallel financing fell through.
          the Minimum Conditions and the Performance Criteria were slightly adjusted, building on the
           early years experience (ICR, paragraph 6)..
          the coordination of Component 2 lacked oversight from the Inter‐Ministerial Committee on
           Decentralization. The planned annual coordination meeting occurred only once during the last
           four years of the project (ICR, paragraph 66).

  The overall quality of the M&E was substantial. The M&E system as designed and implemented was
  sufficient to assess the achievement of the objectives and tested the links in the results chain. There
  were moderate shortcomings in the M&E system’s design, implementation, and use. For example, the
  number of beneficiaries and the gender composition outcome indicators, and the lack of a
  baseline. Those weaknesses did not alter project implementation or the overall project outcome.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned an Environmental Category B for purposes of OP/BP 4.01, which required a
   partial environmental assessment. The project triggered OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, OP/BP
   4.04 Natural Habitats, OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources, and OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement.
   An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework
   (RPF), were prepared with provisions for strengthening national safeguards capacities. Safeguards risk was



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



  rated moderate at appraisal. The FA spelled out that sub‐projects that would cause the safeguard category
  from B to A were ineligible for financing under the project.

  At closing, the framework documents were evaluated. According to the ICR, compliance with environmental
  and social safeguards were lagging during most of the project life due to a lack of attention to systematically
  monitor compliance with the framework documents. Bank safeguards specialists prepared annual detailed
  action plans for the last 2 years of the project that were satisfactorily implemented. Compliance with
  safeguards required the recruitment of a safeguards specialist in the PIU that went through several
  iterations and in the end, that specialist participated intermittently in monitoring compliance. Since each of
  the 4 mobile teams had a safeguard specialist, they assisted and advised local governments in monitoring
  safeguards compliance. In addition, the Ministry of Environment also conducted site visits to ensure sub-
  project compliance with national standards. Safeguards compliance for each of the safeguards triggered
  was noted satisfactory in the project's Operations Portal but only indicated blanket satisfactory compliance
  in the ICR.

  The project enjoined local governments to designate environmental and social safeguard focal points to
  monitor social and environmental issues and integrate these safeguard issues in regular municipal planning.
  Safeguard experts of the mobile teams reinforced local capacity with hands‐on advisory support during
  investment planning and infrastructure construction in areas such as: (i) adequate waste management in
  construction sites and specific subprojects such as slaughterhouses and health facilities; (ii) completion of
  land acquisition before any commencement of works; and (iii) technical standards in security, notably traffic
  signs, sites and infrastructure fences, wearing of personal protective equipment, adequate health and
  hygiene standards for workers, safe electricity installations, etc.

  The Resettlement Policy Framework included a grievance redress and conflict resolution mechanism
  (GRM) that had 4 layers of resolving conflict - (i) the commune level, (ii) the Local Land Commission, (iii) the
  Regional Land Commission, and (iv) the Court. At the commune level, citizens had access to a grievance
  notebook. The Municipal Consultation Committee was responsible for addressing the complaints from this
  notebook. In practice, traditional ways were used to address complaints: through the social network,
  community chiefs, mayors, or Hakems. These complaints were not systematically documented in the
  beginning. The mobile teams trained local governments on how to formalize their conflict resolution
  mechanisms, guiding the PIU staff to monitor and guide the local committees on conflict resolution. Only
  one land related conflict was formally brought to the attention of the Bank. The PIU and the local
  government resolved this. During site visits, residents voiced minor conflicts that were resolved by local
  authorities.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: The project provided substantial support in fiduciary compliance by training staff
  from the national and local government levels in financial management and procurement. Eligibility for
  financing from the performance based conditional financing window assessed the performance of local
  governments in areas such as the timely completion of the annual budgets and submission of audit
  reports. According to the Operations Portal but not reported in the ICR, Interim Unaudited Financial
  Reports were regularly produced, reviewed, and found acceptable by the Bank. Compliance with financial
  management was assessed as satisfactory (ICR, paragraph 90). The task team confirmed in their May 15,


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



   2020 email to IEG that audits were not reported in the ICR following the new format but confirmed that all
   audits were submitted on time and all major issues were adequately addressed.

   Procurement: The project was off to a slow start in procurement because a surge of subproject
   contracting overwhelmed an understaffed national procurement agency. The PCU experienced some delay
   recruiting procurement experts who were then given necessary training on procurement guidelines.
   According to the ICR, the last two Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs)
   assessed compliance with procurement and financial management as satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were derived from the ICR with some modification of language:

      Continuous Capacity Building Efforts May Sustain Capacity Gains as long as there is
         Staff to Receive these. Mauritania’s decentralization agenda began in the 1980s. Different
         approaches were adopted to build its legal and policy framework, planning, and human
         resource capacity at different administrative levels. This project supported the PNIDDLE
         program as a comprehensive initiative to address local capacity gaps and strengthen local
         administrations to deliver local services. However, to achieve capacity gains from training,
         there has to be adequate staff to receive that training. In rural Mauritania, attracting and
         maintaining qualified staff was difficult. The level of activity of rural local governments was
         limited. Some rural local governments started to share staff to attract more competent
         professionals. The new operation under preparation will support the local government human
         resource reform agenda and propose financially sustainable measures informed by the
         lessons of this project. The lesson from this operation was the need to have and retain
         adequate staff to carry forward the capacity gains from training and technical assistance.


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)



        Using Conditional Performance‐Based Grants may be an Effective and an Efficient
         Strategy to Build Capacity. In this project, investment financing for local services was
         linked to good local government administration performance. The performance‐based
         mechanism rewarded good performance using predictable and transparent indicators
         assessed independently. The lesson from this operation was the effective approach brought
         by using the achievement of capacity building factors to qualify for investment projects that
         delivered basic services.
        Numerous Participating Local Governments in a Single Operation may Provide Data
         and Evidence for an Effective Decentralization Strategy. In Mauritania, precedent local
         government projects targeted a limited number of local governments. In this project, the 100
         participating local governments represented a third of the national population and covered 10
         of the 13 regions of the country. This project served as a laboratory for decentralization and
         showed local governments how to best deliver basic services. This project helped develop
         critical tools that apply to all local governments, such as the performance evaluation system,
         including auditing (with some simplification measures already discussed during project
         implementation, such as self‐evaluation, to help with the financial sustainability of the tools),
         the technical support system needed, including with procurement, and determining human
         resource needs of rural local governments. The lesson from this project shows that
         performance assessment from a big enough sample may identify customized capacity
         building tools such as the decentralized procurement regulations as evidence in
         formulating an appropriate decentralization strategy.
        A gender action plan may be useful to facilitate women's participation in capacity
         building projects. In this project, women's participation in local administration and local
         elective offices were mandated. Not very many women (16 percent) benefited from the
         training programs inlocal administration funded under this project. Giving women voice may
         have been better guided by a gender action plan, presently included in investment projects
         financed by the World Bank. A gender assessment at closing may also help identify specific
         actionable steps for continuing to engage women in the area of local administration. The
         lesson from this project was that gender action plan may prove useful in offering measures to
         give women voice in delivering improved services to constituents.
        A low cap on the size of subprojects may improve a project's allocative efficiency but
         may discourage the financing of priority projects. In this project, water services and
         waste management were listed as priorities during the consultative process of creating the
         Commune Development Plans. With a low cap on project size (the average was US$90,000),
         these projects were not tabled because of their inherent long gestation, longer periods of
         analyzing feasibility, and higher risks associated with environmental and social safeguards
         compliance. The lesson from this project was that establishing a cap on subprojects may be
         premature until informed by the priorities identified by the consulted beneficiaries.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                      Page 20 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR-Local Government Development Project (P127543)




The ICR was clear and concise, followed OPCS guidelines with regard to ratings. A minor shortcoming was in
the poorly articulated theory of change. The report offered evidence from independent assessments that
followed the design parameters of the conditional grants implemented under the project. Annex 5 of the ICR
provided additional information, outlining the factors used in the detailed performance assessment of local
governments, which provided robust evidence of how the project addressed capacity building. The performance
narrative followed a consistent logic, focused on how the activities informed outcomes that led to the mutually
reinforcing results. Results and outcomes were highlighted throughout the report. There were clear links
between evidence and findings as reflected in the lessons from the project's operations. A follow-on project is
currently under preparation to further strengthen the human resource needs of local governments and continue
to support the government's decentralization agenda.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 21 of 21
