     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transp- APL-2 (P116323)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021995

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P116323                                    3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transp- APL-2

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Western Africa                             Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H7870                                 30-Jun-2018                                          80,198,025.54

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 31-May-2012                               29-Mar-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           90,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            90,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                        80,437,235.97                                                0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Dileep M. Wagle               Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   This project in Cote d' Ivoire, was the second phase of the Abidjan - Lagos Trade and Transport Facilitation
   Program (ALTTFP). The objectives of the Adaptable Program Loan (APL) were "to reduce the trade and
   transport barriers in the ports and on the roads along the Abidjan - Lagos coastal corridor".

   The first phase of the APL program covered Ghana, Togo and Benin. Although Nigeria was initially included in
   the second phase of the program, it decided not to borrow under the program in late 2010. The Project


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transp- APL-2 (P116323)



   Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, page 18) were:

   "To reduce trade and transport barriers in the ports and on the roads along the Abidjan-Lagos
   corridor in Cote d' Ivoire".

   This review is based on the three sub-objectives: (1) To reduce trade barriers in the port in Cote d'Ivoire: (2)
   To reduce trade barriers on the road along the corridor in Cote d'Ivoire: and (3) To reduce transport barriers
   on the roads along the corridor in Cote d'Ivoire.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were four components (PAD, pages 18-20).

   1. Trade Facilitation. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$6.3 million. The actual cost was US$1.8
   million.

   This component aimed at financing the following activities: (i) facilitating data collection and sharing relevant
   information for interconnectivity between the customs agencies in Cote d'Ivoire and Ghana: (ii) equipment
   and technical advisory services for implementing a trade facilitation Singe Window (an electronic facility that
   allows the parties involved in trade and transport to submit relevant information required for fulfilling trade-
   related regulatory requirements at a single entry point) in Abidjan port, and strengthening the capacity of the
   port's border (customs and immigration) agencies: (iii) conducting training programs for stakeholders: (iv)
   streamlining customs procedures, formulating customs procedures manuals and
   dissemination to stakeholders: (v) strengthening the operational capacity of Cote d'Ivoire's National
   Facilitation Committee.

   2. Improvement of the Road Corridor's Infrastructure in Cote d'Ivoire. The estimated cost at appraisal
   was US$138.8 million. The actual cost was US$109.9 million.

   This component aimed at financing the following activities: (i) technical designs and engineering studies for
   road rehabilitation: (ii) rehabilitation of 130 kilometer (km) on the Grand Bassum - Aboisso - Noe section
   of the corridor, construction of rest stops at Noe and Aboisso and rehabilitation of a freight terminal at Vridi:
   (iii) rehabilitation of the access roads to Abidjan port: (iv) a study on traffic management in the port access
   zone: (v) implementing social and environmental measures: and (vi) equipment and technical studies for
   road safety measures.

   3. Project Management and Coordination. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$2.9 million. The
   actual cost was more than twice the appraisal estimate at US$7.0 million (discussed in 2e).




                                                                                                       Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transp- APL-2 (P116323)



  This component aimed at providing technical advisory services, training and project management logistical
  support.

  4. Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome ((HIV/AIDS) programs
  and corridor performance monitoring. This activity was originally financed under APL 1. This component
  aimed at providing support to pending activities in the first phase of the project (discussed in section 3). No
  funding was allocated to this component at appraisal. The actual cost was US$1.50 million.

  Activities in this component included: (i) executing activities aimed at reducing the impact of HIV/AIDS and
  preventing the spread of HIV infection among communities along the portion of the corridor: and (ii)
  collecting data for monitoring HIV/AIDS prevention and dissemination of data across Cote d'Ivoire.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$148.0 million. The actual cost was US$120.3 million.
  The difference between the appraisal estimate and actual cost (about US$28.0 million) was due to
  combination of factors including: (i) significant changes in the exchange rate (the Grant was designated in
  Special Drawing Rights (SDR) and disbursements were in West African CFA francs). This resulted
  in approximately US$18.0 million in savings: and (ii) lower counterpart funding. The cost of road
  rehabilitation (component two activity) was seven percent higher than estimated at appraisal, due to
  changes in project scope, scale-up of activities to include new works and unforeseen site conditions not
  properly identified at appraisal. Due to the extensions of these activities, the supervision cost (component
  three activity) increased as well (discussed in Section Five). The cost overruns were covered through
  the savings due to exchange rate changes between SDR and the West African CFA francs.

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA Grant of US$90.0 million. The actual amount
  disbursed was US$80.4 million. The difference between actual disbursements and appraisal grant was due
  to exchange rate changes during implementation. There was parallel financing for complementary trade
  facilitation activities on the corridor from European Union (EU) during implementation.

  Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution was estimated at US$58.0 million. Their actual
  contribution was significantly less than planned at US$39.9 million.

  Dates. The project was approved on May 31,2012, became effective on October 16, 2012 and was
  scheduled to close on June 30, 2018. The project closed nine months behind schedule on March 29, 2019.

  Other changes. There were two Level 2 restructurings. These changes were made through the first
  restructuring on June 2017.

        A new activity was created under component four to allow the Abidjan -Lagos Corridor Program train
         the staff of the Observatory For Transport Fluidity (OFT). According to the clarifications provided by
         the team, OFT is an administrative structure, attached to the Ministry of Transport. The aim of the
         OFT is to control and regulate activities and operations that are likely to impede corridor
         transport movements. The missions of the OFT in this project were to: (i) collect data related
         to traffic movements on the Ivorian territory: (ii) create awareness of transport operators and police
         officers; and (iii) dismantle illegal roadblocks.


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transp- APL-2 (P116323)



         A new disbursement category of expenses was created for implementing the above-mentioned
          activity and funding was allocated for this activity, from the savings realized due to exchange rate
          changes.

   The project closing date was extended by nine months from June 30, 2018 to March 29, 2019, in order to
   complete the ongoing activities through the second restructuring on April 24, 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and regional context. The Abidjan-Lagos regional corridor, links some of the largest and
economically dynamic cities in Africa - Abidjan (Cote d'Ivoire), Accra (Ghana) and Lagos (Nigeria)
and handles over two-thirds of trade in West Africa. The corridor is also a global gateway to the regional
landlocked countries. The transport cost on this corridor was high at appraisal (with the cost on average two
times more than in Western Europe) due to a combination of factors, including poor roads and non-
infrastructure related factors inhibiting movement of freight and passengers on the corridor (such
as, deficient implementation of regional transit agreements, poor information sharing between customs
agencies and port operators, excessive checkpoints and road blocks, costly and cumbersome customs
procedures due to lack of automation of customs procedures and equipment at border posts). Reducing
transport prices along the corridor through addressing these issues was therefore important for boosting the
intra and inter regional trade of West African countries.

Country and Regional strategy. The Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper for Cote d'Ivoire underscored the
need for transport infrastructure improvements and regional integration. At appraisal, the PDOs
were consistent with the New Partnership for Africa's Development's (NEPAD) Action plan to improve
transport and transit trade along regional corridors. The Abidjan - Lagos corridor was identified by both
the Economic Community of West African Countries (ECOWAS) and the West African and Monetary Union
(WAMEU) as a sub-regional priority corridor, due to the large population covered by the corridor. Before
appraisal in 2007, a protocol of cooperation was signed between the Ghanaian Customs and the Ivoirian
Customs. This protocol identified implementation of a Single Window as a major reform of customs
connectivity and information sharing which would contribute to expediting the customs clearance process.

Alignment with the Bank country and regional strategy. At the country level, the Bank's Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Cote d'Ivoire for 2010-2014 explicitly supported the need for regional
integration and cooperation in matters pertaining to trade and transport facilitation. The fourth pillar of the
CPF articulated the need for infrastructural renewal and improving basic service delivery through
rehabilitation/expansion/upgrading of essential basic transport infrastructure. The CPF also highlighted the
need for reducing trade and transport barriers along the Abidjan-Lagos corridor by improving road
conditions, modernizing customs procedures and reducing road blocks (CPF, page 34). The PDO was
relevant for the Bank's Regional Integration Assistance Strategy (RIAS) issued in 2008. The RIAS
highlighted the need for creating an open, unified, regional economic space for creating an enabling
environment for fostering a competitive and efficient private sector in Africa. The three pillars of the strategy
were: (i) improving cross-border connectivity through developing regional infrastructure: (ii) institutional
cooperation and economic integration to increase trade and investment with regional and non-regional
economies: and (iii) coordinated interventions to provide regional public goods for improving regional,

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transp- APL-2 (P116323)



               environmental, health and social conditions (such as addressing HIV related issues): The PDOs were well-
               aligned with the Bank's current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Cote d'Ivoire for 2015-
               2019. Under pillar D Regional Integration, the CPF highlighted the need for accelerating structural reforms,
               aimed at lowering the cost of cross-border activities and strengthening infrastructure development. The
               CPF also underscored the need for interventions aimed at policy coordination and infrastructure
               development and investments, to promote regional synergies (CPF, page 22). According to the clarification
               provided by the team, the existing CPF was extended to 2022, in order to align it with the electoral cycle
               and Cote d'Ivoire's National Development Plan (2016-2020).

               This project in Cote d'Ivoire, was the second phase of the Bank-financed Abidjan- Lagos Trade and
               Transport Facilitation Regional Program. The first phase focused on a regional approach for reducing the
               prevalence of HIV/AIDs along the corridor. The prior project achieved its objectives and demonstrated that
               a regional approach can have a substantial effect in reducing the prevalence of HIV/AIDS disease. Since
               the prior project exceeded targets, the scope of this project was broadened to address transport, transit and
               trade facilitation issues along the corridor (besides addressing some remaining regional HIV/AIDS
               prevention issues). The relevance of objectives is High, given that the project scope was elevated following
               the success of the prior project.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To reduce trade barriers in the port in Cote d'Ivoire.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The causal links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and
                             the intended outcomes were measurable. Implementing national custom modernization plans, training
                             customs agencies, establishing a Single Window and supporting interconnectivity between Ghanaian and
                             Ivorian customs were aimed at streamlining customs procedures. The outputs of these activities can be
                             expected to address some of the trade barriers in the port of Cote d'Ivoire and thereby aid in the long term
                             development outcome of increasing competitiveness of the ports along the Abidjan - Lagos corridor.

                             Outputs (pages 13-14 and page 35).

                                        The computerized single window - Guichet Unique (GUCE) - was established at the Abidjan
                                         Port through Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) arrangements (and not through IDA resources as
                                         originally envisioned). With the establishment of GUCE , all cargo manifests were transmitted by
                                         consignees and shared through the single window and all customs declarations processed through
                                         GUCE.

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transp- APL-2 (P116323)




      Customs procedures manuals for streamlining customs clearance processes were developed at
       the port as targeted.
      Technical assistance was provided for strengthening Cote d'Ivoire's National Facilitation Committee.
      Annual campaigns were held by the Abidjan - Lagos Corridor Organization to collect data on port
       dwell times in ports of the Abidjan -Lagos corridor.

Outcomes. (ICR, paragraph 27).

      The proxy measure used for monitoring performance was reduction in port dwell time. (Dwell time is a
       measure of the time elapsed, from the time imported goods arrives at the port till the time goods leave
       the port for final inland destinations, after all the permits and clearances had been obtained. Shorter
       port dwell times enable cargo owners to save on storage costs charged by the ports). The port dwell
       time declined continuously over the project timeline, decreasing by 21% from a baseline of 14 days in
       2012, to 11 days as targeted in 2018.

Since reducing port dwell time is necessary for realizing the higher level objectives for improving port
competitiveness, this review concludes that the project activities significantly contributed to reducing trade
barriers in the Cote d'Ivoire port.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To reduce trade barriers on the roads along the corridor in Cote d'Ivoire.

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were clear and the
intended outcomes were monitorable. Facilitating data collection and sharing of data between the customs
agencies of Ghana and Cote d'Ivoire, development of customs manuals, training the customs
staff, conducting regional meetings of the National Facilitation Committees and sensitization workshops to
raise awareness among road users on the protocol between Ghana and Cote d'Ivoire, were aimed at
reducing trade barriers on the roads along the corridor in Cote d'Ivoire. These activities were likely to reduce
border crossing time of trucks/merchandise at Eluba- Noe segment of the Abidjan - Lagos corridor.

Outputs (pages 14 -16).

      The activity of interconnection between the customs agencies of Cote d'Ivoire and Ghana, for
       simplifying and reduce customs clearance procedures at the port and at the border, was partially
       completed. The interconnection was operational since 2017 at only three customs offices in Cote
       d'Ivoire (Transit Bureau, Vridi Petroleum Bureau and Noe Bureau at the border) and two offices in
       Ghana (Afalo and Elubo).
      Technical assistance via capacity building and training was provided to the following customs
       departments of Cote d'Ivoire: the investigation office, the customs services performance department

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transp- APL-2 (P116323)



         and the communications department. An evaluation survey organized by customs in 2018 on 428
         customs agents concluded that the reforms had a positive impact on the organization and customs
         performance.
        Awareness campaigns on the reduction of border crossing time were organized by the National
         Facilitation Committee.
        A regional customs guarantee mechanism was established to simplify clearance procedures of transit
         goods. This mechanism is currently being implemented by the chambers of commerce in Burkina
         Faso, Cote d'Ivoire and Ghana.
        The following activities were completed as targeted: The freight terminal at Vridi and the related
         access roads (approximately 8.9 kilometers) and a transit office to improve traffic fluidity within the
         port zone and its neighborhood: The parking lot was rehabilitated for on-site establishment of customs
         and Chamber of Commerce offices issuing transit documents: and Global Positioning Systems
         (GPS) devices were installed on transit trucks to decongest the port area.
        Stakeholders dialogue led by the National Facilitation Committee contributed to revising the parking
         fees and this in turn allowed for higher turnover of trucks.
        The activity associated with establishment of a "Joint Border Post" (JBP) with Ghana at Noe - Elubo
         border was dropped, following the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to
         coordinate the establishment of JBPs in West Africa with support from the European Union.

Outcomes.(ICR, paragraph 30).

      The border crossing time from Elubo to Noe declined from a baseline value of 37 hours in 2012 to 14
         hours when the project closed in March 2019. This exceeded the target of 29.6 hours. However, the
         ICR (paragraph 30) notes this outcome was significantly undermined and the border crossing time
         reverted to 47 hours one year after the border closed, due mainly to the Ghanaian border agencies
         and changes in Ghana customs procedures in 2017 (trucks were allowed to enter the customs border
         area before some required customs documents were ready). It is not clear from the ICR, whether the
         Ghanaian authorities have taken any steps to address the issue.

Although the project did achieve its targets when the project closed, given that the outcomes were
significantly undermined by the deterioration of the border closing time, this review concludes that the project
made a modest contribution to realizing this PDO.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective

To reduce transport barriers on the roads along the corridor in Cote d'Ivoire.

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and
the intended outcomes were monitorable. Rehabilitation of the road sections along the segment of the

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transp- APL-2 (P116323)



corridor, together with collection and dissemination of data required to measure and monitor performance,
were aimed at reducing trade barriers on the roads along the corridor in Cote d'Ivoire and these were likely to
reduce the transport time on the rehabilitated sections of the corridor. These were aimed at the long-term
outcome of seamless movement of people and goods along the corridor.

Outputs (pages 15 - 16 and page 36).

      113.59 km of non-rural roads on the corridor were rehabilitated at project closure, slightly short of the
       target of 130.3 km.
      The market at Elubo was rehabilitated but was not yet functional when the project closed.

These activities were completed as targeted.

      The transit and parking areas at Noe and Aboisso, the freight terminal at Vridi, access roads (about
       nine km), the Aboisso and Noe bridges, and a footbridge in Aboisso to reinforce road safety
       conditions.
      The staff of the Observatory for Transport Fluidity (OFT) of Cote d'Ivoire were trained on data
       collection and analysis.
      Speed bumps and improved road safety signs were placed in the proximity of villages along the
       corridor for road safety.
      The percentage of truckers that were familiar with at least two means of prevention of HIV/AIDS
       increased from 80% to 98% and the percentage of truckers reporting the use of condoms increased
       from 72% to 97%. 206,000 people were sensitized on HIV/AIDS prevention at project completion. Of
       this, 32% were women.

Outcomes (ICR, paragraphs 37 and 38).

      92% of the roads of the corridor in Cote d'Ivoire were reported to be in good or fair condition at project
       closure in March 2019, as compared to 71% at the baseline in September 2012. This exceeded the
       target of 77%.
      Travel time (the journey time from Abidjan to Noe) dropped to two hours at project closure as
       compared to up to five hours in 2012. This outcome was achieved through reducing the number of
       legal and illegal checkpoints and road blocks on the corridor. The target of three checkpoints per 100
       km at the end of the project was surpassed, with four checkpoints along the 170 km from Noe to
       Abidjan in 2018, equivalent to 2.4 checkpoints per 100 km.
      53 million people living in the vicinity of the corridor benefitted from the project activities. This
       exceeded the target of 50 million. 33% of the beneficiaries were women (This was short of the target
       of 55%).

Given that the outcomes were realized, this review concludes that the project development objective
was substantially achieved.



Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transp- APL-2 (P116323)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            There is adequate evidence that the project substantially contributed to realizing the project objectives
                            of reducing trade barriers in Cote d'Ivoire and reducing transport barriers on the roads along the corridor in
                            Cote d'Ivoire. Regarding the objective of reducing trade barriers on the roads along the corridor in Cote
                            d'Ivoire, although the targets were realized when the project closed, the outcomes were significantly
                            undermined leading to deterioration of the border closing time on the Ghana side. On balance, overall efficacy
                            is considered to be Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. An economic analysis was conducted both at appraisal and at closure for project activities
   associated with rehabilitation of roads on the Noe-Abidjan section of the corridor (component two activity). This
   component accounted for 94% of the estimated cost at appraisal and 91% of the actual project cost. The
   analysis was conducted using a simplified version of the Bank's Highway Development Management (HDM -4)
   model. The overall project benefits were assumed to come from: (1) travel time savings due to improved road
   infrastructure: and (2) savings in Vehicle Operating Cost (VOC) due to the improved quality of roads. The
   quantifiable benefits were assumed to come road infrastructure improvements, leading to gains from decreased
   delays. The Net Present Value (NPV) at 12% discount rate was US$32.4 million of the revised appraisal cost by
   the ICR team (as the PAD's detailed cost analysis was not available) and the NPV at closure was US$46.6
   million. The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was slightly higher at 20% as compared to the ex
   ante EIRR of 17%. The ex post EIRR was higher than the ex ante EIRR due to the higher than anticipated traffic
   flows on the corridor.

   Administrative and Operational inefficiencies. There were several administrative and operational issues both
   at preparation and during implementation. One, the cost of civil works was underestimated at appraisal, with the
   cost of civil works increasing rather substantially during implementation (the cost of civil works was about 30%
   higher than the awarded contract in the beginning of the project and by seven percent when compared to the
   appraisal estimates). The cost overruns were due to a combination of factors, including poor quality of
   preparation studies and unforeseen site conditions for the Vridi freight station and its access roads which had
   been prepared in a crisis environment. Underground utility services, such as lines used for electricity distribution,
   traffic lights, street lights, natural gas transportation, telecommunication, water/wastewater pipelines and
   broadband internet services were not properly identified. This necessitated extension of the work contracts and
   increased supervision cost as well (the actual supervision cost was more than twice the appraisal estimate). (2)
   major shortcomings in compliance with safeguards, led to partial suspension of disbursements for eight months
   in 2016 (discussed in section 10a). This necessitated additional costs for extra environmental and social
   measures and contributed to delays during implementation. and (3). Recurrent delays in counterpart funding
   which at appraisal was estimated to be as much as 40% of the appraisal estimate, impacted the implementation


                                                                                                                             Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transp- APL-2 (P116323)



of activities on the ground throughout the life of the project. and (4). Inadequate cooperation between Ghana
and Cote d'Ivoire with respect to the signing and implementation of the customs interconnectivity at the Noe-
Elubo border contributed to delays and at closure this activity was partially completed.

In sum, despite the significant administrative and operational issues, efficiency is rated substantial, considering
the difficult conflict environment under which the project was operating during preparation and the fragile post
conflict environment in the initial years of implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       94.00
 Appraisal                                                  17.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       91.00
 ICR Estimate                                               20.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the government and Bank strategy is High. Efficacy of the two objectives -
 reducing trade barriers in Cote d'Ivoire and reducing transport barriers on the roads along the corridor in Cote
d'Ivoire are rated as substantial. Although the targets were realized, efficacy of the third objective - reducing
trade barriers on the road along the corridor in Cote d'Ivoire was seriously undermined by the deterioration of
the border crossing time on Ghana side, one year after the project closing date. Given this, overall efficacy is
rated as substantial, although marginally so. Although there were serious administrative and operational
drawbacks, efficiency is rated as substantial, considering the difficult conflict environment under which the
project was operating during preparation, and the fragile post conflict environment in the initial years of
implementation. Taking these factors into account, outcome is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. The ICR (paragraph 82) notes that trade facilitation and customs modernization
is a major concern of the Economic Community of West African States. However, the government's decision

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transp- APL-2 (P116323)



to physically inspect imports would undermine the benefits of the single window activity. When the project
closed, Cote d'Ivoire had still not signed the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Ghana on the
operation and maintenance of the Noe bridge (ICR, paragraph 84). Further, without regional commitment,
there is risk associated with the activity pertaining to the number of roadblocks and checkpoints on the
corridor, given that these are subject to local security conditions and political direction (ICR, paragraph 83).

Institutional risk. There is risk of underfunding for road maintenance activities on the rehabilitated sections
of the corridor. The ICR (page 26, footnote 18) notes that over the period 2012-2015, the financing needs for
road maintenance amounted to West African CFA francs 741.28 billion as compared to the requirements
of 471,56 billion. This corresponded to a financing gap of 269.72 billion (approximately US$539.0 million).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project was prepared based on the experiences from the first phase of a Bank -financed project and
  from the other projects financed by the Bank in the region (East Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation
  Project, the Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa Transport and Transit Facilitation
  Project and the West Africa Transport and Transit Facilitation Project). As a "first generation corridor
  project, the project activities included hard infrastructure road investments alongside trade facilitation
  components (such as activities aimed at trade facilitation awareness campaigns at the national
  level). Several risks were identified at appraisal, including risks associated with the multi-dimension of the
  project (as the activities required concerted efforts by customs and other border control agencies), and
  governance risks. The mitigation measures incorporated at design, included efforts aimed at improving
  the customs internal reporting systems and public disclosure of the number of illegal road blocks along
  the corridor (PAD, page 74). The project design appropriately included a Project Preparation Advance
  (PPA) for recruiting fiduciary specialists before the project became effective. The arrangements made at
  appraisal for monitoring were appropriate (discussed in section 9).

  There were several shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. For one thing, as indicated in section 5, there were
  cost overruns. This was primarily due to the low quality of the technical studies for civil works at appraisal
  due to a combination of factors, including poor quality of preparation studies, and unforeseen site
  conditions at the Vridi freight station and its access roads. This necessitated revision of the civil works
  activities and led to cost overruns of the civil works activities and increased supervision costs as well. For
  another, the staff of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in the Ministry of Economy and Finance
  (MEF) staff had no experience executing Bank projects. This contributed to the long procurement process
  (the construction of the Vridi Trucks station and rehabilitation of the access roads was subject to an
  year's delay due to poor management of the procurement process), significant delays in executing the
  Resettlement Action Plan and weakness in monitoring cross-cutting activities directly managed by the
  PIU (fiduciary management). and three, weak capacity to monitor safeguards led to the partial
  suspension of disbursement in 2016 (discussed in section 10). The PIU eventually had to be superseded
  by a new PIU in the Ministry of Economic Infrastructure (a condition imposed by the Bank for lifting the
  suspension of disbursement).




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transp- APL-2 (P116323)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Twelve Implementation Status Results reports were archived during project execution (ICR, page 2). The
 supervision team included a customs consultant and a road engineer consultant with strong experience in
 the region and who had worked in similar projects. The supervision was aided by the presence of the Bank
 staff in Cote d'Ivoire, who were in close contract with the Project Implementation Unit and the respective
 government agencies. The supervision team provided candid assessments to the Government and the
 Bank management during implementation and immediately took the decision to partially suspend
 disbursements, in the wake of shortcomings in compliance with social safeguards (discussed in section
 10). The supervision team worked closely with the government to resolve the issue with a Nine-
 Point Action Plan, which among other things transferred responsibility to a new PIU. The supervision team
 also worked proactively and led the dialogue on road safety with high level authorities.

 There were shortcomings is supervision. The ICR (paragraph 77) notes that on average only one full
 supervision mission was conducted per year (as compared to the usual norm of two full supervision
 missions a year), although interim supervision missions were held as needed, especially in the last years of
 implementation. According the information provided by the team, there were as many as four Task Team
 Leaders over a project lifetime of seven years.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was clear and the two outcome indicators - reduction in port dwell time and
 reduction in border-crossing time of trucks/merchandise along the corridor in Elubo - Noe (border with
 Ghana) were appropriate for monitoring project performance. The indicators were easily measurable. The
 M&E framework however could have been strengthened, to include indicators on the assessment of
 transport costs, trade volume and passenger travel.

 The indicators mentioned above were to be monitored through the data collected and monitored by the
 Abidjan - Lagos Corridor Organization (ALCO), based on a methodology to be developed during
 preparation. ALCO had already provided the data for the prior Bank-financed project and this aided in
 collecting data for monitoring performance. Baseline data had been collected by the ALCO for the port


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transp- APL-2 (P116323)



 dwell time and border crossing time and data for the first year had been collected by the ALCO under the
 first phase of the project.



b. M&E Implementation
  Although M&E in the first phase of the project was funded by the Bank, ALCO was created under
  ECOWAS through the Accra Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) in 2007. The recipient countries of
  the first phase of the program (Ghana, Togo and Benin) continued to benefit from monitoring and results
  dissemination until March 2019, more than a year beyond the closing data for the first phase of the
  program.



c. M&E Utilization
  Comparative results across the regional countries were disseminated through stakeholder workshops,
  information sharing and awareness raising on trade and transport issues along the corridor. This
  provided a platform for continual regional policy dialogue on trade facilitation, including customs
  modernization reforms and port efficiency.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   This project was classified as a Category B project under World Bank safeguard policies. Three safeguard
   policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Physical Cultural Resources
   (OP/BP 4.11) and, Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Assessment and Physical Cultural Resources. The PDA (paragraph 71) notes that
   preliminary field assessments conducted at appraisal revealed no possible adverse environmental impacts
   associated with the planned civil works (road and bridge improvement and rehabilitation of the Vridi trucks
   parking lot). The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and the Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
   to address environmental issues, were prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 40).
   The ICR (paragraph 72) notes that there were occupational and road safety issues during
   implementation. There were at least 22 accidents, including five fatalities, that had not been reported to the
   Bank and some led to protests from local communities. As a result, there was a partial suspension of
   disbursement during implementation. The suspension was lifted after eight months following the
   establishment of a new PIU.

   Physical Cultural Resources (PCR). The ICR does not provide information on whether there were any
   issues associated with the safeguards on physical cultural resources during implementation. According to




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transp- APL-2 (P116323)



   the information provided by the team, there were no issues associated with the safeguards on Physical
   Cultural Resources during implementation.

   Involuntary Resettlement. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared and publicly-disclosed at
   appraisal in 2011 to address resettlement issues (PAD, paragraph 66). The ICR (paragraph 71) notes that
   the RAP was updated in 2013. The ICR (paragraph 72) notes that there were systematic delays in the
   implementation of RAP, due to delays in mobilization of resources during implementation. The ICR notes
   that there were 2411 Project-Affected Persons (PAPs). 94 percent of the PAP (2256) were compensated
   and 155 could not be reached. About US$7.2 million was disbursed for the RAP (of this 98% were paid
   directly to the PAP and the balance placed in an escrow account). At Noe, a platform was built under the
   project to relocate the affected traders. According to the information provided by the team, a platform refers
   to land that was built into a market for the relocated traders.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. An assessment conducted at appraisal, concluded that the financial management
   arrangements of the Abidjan - Lagos Corridor Organization (ALCO) were satisfactory and the financial
   management risk was rated as modest (PAD, paragraph 62). The ICR (paragraph 73) notes that financial
   management arrangements during implementation were deemed to be satisfactory and the project
   complied with the reporting and accounting requirements as stated in the Loan Agreements. The ICR
   however provides no details on the quality of audits.

   Procurement management. A procurement management assessment of the Project Coordination Unit
   (PCU) and ALCO, was conducted at appraisal. A procurement plan for the first eighteen months was
   prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal. This plan was to be updated as required during
   implementation to reflect the actual needs during implementation (PAD, paragraph 43). The ICR
   (paragraph 75) notes that there were no instances of misprocurement in the project. The ICR however
   notes that there were significant delays in procurement of critical activities (such as, the construction of
   Aboisso and Noe rest stops and the rehabilitation of the Grand Bassam - Aboisso road section).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transp- APL-2 (P116323)



                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. The combination of "hard" and "soft" components in a "first generation corridor project"
can help in strengthening the overall impact of the regional program. Investment activities
financed along the road, port and borders in this project, were complemented through trade
facilitation awareness. The lesson is that such projects can be a prelude to "second generation
corridor projects" to include elements of growth and to encourage governments to improve
coordination of joint regional reforms.

2. Implementation readiness is key to avoid potential delays and cost overruns. In this project,
there was a long delay between the time when the technical studies were done and when the works
had started (leading to additional degradations on the infrastructure). The technical designs needed
to be modified and this contributed to the cost overruns and delays during implementation. The
lesson is that infrastructure projects should ensure that all the required technical and economic
studies are of high quality and, if needed, recruit specialists to strengthen the client capacity.

3. While counterpart financing can be helpful in raising the degree of government
commitment, it is necessary to ensure that the government provides proof of adequate
budgetary commitment. About 40% of the appraisal estimate of the project cost in this project,
was to come through counterpart funding. Delays in mobilizing counterpart funding contributed to
significant delays in implementing the infrastructure component of the project. The lesson is that
when counterpart funding of this magnitude is involved, it is necessary to ensure that the
government provides proof of adequate budgetary commitment and that this be made a condition of
project effectiveness.

4. All measures available to the team (including hard decisions like the suspension of
disbursement) should be used when important issues are identified during implementation.
The partial suspension of disbursements due to shortcomings in social safeguards compliance in
this project, served as the basis for increased high-level dialogue with the government. Due
diligence measures (road safety and occupational health and safety measures) taken to lift the
suspension, led to additional positive outcomes which benefitted the workers and the population
living in the area of the project investments.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transp- APL-2 (P116323)




14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and analytical. The ICR candidly discusses the issues associated with the regional dimension
of the project. It is also candid in discussing the non-compliance with safeguards which led to partial
suspension of disbursements. It is internally consistent and draws good lessons from the experience of
implementing this project.

However, there were some shortcomings. The ICR (paragraph 48) notes that the overall outcome is moderately
satisfactory, given the high relevance of objective, substantial efficacy and efficiency. High relevance and
substantial efficacy and efficiency would imply a satisfactory outcome, according to the guidelines. The ICR
provides no information on whether the audits were unqualified.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 16 of 16
