     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Youth Employment (FY14) (P132667)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022025

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P132667                                    BJ-Youth Employment (FY14)

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Benin                                      Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53920                                  30-Jun-2018                                        32,111,789.97

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Mar-2014                                30-Jun-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           35,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            35,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        32,111,789.97                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Shiva Chakravarti          Salim J. Habayeb              Joy Behrens                   IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Sharma




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the Project was “to improve access to employment skills and employment opportunities for
   underemployed youth in Benin.” (Financing agreement No. 5392-BJ, 2014; PAD No. 795, 2014).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Youth Employment (FY14) (P132667)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  24-Apr-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Developing Skills through Apprenticeships (Approval: US$ 6.3 million; Actual: US$
   7.50 million) – This component supported improved access for underemployed youth to apprenticeships of
   improved quality in skilled trades and helped the Government and private sector trade associations to
   expand and improve nationally recognized certification for skills learned in such apprenticeships. It
   supported three priorities of the National Employment Policy: (i) promotion and sustainability of SME’s and
   small industries; (ii) building capacity among employment actors; (iii) promotion of national solidarity in
   employment services (i.e. increasing access of poor and vulnerable households to such services); and (iv)
   building the public and private institutional capacity for employment promotion.

   Component 2: Developing Small Business Skills (Approval: US$ 15 million; Actual: US$ 13 million) –
   This component supported the ANPE to scale up and improve the quality of its existing programs to assist
   predominantly underemployed youth to develop skills related to establishing and managing a small
   business. This included (i) developing training modules for life skills training, business training, and
   business plan preparation for beneficiaries of different levels of literacy; (ii) supporting the formation of
   business groups and facilitation to help beneficiaries to pair with existing private sector firms; and (iii)
   supporting short vocational training in high potential sectors. In so doing, it would support key priorities of
   the National Employment Policy: (i) the promotion and sustainability of SME’s and small industries, and (ii)
   the promotion of national solidarity in employment services.

   Component 3: Start-up Support (Approval: US$ 8.7 million; Actual: US$ 10.30 million) – The skills
   developed under components 1 and 2 may not be sufficient by themselves for youth to access improved
   labor market outcomes without complementary support to address other constraints that they typically
   faced. In line with the World Bank Independent Evaluation Group’s 2012 thematic evaluation of youth
   employment programs whose main operational recommendation was to adopt a comprehensive approach,
   the project aimed to address not only skills constraints through components 1 and 2, but also lack of capital,
   information, networking, and mentoring.

   Component 4: Institutional Capacity Building and Project Management (Approval: US$ 5 million;
   Actual: US$ 4.2 million) – This component supported four of the nine priorities of the National Employment
   Policy: (i) improving the employment information system; (ii) building capacity among employment actors;
   (iii) improving the coordination among employment promotion programs; and (iv) building the public and
   private institutional capacity for employment promotion.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         BJ-Youth Employment (FY14) (P132667)



                       Project cost and financing. At appraisal, the project was estimated at US$ 36.9 million, financed by IDA-
                       53920 grant of US$ 35 million and a borrower contribution of US$ 1.9 million. The proceeds were not fully
                       disbursed. US$ 32,111,790 were disbursed from the World Bank Financing and US$ 500,647 from the
                       borrower contribution. The total disbursement amounted to US$ 32,612,437.

                       Dates. The project became effective on November 5, 2014. A level-2 restructuring in April 2018 extended
                       the loan closing date from June 30, 2018 to June 30, 2019. The restructuring changed component costs
                       and reallocated between disbursement categories. Additionally, it changed the results framework by
                       dropping two intermediate results indicators and reducing the ambition of two other intermediate results
                       indicators. The project closed on June 30, 2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project was consistent with the Country partnership strategy (FY 2013-2018) at approval: the project
was relevant to Objective 5 of the Country partnership strategy (CPF), ‘Labor skills development for youth in
Benin.’ The project continued to be consistent with the country strategy at closing: Country Partnership
Framework (FY19-23) identified ‘BJ-Youth Employment’ project as relevant to objective 5, ‘Improving
relevance of education and professional training for strengthened job creation in Benin.’ Moreover,
Women’s economic empowerment was a foundational theme in CPF at closing following the Systematic
country diagnostic finding that women’s weak economic empowerment is a significant constraint to
achieving twin goals in Benin. The project focused on women beneficiaries by aiming that at least half of
beneficiaries were women, specific needs of young women were taken into consideration, and gender
disaggregated results indicators were collected (PAD, page 12). Additionally, sub-component 1.3 provided
support for girls in nontraditional trades (PAD, page 38). The project was also consistent with the 2012
national Employment Policy that by 2025, all Beninese women and men of working age have a job that
provides an income sufficient to meet their vital needs and ensure their full well-being (PAD, page 9).

While unemployment rates in Benin are generally low relative to comparators, the levels of
underemployment are high. Benin also has a large informal economy with 72% employed workers
employed less than 35 hours and/or in a lower paid job than the minimum guaranteed wage (ICR, page 5).
The project was suitable for the country context because it expanded and scaled up an existing government
program and supported youths to start their own businesses in a context that is highly informal and unable
to support workers. Additionally, the World bank has previous sector experience of a labor force
development project in the country (P070204).


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                                     Page 3 of 14
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  BJ-Youth Employment (FY14) (P132667)



EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Improve access to employment skills for underemployed youth in Benin

               Rationale
               The theory of change (TOC) for the project was convincing. The main assumption underpinning the TOC was
               that skills and financial constraints prevent youths from full employment. The project focused on increasing
               these skills through two channels: Improving Employability through apprenticeship program and developing
               small business skills. In Benin, apprenticeship is one of the main sources of employment skills, especially for
               youth with low levels of education. The project builds upon this existing country structure of apprenticeship
               training by improving the quality of apprenticeship, which included equipping training centers and improving
               master artisans’ capacity to teach. The project also supported scaling up the apprenticeship certifications by
               enhancing government capacity to conduct examinations e.g. new communes offering examinations.
               Moreover, the project included increasing women’s participation in male-dominated programs through
               information campaigns, network facilities and direct monetary incentives. The second channel aimed to
               support graduates of the apprenticeship program, in addition to other underemployed youth, to provide life
               skills training and business training.

               Employment skills may not translate into employment opportunities due to financial and capital constraints.
               The project aimed to minimize this constraint by providing start-up grants to the apprenticeship and business-
               training graduates in fields with significant capital intensity under objective 2. The main assumption
               underpinning the second objective was that access to grants will translate into employment opportunities for
               underemployed youth in Benin. Temporally, the youths would first participate in enhanced apprenticeship
               trainings, receive certifications (CQP/CQM), then enroll in life skills and small business trainings, prepare
               business proposals under the small business trainings and apply for grants. Finally, the beneficiaries would
               productively invest those grants and receive follow up support to start or expand a business.

               Selected output and Intermediate outcomes:

                     Ten occupation streams offering new post-apprenticeship exams leading to the CQP or CQM were
                        created, meeting the revised target of 10.
                       1,069 master artisans, 54.3 percent of which were female, received skills upgrade training, exceeding
                        the target of 500.
                       Six training centers received new equipment, falling short of the target of 10.
                       77 communes offered exams leading to the Certificat de Qualification aux Métiers (CQM), which
                        exceeded the target of 60.
                       15,729 of youth with low levels of literacy received support for creating business plans, surpassing the
                        target of 5000.
                       474 women supported were trained in trades with traditionally low numbers of women, exceeding the
                        revised target of 200

               Outcomes

               The project surpassed the result framework targets for both PDO level indicators for the objective ‘Improving
               Access to Employment Skills’:

                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ-Youth Employment (FY14) (P132667)




Youth supported by the project receiving the apprenticeship certification (CQP) under the project increased
from a baseline of 0 in 2014 to 2,991 in 2019, exceeding the target of 2,500 by 19.6 percent. The ICRR stated
that the targeting method (decentralized enrollment, tailored communication, and random selection) ensured
that the program benefited targeted beneficiaries: who had never attended school (28 percent), not completed
school (33 percent), and female (+50 percent).

Youth completing small business and life skills training under the project increased from a baseline of 0 in
2014 to 15,864 in 2019, exceeding the target of 15,000 by 5 percent. These consisted of two separate
trainings: ACV (life skills training) and TRIE & CREE (generate your business idea training/ start your
business). While ACV had a retention rate of 92.2%, TRIE and CREE had absolute retention.

Preliminary results of an impact evaluation (IE) support some trends from the results framework. The impact
evaluation studied the impacts of trainings under component 2 (small business and life skills training)
mentioned above. The IE reports results for two randomly sampled groups from the population: the treatment
group who received trainings and the control group, which did not receive any training (see M&E section for
details on impact evaluation). The IE found that Short-term impacts on employment skills were strong and
positive. The trainings had positive effects on the sampled beneficiaries as compared to the control group,
both on their socio-emotional skills and on their business practices. The training had a large, positive impact
on non-cognitive skills: self-efficacy (especially for women), locus of control, and depression (especially for
men). The IE also found that the trainings had a large impact on business practices. For example, more than
half the participants who received training kept separate accounts for households and business, compared to
about a third in the control group. The ICR noted that the practice of keeping written records and a written
budget also increased among training beneficiaries (ICR, Page 16).



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve access to employment opportunities for underemployed youth in Benin

Rationale
The theory of change (TOC) for the second objective was convincing. The PAD stated that even with
employability skills, a main constraint for youth in starting their own business is the lack of financial resources.
A survey of apprenticeship graduates showed that even after receiving training and formal certification, many
of them were unable to start their own or joint businesses due to lack of resources. The project aimed to
minimize this constraint by providing start-up grants and follow-up support to the apprenticeship and
graduates in fields with significant capital intensity. The main assumption underpinning the TOC was that
access to grants will translate into employment opportunities for underemployed youth in Benin (see the
rationale section under objective 1 above for an explanation of the TOC for the whole project).

Outputs



                                                                                                      Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ-Youth Employment (FY14) (P132667)



The ICR notes the following outputs under Component 3. Start Up support:

      Contract with Mobile operator MTN signed for mobile payments of start-up grant to qualified trainees.
      Effective mechanism developed by PCU M&E Specialist for data collection on payments and
       verification using ACE feedback via Google Forms and vetting with MTN.
      Rich database built of 15,000 + youth with approved business plan in as many as 90 different types of
       enterprises awarded start-up grants.

These outputs aided the process of disbursement of start-up grants and gathering of data of beneficiaries.

Outcomes

The outcome indicator for this object was the number of youths starting or expanding microenterprises with
support from the project, which increased from a baseline of 0 in 2014 to 15,509 in 2019, exceeding the target
of 10,000 by 56 percent. However, this indicator was insufficient for tracking the results for access to
employment opportunities because it reports the number whose business plans were approved and received
a start-up grant, but no other outcomes were reported to assess the viability of these businesses. A post-
grant training (GERME) was conducted to provide follow-up support for businesses, which had a 92.7 percent
retention, but no variables evaluate these follow-up trainings.

The preliminary impact evaluation results provide some subsidiary results that were not assessed by the
results framework. The IE reports results for three randomly sampled groups from the population: treatment
group 1 (T1), which received grants and training, treatment group 2 (T2), which only received a cash-grant,
and a control group, which received neither. Across both groups (T1 and T2), the cash grant was mostly used
for purchasing productive asset. However, T1 was more likely to use the grant for productive grants (80
percent) then T2 (68 percent). Half of both groups (T1 and T2) also spent the grant on purchasing inventory
for the enterprise. The IE also stated that the program did not have any significant effects on profits and
earnings. The evaluation notes there isn’t enough elapsed time to assess if these lower profits were due to
higher expenditure for expansion or lack of demands for products and services from these businesses.

Yet, the ICR noted that employment opportunities were improved through the combination of training and
startup support. Beneficiaries invested in their economic activities, grew the amount of capital and inventory
of their firm, and women hired more labor (ICR, page 18). The ICR reported this based on positive results of
the trainings (see objective 1 for details), which might turn into increased income and profits, but the evidence
to support this conclusion is not available. While noted positive impacts of trainings on business practices and
usage of start-up grants indicate an increased access to employment opportunities, the sustainability of these
employment opportunities will depend on long-term trends of income and profits of the businesses (see Risk
to development section for discussion on sustainability).




Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BJ-Youth Employment (FY14) (P132667)


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Based on the information in the ICR, the objective to improve access to employment skills was fully achieved,
                            and the objective to improve access to employment opportunities was almost fully achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal, the project did not undertake a cost-benefit analysis or cost-effectiveness analysis due to limited
   data and difficulties with quantifying employability. The PAD anticipated that the proposed project was expected
   to improve youth labor market outcomes and produce important social benefits but did not give any data of a
   comparable project in Benin or any other country. The only calculation cited in the PAD is that, without
   assistance, youth will most likely find work in an economic activity with very low productivity because according
   to the national statistics about 60 percent of youth aged 15-24 and 47 percent of youth aged 25-34 earn less
   than the poverty line while working full time. The median wage was estimated at around 20,000 FCFA per month
   for youth with no education and 25,000 FCFA per month for youth with primary education, compared to 45,000
   FCFA per month for youth with higher levels of education. The analysis stated that by strengthening the human
   capital of selected youth and supporting their transition into the labor market, the project was expected to have a
   positive impact on their productivity and future revenues (PAD, page 24). The end-line survey of impact
   evaluation is expected to report revenue and profitability trends of the businesses started under the project.

   The ICR provided cost comparisons for training interventions under component 2 for similar programs around
   the world. The ICR also estimated the cost of the intervention per person at US$ 745 and concluded that these
   number are comparable with comparators and that the cost of similar interventions in developing countries that
   range between US$ 1,000-US $2,000.

   The ICR also noted three factors that negatively affected the project’s implementation efficiency: (i)
   underperforming coordination during the first two years due to the Government’s decision to bypass Bank
   procedures and appoint a coordinator paid through Government funds; (ii) The use of country systems for
   financial management; and (iii) frequent changes in line ministry and high turn-around of key personnel
   aggravating issues linked to country systems since new counterparts had to be educated on the project every
   few months (ICR, page 19). The ICR also stated that low coordination in initial years resulted from government-
   nominated coordinator’s poor understanding of project scope and planned activities. Similarly, financial
   management system delays caused problems with disbursement, which influenced the sequencing of project
   activities and decision of dropping activities during restructuring. Finally, the project coordination unit had to
   modify relationships and re-coordinate with civil servants each time the line ministry changed (ICR, pp 24-25).


   Efficiency Rating
          Modest

                                                                                                                            Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BJ-Youth Employment (FY14) (P132667)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High, as the objectives were aligned at project closing with the Bank’s Country
Partnership Framework for Benin (FY 18– FY 23) and the country’s national employment policy. Efficacy is
rated Substantial, as the project almost fully achieved its development objectives. Efficiency is rated Modest
because of insufficient economic analysis and shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation. Based on these
ratings, and consistent with the achievements and shortcomings noted, Outcome is rated Moderately
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR characterized Risk to Development Outcome as Modest because (a) Government of Benin is
committed to the youth and social inclusion agenda as reflected in the many national programs in existence
(b) project generated content, process, and institutional improvements will last after project closing (c) skills
developed will be sustained among the beneficiaries. The ICR stated that while sustainability is a challenge
in absence of external support, the success of the project has sparked interest in government for continued
engagement. However, it is important to note that in the past the reduction of donor funding, including the
closing of Bank’s Labor Force Development project drastically reduced the money supply to FODEFCA, the
main financier of apprenticeship program. (PAD Annex II, page 34).

The ICR also recognized a risk to the sustainability of the commune-level employment services. Moreover,
the sustainability of employment opportunities rests on the viability of microenterprises created under the
project. At the closing of the project, there was not enough evidence to assess the sustainability of the
businesses started or expanded under the project. The long-term outcome (skills and employment
opportunities) will only be sustained if these businesses are profitable and if youths stay employed through
them.



                                                                                                        Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Youth Employment (FY14) (P132667)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Aforementioned in the relevance section, the project continued to be relevant to Country Partnership
  Framework (FY19-23) and 2012 National Employment Policy. The PAD stated that project’s design was
  based on the lessons learned from previous youth employment projects, including a report by the
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) of the World Bank, which suggested that a comprehensive
  approach involving complementary interventions to remove key constraints to youth employment can
  maximize the impact of youth employment programs (PAD Annex II, page 24). Additionally, the project
  had a specific focus on social development aspects. The project aimed to put an emphasis on targeting
  youth who were most affected by underemployment -- youth who are female, rural, currently self-
  employed, and/or with low levels of education. The ICR also noted that the gender Innovation lab
  provided insights from academic literature to support female beneficiaries.

  Quality at entry review (QER) raised issues about implementation arrangements and low capacity of the
  coordinating agency. The PAD acknowledged that weak capacity of stakeholders was a potential risk and
  proposed capacity building activities (Component 4). The ICR at closing stated that the delays observed
  in reaching effectiveness and in starting the implementation of the main activities suggested that the
  project was not fully ready to be implemented after Board approval (ICR, page 31). Yet, the project put
  effective monitoring and evaluation measures in place as discussed in the M&E section. The results
  framework indicated the agency responsible for monitoring each indicator. Additionally, the project
  assessed several operational risks associated with the program (Annex 4, PAD): stakeholder risks,
  governance, design, social and environment, monitoring, and sustainability with mitigation measures.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR stated that the World Bank team conducted periodic supervision missions, proactively addressing
 implementation issues as they emerged. The findings of the implementation support missions focused on
 performance of implementing agencies in managing the project and the progress toward achieving the
 PDO and were reported regularly in the Aide-Memoires and ISRs (ICR, page 31). The team provided
 regular implementation status through reports and tracked the progress of the project. The Bank team took
 proactive steps to manage risks. It identified key challenges facing FODEFCA (the implementing agency
 for Component 1) and pushed for an institutional audit to improve its functioning and took the risk of the
 beneficiary selection process very seriously and addressed it by promoting a transparent and equitable
 process (ICR, page 31-32).




                                                                                                 Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Youth Employment (FY14) (P132667)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Clear PDOs and components aided a concise design supported by a results framework. For the first
 objective, “improving access to employment skills,” the project provided support for (i) upgraded CQM and
 CQM examinations for different trades (ii) life and business skills training. Both activities are underpinned
 by good intermediate and outcome indicators e.g. number of youths receiving CQP certification (see
 efficacy section for details). For the second objective, “improving access to employment opportunities,” the
 project provided start-up grants and follow up support (GERME trainings), which is underpinned by one
 outcome indicator – number of youths starting or expanding microenterprises with support from the project.
 There were no indicators to measure the quality of follow-up trainings (GERME) or businesses started
 under the program.

 The main gap in the M&E design was that some indicators were not sufficient to adequately capture the
 contribution of project activities to project outcomes. In the efficiency section, PAD noted that in the
 absence of project youth will most likely find work in an economic activity with very low
 productivity. However, in M&E design, baselines for many indicators did not account for this assessment –
 that is, all baselines were zero. The first component, developing skills through apprenticeship expands the
 existing government program by scaling up apprenticeship certification, supporting the quality of
 apprenticeships (equipping training centers, master artisan training), and support for girls in
 apprenticeships. Indicators that only report project beneficiaries with zero baseline do not capture the
 before-and-after effects of the quality of the support provided by the WBG.

 Some of these gaps were addressed by a rigorous impact evaluation to study the relative impacts of
 providing basic business training (component 2), providing start-up capital (component 2 and 3), or
 providing both on employment outcomes for youth after 12 and 24 months of the program. The
 experimental design allowed for causal inferences about the results the project activities. It focused on 15
 southern communes from the 77 communes to minimize cost. Three highest communes with highest
 contribution to poverty were selected from 5 departments. Three rounds of data collection were (see M&E
 implementation for details on the impact evaluation).



b. M&E Implementation
  The PAD envisaged that the PCU would develop a computerized system to track all outcome and
  intermediate indicators as well as other information required for effective management. The ICR stated
  that the implementation was more cumbersome than expected due to interrupted power supply and
  inadequate time for management information system (MIS) trainings due to initial payment delays for
  component 2 (ICR, page 27). The issue of not being able to collect information on life and business skills
  trainings without either delaying the trainings or starting trainings without monitoring was addressed by

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Youth Employment (FY14) (P132667)



  using Google forms. For the first component, the team collected exam data and maintained an Access
  database to ensure verification of the data collected by the government database. Under Component 3,
  grant payments were made using mobile money by contracting with the mobile operator, MTN. A Google
  Form (1st wave) and Survey CTO (2nd wave), a mobile data collection app, was used to retrieve data
  related to SIM activation for use in start-up grants payments.

  Moreover, the project conducted an impact evaluation, which was financed by the World Bank’s Gender
  Innovation lab. A baseline survey was conducted in July/August 2017. A set of 3,444 eligible applicants
  were randomly selected from 15 communes stratified by gender and their participation in project
  activities. The applicants were randomly assigned to four treatments: 1. Participants assigned to the first
  treatment group (T1) received the full package of interventions, including the training and cash grant; 2.
  Participants assigned to the second treatment group (T2) received the business and socioemotional
  skills training but not the cash grant; 3. Participants assigned to the third treatment group (T3) received
  an unconditional cash grant of up to US $400 but not the training; 4. Participants assigned to the pure
  control received neither the training nor the cash grant.



c. M&E Utilization
  Program data was periodically presented in progress reports and generated with increasing frequency
  notably after the MTR to keep up with the pace of implementation. The PCU M&E Specialist analyzed
  data to generate a weekly feedback report for various actors and stakeholders (ANPE Directorate, PCU,
  ACE, and Trainers) which helped streamline organization of activities for the following week. The real-
  time data also informed planning and budgeting of activities, for example, on short-term technical
  training, preparation and verification in payment of start-up grants to beneficiaries, and in quality
  assurance such as through the identification of ineffective catering service firms contracted for the
  trainings (ICR, page 27-28). The ICR also stated that the pivotal role played by the ACE (Employment
  Agent) in strengthening monitoring and evaluation in the project has created a replicable model for future
  endeavors in youth employment- such as the proposed Youth Inclusion project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards: The project was classified as a category C project and was expected
   to have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts. The project financed apprenticeships for selected
   youths working with a master crafts person acquiring skills and work experience. This skill acquisition might
   involve occupational health impacts to both the apprentices and the masters- however, nothing adverse or
   untoward was reported during implementation. Also, there was no plan for new civil works or rehabilitation
   of training centers (ICR, page 29).




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BJ-Youth Employment (FY14) (P132667)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: The project heavily relied on country’s FM system. During implementation, the
  cumbersome financial procedures associated with this system contributed to cumulative delays which had
  to be tackled with a creative workaround. The delays due to unpredictability with payments ended up
  impacting the sequencing of activities. In the first year of implementation, the FM issue impacted timeliness
  of payments in the project, with the program making slow progress. Delays however also meant more time
  needed for implementation, which the restructuring subsequently addressed (ICR, page 25). By mid-2016
  a creative and practicable workaround to the SIGFIP system to help prioritize PEJ was devised to improve
  funds flow and implementation quality. The successful implementation of an action plan for accelerating
  payments through SIGFIP greatly improved overall disbursement for the remainder of the project (ICR,
  page 30). The ratings for Financial management changed from moderately unsatisfactory to
  moderately satisfactory in November 2017 and remained at that level for the remainder of the project
  (Operations Portal).

  Procurement: Overall, the procurement rating was steady at moderately satisfactory from the MTR to
  project closing. The project complied with the Bank’s procurement policies and procedures (OP/BP 11.00).
  Large procurement contracts centered around the procurement of training firms, hiring of the ACE across
  all communes, selecting service providers who would develop entrepreneurship and life skills curricula and
  administer training (under Component 2), and acquisition of new equipment around the proposed
  upgrading in a few public and private technical and vocational training centers (under Subcomponent 1.2)
  to ensure that apprentices were able to follow the dual training in adequate conditions, and to improve
  overall quality of apprenticeships (ICR, page 30).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Several unintended positive impacts were reported by the ICR (p. 23):

         The PEJ implementation experience triggered the mainstreaming of short-term technical training
          (FTCD) into all vocational training centers (CFP) and technical schools, with FTCD also being
          seriously considered for inclusion in the government’s National Vocational Training strategy.
         The success and visibility of PEJ informed further thinking within government on exploring ways to
          ensure that more unemployed and under-employed youth are reinserted into everyday practical
          trades to assure better income certainty for graduates of the program under a proposed new
          initiative termed PURDE (Projet d'Urgence de Reconversion des Demandeurs de l'Emploi).
         The extensive database of applicants spun off the development of a mobile App by ANPE to match
          up trades people with customers seeking their services. ANPE saw potential in putting this data to
          good use and an App in beta testing, expected to be functional by the end of 2019, was highlighted
          during the ICR mission.



d. Other
  ---


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BJ-Youth Employment (FY14) (P132667)




11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                Both ICR and this ICR Review
                                                                                have the same ratings for the
                                                                                harmonized criteria (high
                                                                                relevance of objectives,
                                                                                substantial efficacy and modest
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   efficiency). The aggregation of
                                                                                these ratings is consistent with a
                                                                                moderately satisfactory
                                                                                outcome. If the ICR had followed
                                                                                OPCS Guidelines, it would have
                                                                                reached the same conclusion.
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  High                  High

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 34) offered several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons
restated by IEG:

        A strong communication strategy, decentralized delivery, customized content aligned to
         target groups, and incentives for maximum participation such as provision of childcare and
         subsidies for lunch and travel are important factors for determining the success of
         employment training programs such as this youth employment project in Benin.
        Early joint preparation by Bank and Client to develop operating modalities for the project
         facilitates coordination and fund flows.
        Project background work e.g. beneficiaries’ surveys help ensure that project would address
         context-specific constraints.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Youth Employment (FY14) (P132667)



The ICR was written well and provided a good account of the project. The theory of change was logical and
clear, although it could have established better linkages between the project components and accounted for
external factors. The evidence was results-oriented and captured good data points from the results framework
and impact evaluation. The document candidly discussed implementation inefficiencies and provided good
examples of workarounds and effectives solutions. The lessons learned section was utilized effectively to reflect
on project preparation, implementation, and results. Two shortcomings were that the ICR did not follow
OPCS guidelines to derive outcome rating, and that, although it presented costs for comparable training and
entrepreneurship programs, the economic analysis was insufficient.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 14
