     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022129

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P122944                                   RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Azerbaijan                                Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-81890,IBRD-84030                     30-Sep-2017                                         80,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Jul-2012                               30-Sep-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           30,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            80,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        80,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Chikako Miwa               J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of this Rural Investment Project in Azerbaijan (AzRIP-2) were to improve access to, and use of
   community-driven rural infrastructure and to expand economic activities for rural households (Loan
   Agreement dated October 19, 2012, Schedule 1; Loan Agreement for Additional Financing dated October 22,
   2014, Schedule 1).




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



   For the purposes of assessing the extent to which the project’s objectives were achieved in Section 4 of this
   ICR Review, the following sub-objectives have been defined. They will be referred to as Objectives 1, 2 and 3
   in Section 4.

   Sub-objective 1: To improve access to community-driven rural infrastructure

   Sub-objective 2: To improve use of community-driven rural infrastructure

   Sub-objective 3: To expand economic activities for rural households



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Rural Community Infrastructure (Appraisal amount: US$41.61 million. Actual cost:
   US$122.10 million, which was 293 percent of the approved amount.)

   Component 1 intended to support three categories of microprojects: (i) infrastructure microprojects in the 11
   districts not previously covered by Azerbaijan Rural Investment Project (AzRIP)-1; (ii) infrastructure
   microprojects in communities that managed well-performing microprojects under AzRIP-1; and (iii)
   livelihoods microprojects in communities that had performed well under AzRIP-1, to be submitted
   by Common Interest Groups (CIGs) that were established and provided with technical assistance under
   Component 2. This component financed activities throughout the project cycle for microprojects, focusing
   on local intra-community roads, community renovations/land improvement works, potable water systems,
   and irrigation and drainage systems. It also supported clinics, kindergartens and schools, small-scale rural
   electrification, as well as commercial investments in poultry incubators, milk collection facilities, and fodder
   mills.

   During implementation, the funding and hence the scope of this component (financed by Additional
   Financing of US$86.47 million (ICR, Table 2, page 12) was expanded by: (i) increasing rural infrastructure
   investments to two additional districts (Agdam and Fusuli in the Karabagh region), and financing additional
   community infrastructure microprojects in well-performing communities; (ii) increasing investments in
   livelihoods activities to cover an additional twenty communities; and (iii) piloting the rehabilitation of inter-
   community roads, targeting 30-60 communities each. In addition, the average size of infrastructure
   microprojects funded was scaled up from US$70,000 to US$90,000, considering commodity price increases
   and inflation; and the ceiling for livelihoods microproject grants was raised from US$120,000 to
   US$160,000. Moreover, a pilot on Women’s Development and Enterprise Groups (WDEGs) was included in
   this component in March 2018, to enhance livelihoods activities for rural women who face multiple
   constraints in accessing the labor market.

   Component 2: Technical Assistance for Rural Infrastructure (Appraisal amount: US$4.75 million. Actual
   cost: US$4.75 million.)



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



  This component was intended to provide technical assistance to: (1) develop and implement infrastructure
  microprojects, and (2) pilot activities to support livelihoods in six communities. The former was geared
  towards strengthening the capabilities of community groups, local authorities, Regional Grant
  Approval Committees (RGACs), Project Assistance Teams (PATs), and staff in Regional Operations Offices
  (ROOs) in contracting, procurement, financial management, and participatory monitoring and evaluation
  (M&E). The pilot livelihoods support services included the mobilization and organization of CIGs,
  identification of income generation activities, preparation of business plan proposals, legalization of the
  CIGs’ status, and training of CIG members in business management. Well-performing CIGs were
  encouraged to submit microproject proposals for financing under Component 1. Technical support services
  were delivered through cross visits to enable peer-to-peer learning among communities, workshops and
  seminars, and specific training sessions.

  During implementation, livelihoods support services were expanded from six to 20 communities, to
  align with the expansion of scope under the Additional Financing and related restructuring, and support
  services to the Women’s Development and Enterprise Groups (WDEGs) were expanded.

  Component 3: Project Management and Results Monitoring (Appraisal amount: US$7.21 million. Actual
  cost: US$14.06 million, which was 195 percent of the approved amount.)

  This component aimed to finance project management, including staff costs and overhead, project outreach
  and the beneficiary feedback mechanism (BFM), support to the RGACs, and regular M&E at the project,
  district, and community levels.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At appraisal, the original cost estimate was US$53.60 million (PAD, Table 1, page 7). At
  project closing, the actual cost was US$140.91 million (ICR, page 2 and Annex 3).

  Financing: At appraisal, expected financing sources were: US$30 million loan from the World Bank (IBRD),
  US$20 million from the Borrower, and US$3.60 million from Local Beneficiaries (PAD Data Sheet). At the
  restructuring in 2014, the Additional Financing (AF) increased the Bank's financing to US$80 million, the
  Borrower's financing to US$50 million, and the Local Beneficiaries' financing to US$10.07 million. At project
  closing, the total actual costs were financed with US$80 million loan from the Bank, US$49.39 million from
  the Borrower, and US$11.52 million from Local Beneficiaries (ICR, page 2).

  Dates: The project was approved on July 5, 2012 and became effective on December 4, 2012. The Mid-
  Term Review (MTR) was published on September 30, 2015. The project was closed on September 30,
  2019, which was 2 years after the original closing date of September 30, 2017.

  Restructuring: The project had the following two restructurings: a restructuring in 2014 for Additional
  Financing (AF) and another restructuring in 2018 to extend the loan closing date. At the AF, which was
  approved on July 9, 2014, the total planned project costs were increased to US$140.07 million (135 percent
  of the original planned costs) (ICR, para. 24). At the same time, funds were transferred from Component B
  and C to Component A, to fulfill the increasing needs for rural infrastructure rehabilitation in the capacitated
  communities (Ibid). Moreover, at the AF, one PDO indicator was disaggregated by types of microprojects,
  and four PDO indicators were revised with the higher end targets (ICR, Annex 8, page 56).



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



   IEG concurred with the ICR team (para. 47) that "[g]iven that the AF increased the scope of the project
   without changing the PDO, a split rating of the project is not necessary."




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context. Poverty levels were decreased from 49 percent in 2001 to 6 percent in 2012 due to an
average of 12.8 percent economic growth from 2000 to 2012. Per capita income increased from US$470 in
1995 to US$4,820 in 2009, driven by the growth of employment due to the oil boom and the public
spending, which included a social benefit system. On the other hand, the country faced challenges such as
decaying infrastructure and service provision in rural areas and worsening inequality indicated by disparities
between regions. Of the total population, 47.1 percent resided in rural areas, where poverty incidence was
8 percent and almost twofold of 4.5 percent in urban. Though the poverty rate was not high, the vulnerable
population to shocks and to falling back into poverty was estimated as 65 percent, of which 54 percent of
them were rural residents. The increases in oil and gas revenues were expected to slow down within a
decade and then decline. Working towards a diversified economy, market-based policies, strengthened
institutions, and improved access to and reliability of social services was essential to achieve sustainable
and more equitable economic growth.

Sector Context. The spatial disparities were not decreased by the economic growth, as rural populations
had limited access to infrastructure, services, and economic opportunities. In rural areas, insufficient basic
infrastructure and services, including roads, water, energy, health, and education, intimidated people and
businesses to reside and invest there, leading to slow poverty reduction. Piped water was accessed by less
than 33 percent of households in rural areas, while it was available for over 90 percent of households in the
capital city. Supply of gas and electricity was not stable in rural areas, and access to them was limited in
remote mountainous areas. Local roads were congested due to the increase in domestic vehicular traffic
which grew 10 percent per year since 2003. About 45 percent of main and regional roads and 80 percent of
local roads in rural areas were in poor condition. Combined with the poor road conditions, long travel
distances from villages to the district market resulted in high transportation costs and lower product prices
for the farmers. Saline water intrusion was observed in over 50 percent of all irrigated land because of
degraded irrigation and drainage systems. Distance to healthcare facilities limited the rural poor to access
those facilities. Access to both preschool and post-secondary facilities was also limited in rural areas. Rate
of post-secondary education attainment was below 11 percent in rural areas, compared to 40 percent in the
capital Baku. In addition, the poor condition of school facilities in rural areas affected quality of learning at
primary and secondary levels (ICR, para.2; PAD, para. 7).

Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies. At appraisal, the objectives of AzRIP-2 were consistent with
those of the CPS FY11-14, namely: (i) building a competitive non-oil economy; and (ii) strengthening social
and municipal services. The project was intended to contribute directly to Outcome 3 – improved access to
rural infrastructure – under the CPS’s Results Area 4 on Improved Municipal and Rural Services. The CPS
aimed to generate employment by implementing rural infrastructure projects. AzRIP-2 supported rural
communities’ demand-driven investments to improve access to rural infrastructure. At project closing, the
project’s objectives remained relevant to the CPF FY16-20. AzRIP-2 supported two objectives of the CPF:
objective 1.3 of contributing to improved access to water, sanitation and communal services; and objective
2.4 of supporting enhanced competitiveness of agriculture and rural development. AzRIP-2 supported

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



               investing in infrastructure in poor communities, providing them with better access to markets and more
               productive use of assets.

               Relevance to Government Strategies. At appraisal, AzRIP-2 was in line with the Government’s strategic
               vision and development priorities described in the State Program on Socio-Economic Development of
               Regions for 2009-2013; the State Program for Agriculture for 2008-2015; Azerbaijan 2020: Outlook for the
               Future; and the State Program on Poverty Reduction and Sustainable Development 2008-2015. AzRIP-2
               also ensured to support only those investments that aligned with regional development programs. At
               project closing, the PDO was aligned with the State Program on Socio-Economic Development of Regions
               for 2019-2023, as the project aimed to increase balanced growth and employment
               opportunities, contributing to the diversification of the rural economy emphasized by the latest State
               Program (ICR, para 28). The project continued to be relevant to Azerbaijan 2020: Outlook for the Future at
               project closing.

               Institutional Capacity and Realism. Local executive committees (ExComms) were one kind of local
               government institutions that represented the various line ministries and provided oversights to all
               development activities at the district level. In addition, municipal councils were responsible for intra-
               municipal infrastructure outside the ExComms’ responsibilities, such as rural roads. AzRIP-2 aimed to
               contribute to strengthening the role of local government institutions by mobilizing local communities to work
               closely with ExComm authorities and municipalities in the development of infrastructure in underserviced
               rural communities.

               Previous Sector Experience. AzRIP-2 was designed to succeed achievements of the preceding rural
               investment project (AzRIP-1) while expanding its scope to cover new districts. AzRIP-2 also adopted the
               community driven development (CDD) approach implemented under AzRIP-1, relying on the World Bank’s
               expertise and experience in supporting the CDD approach all over the world to improve service delivery,
               local infrastructure, and income generation opportunities.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Sub-objective 1: To improve access to community-driven rural infrastructure

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change for the project: Technical assistance such as training and financial assistance such as
                             grant provisions would lead to strengthen capacities of: community groups for implementing microprojects,
                             and Regional Grant Approval Committees (RGACs) for screening and approving microprojects. These would
                             support rural communities to develop and implement microprojects to build and rehabilitate social basic

                                                                                                                            Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



infrastructure and to enhance income generation activities. The infrastructure and livelihoods microprojects
would lead to improve access to and use of rural infrastructure and to expand economic opportunities for rural
households. In the long-term, the improved social capital would translate into financial capital and
economic well-being, as well as improve social cohesion at local level and governance and accountability
between citizens and the State, contributing to decrease the spatial disparities. Critical assumptions included:
(1) Capacities of the community groups and RGACs were strengthened sufficiently and timely for them to
develop and implement microprojects within the project duration; (2) Income generation activities supported
under the Project would continue to be economically viable after the project closing; and (3) Rehabilitation of
social basic infrastructure would support enhancement of income generation activities.



Outputs:

      884 community roads (totaling 6,198.9 km), 10 inter-community roads (totaling 92.2 km), 180 potable
       water supply systems, 101 irrigation canals and drainage systems, 46 health clinics, 21 kindergartens,
       18 electrical systems, 19 schools, and 234 community facilities were rehabilitated (ICR, para. 32).
      1,512 infrastructure microprojects were financed; of which, 97 percent of investments focused on
       infrastructure (ICR, para. 32).
      According to the ICR (page 32), 3.6 million people in rural areas received direct or indirect benefits,
       exceeding the target of 3.5 million (103 percent of the revised target). Of which, 56 percent was
       female, exceeding the target of 50 percent (112 percent of the revised target).

Outcomes:

      Percentage of households who have access to and use of rural infrastructure increased to 33 percent,
       surpassing the target of 25 percent (132 percent of the revised target). At appraisal, 43 percent of
       households used certain rural infrastructure items, which increased to 57.2 percent at project closing
       (ICR, para. 34). The change of 14.2 percentage points represents a 33 percent increase in access to
       and use of rural infrastructure.
      A 53.7 percent reduction in travel time to market, hospital, school, safe water source was achieved,
       exceeding the target of 48 percent (112 percent of the original target). At appraisal, the average travel
       time to these destinations was 21.43 minutes, which was reduced to 12.59 minutes at project closing
       (ICR, para. 32). The reductions in travel time, weighted by the frequency of access to each
       destination, represented the 53.7 percent reduction. The greatest reductions occurred in travel to
       preschools (68.7 percent), water supply points (57.97 percent), and secondary schools (55.69
       percent). Smaller reductions occurred in traveling to markets (37.55 percent) and the district hospital
       (24.50 percent).

Development of microprojects were led by the communities, which used a Participatory Rural Appraisal
process to analyze economic challenges and opportunities in their communities and agree on the
investments. These contributed to develop local leadership within the communities, as discussed in Section
10c. On the other hand, the independent technical audit in 2017 suggested a sustainability risk to
development outcome, as discussed in Section 7.




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



Overall, the access to community-driven rural infrastructure was improved, as evidenced by the increase in
percentage of households with access to rural infrastructure and the decrease in travel time to basic rural
facilities. The achievement of Objective 1 was therefore rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Sub-objective 2: To improve use of community-driven rural infrastructure

Rationale
Outputs:

      According to the endline survey (ICR, para. 34), roads rehabilitated under the project were used by
       91.9 percent of rural households. Sewage and drainage systems were used by 77 percent of
       households, schools and kindergartens by 63.8 percent, and potable water supply systems by 63.5
       percent.
      Traffic volume on rural connector roads reached an average of 321 vehicles per day, exceeding the
       target of 300 (107 percent of the revised target) (ICR, page 34).
      90 percent of subprojects received necessary maintenance operations with community engagement,
       surpassing the target of 90 percent (100 percent of the revised target) (ICR, page 33).

Outcomes:

      As was the case for Objective 1, the percentage of households who have access to and use of rural
       infrastructure increased to 33 percent, surpassing the target of 25 percent (132 percent of the revised
       target). At appraisal, 43 percent of households used certain rural infrastructure facilities, which
       increased to 57.2 percent at project closing (ICR, para. 34). The change of 14.2 percentage points
       represents a 33 percent increase in access to and use of rural infrastructure.
      As noted in the ICR (Annex 1, page 30), the percentage of households interviewed by the endline
       survey were satisfied with the overall quality of basic rural infrastructure increased from the baseline of
       39.2 percent to 69.5 percent, not meeting the target of 75 percent (93 percent of the revised target).

      The improved use of community-driven rural infrastructure was observed in general; for example, the
       rehabilitated roads were used by almost all of the rural households, and the rural connector roads
       were used by an average of 321 vehicles daily compared with a target established at restructuring of
       300 per day (ICR, page 34).

To summarize, only about two thirds of the households were satisfied with the overall quality of basic rural
infrastructure compared with a target of 75 percent. Considering that most of the project investments were
made for improvements to infrastructure, the increase in percentage of satisfied households by




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



30.3 percentage points from the baseline of 39.2 percent was not substantial. Overall, the achievement of
Objective 2 was therefore rated modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Sub-objective 3: To expand economic activities for rural households

Rationale
Outputs:

      There were 831 members in Common Interest Groups (CIGs), greatly exceeding the target of 225
       members introduced in the 2014 restructuring (369 percent of the target).
      25 livelihoods enterprises were financed as pilots to test four types of farm-related activities, i.e.
       poultry incubators, milk collection facilities, processing of fodder crops, and greenhouses (ICR, para.
       36). These activities were identified through a Participatory Rural Appraisal process, analyzing the
       existing local expertise and gaps in the local supply chains. In addition, 38 Women Development and
       Enterprise Groups (WDEGs) were formed.
      92 percent of livelihood microprojects (i.e. 23 out of the 25 livelihoods enterprises) were ongoing and
       commercially viable, meeting the target of 90 percent (102 percent of the revised target). Moreover, all
       of the 110 businesses started by the WDEGs were commercially viable when the project closed.
      The establishment of these small-scale enterprises supported capacity strengthening of the
       communities, as technical experts (e.g. veterinarians, agronomists) working for the enterprises
       introduced new knowledge and skills to villagers.
      There were 327,874 beneficiaries from livelihoods microprojects, exceeding the target of 250,000
       beneficiaries (131 percent of the revised target). The total beneficiaries from livelihoods microprojects
       consisted of 4,648 direct beneficiaries and 323,226 indirect beneficiaries.

Outcomes:

      A 21.16 percent increase in household income from economic activities, not meeting the target of 23
       percent (92 percent of the original target). These data were based on the endline survey conducted by
       the Government in June 2019. The ICR (para. 62) noted this indicator did not properly capture the
       intended outcome of “expanded economic activities for rural households”, since income would be
       generated three to five years after the livelihood pilots. In addition, sustainability risks of livelihoods
       microprojects were anticipated due to the end of technical assistance at the project closing, as
       discussed in Section 7.

Given the multiple barriers to employment faced by rural women, the piloting of the WDEGs demonstrated a
viable model at scale that supported the participation of rural women in economic diversification and
growth. The project supported the establishment of 38 WDEGs which consisted of 468 women in 14 districts
and developed 110 businesses, which generated income for 1,173 rural residents. Community Business

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



                            Promoters (CBPs), who were local youth trained through a business skills program and supervised by rural
                            business specialists, supported rural women on-site with business incubation and development. At project
                            closing, two to three new businesses were developed per WDEG, including horticulture, silkworm breeding,
                            beekeeping, animal husbandry, catering, dry fruits processing, cleaning services, and carpet weaving and
                            sewing workshops. WDEGs were also committed to engage in voluntary community services, such as
                            environment clean-up campaigns and care of the disabled and elderly in the community. They coordinated
                            with municipalities on waste collection and water consumption reduction, which empowered their capacities in
                            the community. The WDEGs were networked through the Azerbaijan Rural Women’s Association (ARWA),
                            which continued to support the WDEGs through capacity building and service provision.

                            During the project lifecycle, the percentage of households which met all of their needs increased from 1.84
                            percent at baseline to 7.74 percent as measured by the endline survey (ICR, para. 39). The percentage of
                            households, which only made ends meet or were in poverty, decreased from 60.7 percent at baseline to 47.3
                            percent in the endline survey (ICR, para. 39). The ICR team argued that the achievements of the PDO
                            contributed support for households to accumulate assets. For example, a supervision mission observed some
                            villagers who increased the number of livestock, as they were able to secure the potential market for livestock
                            products (ICR, para. 44). The livelihoods microprojects enhanced economic activities of the rural households
                            and increased their incomes to a certain extent. The piloting of WDEGs supported economic and social
                            empowerment of rural women. On the other hand, the livelihoods microprojects would need to address the
                            sustainability risks to continue being economically viable. Overall, based on the evidence available, the
                            achievement of Objective 3 at the project’s close was rated substantial by this review.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of Objectives 1 was rated substantial, as the access to community-driven rural
                            infrastructure was improved, as the achievements of all the relevant PDO indicators surpassed the targets.
                            The achievement of Objective 2 was rated modest, as the increase in the satisfaction level of the users of the
                            rural infrastructures was not substantial considering the amount of investments. The achievement of
                            Objectives 3 was rated substantial, as the establishment of livelihoods enterprises provided rural households
                            with widened opportunities to engage in economic activities, especially for women. Overall, the efficacy of
                            this project’s achievements was rated substantial but only marginally so because of the low level of
                            household satisfaction with the quality of the additional basic rural infrastructure, and the uncertainty about
                            the extent to which improvements in household livelihoods was attributable to the project's investments.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating



                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis: The PAD demonstrated a positive economic return from the micro-project investments
through the cost benefit analysis of a sample of 18 microprojects (water supply, irrigation, health and road
projects) for the preceding project (PAD, para. 38). The PAD provided no new economic analysis because it was
assumed that as a "repeater" project AzRIP-2 would have "similar positive economic returns and socio-
economic benefits" (para 40). This might also have been on the basis that the enterprises to be chosen in a
Community Driven Development (CDD) type project could not be anticipated.

At project closing, investments financed by the project were covered by an economic analysis in November
2017. The economic analysis targeted: (i) productive infrastructure investments in the rehabilitation of local
roads and water supply systems; and (ii) livelihoods investments in commercial milk collection, egg incubation,
and fodder mills.

The infrastructure microprojects were economically viable. The economic analysis for the infrastructure
microprojects was calculated with the estimated lifespan of investments of 15 years (based on the
implementation duration of AzRIP and AzRIP-2) and a relatively high 15 percent discount rate. The average
road repair investments had an economic rate of return (ERR) of 19 percent with a net present value (NPV) of
US$578,797. The average water supply projects had an ERR of 22 percent with an NPV of US$18,990. If
potential benefits were to be included to the analysis, the results would improve. The effects of lower future
benefits, increased costs, and reduced lifetime of the investment were assessed by the sensitivity analysis,
which showed robust results for the infrastructure investment projects, but not for the water supply projects.

The average livelihoods microprojects were also economically and financially viable, though there were some
variations. The economic analysis for the livelihoods microprojects was calculated with an estimated lifespan of
investments of 10 years and a 7 percent discount rate. The poultry incubators had the highest ERR of 31
percent and an NPV of US$128,994. The results would be complemented by the findings from the field research
that some communities established new poultry feed sales centers after poultry incubators were supported by
the project. The microprojects had an average ERR of 18 percent with an NPV of US$35,321. The fodder mills
projects had an average ERR of 19 percent and an NPV of US$39,345. On the positive side, these investments
had a crowding-in effect attracting private investments from community members and enterprises. According to
the field research, 200 community members reportedly purchased meat and dairy livestock, and seven
enterprises started selling fodder products due to higher demand from the local population. At project closing,
the actual NPV exceeded the estimated NPV estimated at the AF for the investments in poultry incubators and
fodder mills. On the other hand, the investments in milk collection and fodder mills were sensitive to a reduction
in the lifetime of the investments. For example, a 50 percent reduction in the life of the investments in milk
collection and fodder mills would yield a rate of return below the discount rate and a negative NPV.

There was no ERR which consolidated the ERRs of different types of microprojects.

Cost Effectiveness Analysis: At project closing, the independent technical audit included a cost effectiveness
analysis of the project’s six types of infrastructure investments (electricity, roads, buildings, drainage, potable
water systems, and irrigation), though the numerical results of this cost effectiveness analysis were not provided
in the ICR (Annex 6A, page 52).


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



Aspects of Design and Implementation that Influenced Efficiency: The Project was designed based on the
preceding project and managed by the same PMU with accumulated experience, these facts contributed to
accelerate implementation at the early stage and disburse 70 percent of the first loan within two years of
approval. On the other hand, the limited human resources in the PMU caused delays in implementation of the
livelihoods activities that were expanded considerably as a result of the AF in 2014.

The ICR provided no assessment of the efficiency with which Common Interest Groups managed the receival
and processing of proposals for the financing of microprojects, as well as no analysis of the cost effectiveness of
the social infrastructure program such as schools and health facilities, except for the brief description on the
independent technical audit’s cost effectiveness analysis (Annex 6A, page 52). The overall efficiency of the
project was rated substantial, as the ex-post economic analysis provided positive results in general, while
shortcomings were observed regarding the vulnerability of the partial economic analysis to reasonable changes
in the assumptions made.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objective was rated high, due to the project’s alignments with the country and sector contexts and
the main strategies of the government and the bank assistance. Efficacy was rated substantial with
shortcomings on insufficient evidence for outcome-level achievements. In general, the project contributed to the
improvements in access and use of community-driven rural infrastructure and the expansion of economic
activities for rural households, with a special attention to women. On the other hand, the achievements of two
out of four outcome-level indicators (i.e. the user satisfaction and the income of rural households) were weak in
terms of the levels of achievements and the attributability of the achievements to the project. Efficiency was
rated substantial, as the ex-post economic analysis for both the infrastructure and livelihoods microprojects
showed a positive economic viability. This review rates the overall outcome of the project as Moderately
Satisfactory because of the shortcomings in efficacy mentioned above. This rating aligns with the rating by the
ICR of the project's overall outcome.




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

1. Risk to the sustainability of infrastructure: According to an independent technical audit (ICR, para. 85), 98
percent of infrastructure financed by the preceding project and this one remained, or are expected to be, in
good or fair condition after 10 years. School buildings and health centers were in the best conditions due to
the continued maintenance by the ministries of education and health. Potable water systems were in the
second-best condition. Infrastructure that required periodic rehabilitation or maintenance, such as local intra-
community roads and irrigation systems, were in fair condition. The infrastructure would degrade overtime
and require periodical rehabilitation effort. The risk would be mitigated by the community project committees,
which would continue coordinating with the local authorities and ensure maintenance of the infrastructure. In
addition, the PMU stated that municipalities embedded expected maintenance expenses of intra-village
roads to their budgets. When municipalities and communities would be able to request the district authorities,
which had jurisdiction over all development activities in districts, to repair the infrastructure.

2. Risk to the sustainability of livelihoods enterprises: After project closing, livelihoods enterprises needed to
graduate from technical assistance provided by the PMU, which would pose challenges to the beneficiaries’
abilities to maintain the enterprises by themselves. The risk would lead to narrowing down the economic
opportunities expanded by the project. The risk would be mitigated by Azerbaijan Rural Women’s
Association (ARWA), which would be expected to continue supporting its member groups including WDEGs
through capacity building and service provisions. Moreover, the delay in adoption of the Cooperative Law
affected the legal status of enterprises established for livelihoods microprojects. According to the Rural
Livelihoods study (ICR, para. 59), the ownership and benefit-sharing arrangements of the enterprises
supported by the project were not legally enforceable. After project closing, therefore, there would be no
measure to ensure that profits were going to be distributed within the entire community.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At project inception, a diagnostic study was conducted for planning livelihoods support services and
  analyzing factors that would make the investments effective. The livelihoods support services were
  designed through extensive consultation with key stakeholders. The PMU for this project was the
  successor of the PMU for AzRIP-1, enabling the Project to use the accumulated experience and
  competence for project management. The project refined the targeting strategy of preceding operation by
  focusing on regions with higher relative incidence of poverty and encouraging smaller communities to
  group and participate in the project activities. In addition, local authorities, such as representatives of
  municipalities and Local executive committees (ExComms), were continued to be invited to the Regional
  Grant Approval Committee (RGAC), to ensure their commitment to the operations and maintenance
  (O&M) of investments after project closing. Through this, the project aimed for formalizing the handover
  of infrastructure investments to municipalities. Potential risks on procurement were identified through a
  Procurement Risk Assessment. Based on the assessment, appropriate risk mitigation measures were

                                                                                                       Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



  developed at project design. The Environmental Management Framework was revised to consider the
  impacts of the livelihoods support projects and the expanded geographical coverage. Moreover, a gender
  empowerment strategy was developed, aiming to increase women taking leadership roles in the project.

  Overall, Quality at Entry was rated by this review as satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR during implementation, the Bank conducted an average of 2-3 missions annually, and
 16 supervision missions in total. An extensive training was provided to the PMU to strengthen their
 capacities, including staff retreat, three study tours to India and Bangladesh, and a week-long training at
 the Hague Academy of Local Governance. The last one aimed to support the PMU to develop capacities to
 work with local governments, communities, and the private sector on spatial development, to prepare for
 the proposed succeeding project. According to the summary of the Borrower’s completion report (ICR,
 Annex 5A, page 49), the Bank Task Team’s technical support was considered by the Borrower to have
 been very helpful for the PMU to implement the project and prepare the proposal for the succeeding
 project. For instance, supervision missions which focused on financial management and procurement
 identified issues and advised the PMU on corrective measures that were followed through. Though the
 project had four Task Team Leaders throughout the project cycle, supervision documents did not show any
 discontinuity of the quality of Bank support.

 On the other hand, the Bank’s M&E framework had shortcomings on the revised PDO indicator as
 discussed in Section 9a. as well as the targets that were unachievable considering the size of target
 population. Moreover, the Bank’s reporting showed some inconsistency in terms of ISR ratings on project
 progress and the quality of procurement administration.

 On balance, the Bank’s support to the PMU was sufficient and timely, though there were shortcomings on
 M&E and reporting that affected the measurement of the achievement of outcomes. On this basis, Quality
 of Supervision was rated by this review as moderately satisfactory.

 Quality at Entry was rated satisfactory. Quality of Supervision was rated moderately satisfactory. Overall,
 Bank Performance was therefore rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 At appraisal, the project’s monitoring methods relied heavily on physical verification of works, as outlined in
 the existing M&E system established by the preceding project, while aiming to further improve the use of
 information management system. The PAD clearly described causal relationships to achieve the PDO. On
 the other hand, at AF, the PDO indicator on percentage change in income from household economic
 activity was revised to percentage change in household income from economic activities disaggregated by
 rural infrastructure and livelihood microprojects. The revised PDO indicator posed two challenges: (i)
 income changes derived from livelihood activities would not be observable within the project duration; and
 (ii) income changes disaggregated by their causes would not be measurable without a randomized impact
 evaluation (IE). The Mid-Term Review pointed out these challenges and recommended that the PMU
 continue collecting data for the original indicator. The PAD planned to conduct a randomized IE with
 quantitative and qualitative components and periodical surveys. However, the GoA disagreed with the
 randomized IE as their targeting criteria did not align with the methodology to establish a control group
 which would not be able to receive project support.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E data were collected appropriately for real-time decision making and public access. The data were
  disaggregated by gender and used to measure impacts of microprojects to the Project, communities, and
  households. The Project’s M&E had a three-tier structure at the PMU, Regional Operations Offices
  (ROOs), and community levels, in order to monitor and evaluate project outcomes. The M&E structure
  and staffing arrangements were considered sufficient by supervision missions. The M&E team monitored
  indicators, conducted technical audits on financial management and procurement, implemented
  participatory M&E activities at the community level, compiled beneficiary feedback in active microproject
  areas, coordinated the IE, and conducted studies on each type of microproject and on project impacts.
  Public reporting was made available regularly in community meetings. Moreover, the community showed
  satisfaction with the GIS Map which provided them with project-related information transparently,
  according to the feedback from community members (ICR, para. 64).

  The information management system was based on the data in the Excel files submitted weekly from the
  ROOs to the PMU. The PMU collected and reported data efficiently, as it compiled extensive data for
  more than 2,000 subprojects under AzRIP-1 and 2 within half a month to develop the GIS Map. The
  geographical data were then combined with publicly available satellite and crowdsourced data to
  construct a Vulnerability Index and Map of the country at the district level. The Vulnerability Index Map
  supported the Project’s targeting strategy to identify the economically vulnerable locations and where
  microprojects were successfully implemented during the preceding project.



c. M&E Utilization
  The PMU used the ROOs’ weekly monitoring reports and the monthly monitor meetings to verify
  progress of the microprojects against their milestones and to take corrective actions as needed. During




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



  implementation, no significant issues were observed by the PMU, which was confirmed by the reports of
  the supervision missions.

  On balance, the M&E design, implementation, and utilization were adequate in general, with the
  appropriate PDO and sufficient data collection, though there were some minor shortcomings including
  the challenges posed by the revised PDO indicator. Overall, M&E Quality was rated substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the Project was classified as Environmental Category B, which required a partial
   environmental assessment. It triggered two safeguards policies: OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental
   Assessment, and OP/BP 7.50 on Projects on International Waterways.

   According to the ICR (para. 69), to comply with the safeguard on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01),
   the Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was updated by the Borrower during project
   implementation after microproject investments were identified. Building upon the EMF of the preceding
   project, The EMF aimed to address the potential environmental risks of the new aspects that were added to
   the project, such as investing in livelihoods microprojects, repairing intra-community roads, and expanding
   geographical coverage. Followed by identification of each eligible microproject investment, environmental
   impact assessments and environmental management plans were developed. Development of the
   environmental management plans was supported by the new checklist adopted at the restructuring in 2014.
   The ICR stated that through the project cycle, the PMU ensured compliance with OP/BP 4.01 by providing
   beneficiary communities with training and guidance to identify potential environmental risks and develop
   adequate mitigation measures. Environmental Specialist at the PMU monitored environmental impacts of
   the microprojects and included findings into reporting to the Bank. Weakness was noted during one
   supervision mission that the PMU did not monitor the disposal of hazardous waste such as asbestos, the
   sourcing and licensing of construction materials, and the operation of associated facilities such as the
   worker’s accommodations. The PMU addressed these issues through appropriate supervision and
   guidance. Moreover, the PMU worked with the local office of the Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources
   to ensure its representatives supervise the collection and disposal of hazardous materials (para. 70).

   The safeguard on Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) was triggered as the project aimed to
   support water supply and small-scale irrigation systems on rivers flowing into the Caspian Sea and
   tributaries of the Aras and Kura rivers. The project’s Preparation Team informed riparian states on the
   geographic locations, the objectives, and the planned activities, and ensured that no adverse impacts were
   expected on any of the riparian rivers nor on the Caspian Sea. There were no unfavorable responses from
   any of the riparian states.

   The project triggered no social safeguards policies. During project preparation, a rapid social assessment
   was conducted, providing the project with recommendations to support strengthening the leadership of



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



  women, target Common Interest Groups (CIGs) for livelihoods support, and engage internally displaced
  persons to mobilize communities and implement community microprojects.

  The Beneficiary Feedback Mechanism (BFM) was established and implemented appropriately. Under the
  oversight of the PMU, the ROOs processed feedback received within their respective areas. After the
  establishment of the BFM, 2,412 feedback were received from beneficiaries and other stakeholders. Of
  which, 33 feedback were classified as complaints. Descriptions of complaints and how they were addressed
  were documented in the quarterly reports (ICR, para. 74).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: Arrangements on financial management were rated satisfactory in the extensive
  review at mid-term, as the accounting system, records, and internal control framework for financial
  operations were adequately established. The review also noted timeliness and quality of annual audit
  reports and interim financial reports. The project complied with the Loan Agreement, the Bank’s guidelines,
  and national legislation, as confirmed by supervision missions and independent annual audits.

  On the other hand, the ICR noted that the implementation of financial management experienced the
  following minor issues: (i) the PMU used IBRD loan proceeds to temporarily finance the GoA portion of
  expenditures to cover the delay in the allocation and transfer of counterpart funding to the project; and (ii)
  the PMU reallocated funds from the savings of Component B and C to Component A, in order to increase
  the number of microprojects. These practices posed the risk of accounting errors, which was well
  mitigated. For (i), the reimbursements of accounts were completed on time. For (ii), the independent
  annual audit for 2017 noted that the financial impact of reallocation of funds between components was
  negligible.

  Procurement: At project closing, procurement administration was rated satisfactory. Capacity of the
  procurement staff was strengthened by training provided under the project. The procurement staff’s
  competency and familiarity to comply with the Bank’s policies and procedures led to a successful
  preparation of the Procurement Strategy for Development for the succeeding project.

  On the negative side, the procurement post-review in 2015 found patterns in the unit price of bids
  submitted to the project. There was a risk that it would lead to potential collusive practices. Based on the
  Bank’s recommendations, the PMU revised the Project Operations Manual to introduce procedures to
  analyze unit prices submitted by bidders. Moreover, the PMU did not obtain the Bank’s prior clearance
  when it started tendering for new microprojects. As discussed in the above paragraph, the PMU aimed to
  maximize the number of microprojects by using the savings in Component B and C, and updated the
  Procurement Plan accordingly. Following the Bank’s recommendation, the updated Procurement Plan was
  submitted to the Bank for clearance. Furthermore, advance payments of 10 percent to the contractors
  were not timely made after the contracts were signed, due to the delays in the provision of counterpart
  funding. The advance payments were completed by 2017 (ICR, para. 78).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



   The project has resulted in the development of local leadership both within the community and at the
   municipal level. Approximately 416 members of project-related community interest groups were elected
   members of local municipalities. Several of them continued to use the same modalities of community
   participation in implementing municipal infrastructure projects. Given the country’s strong centralized form
   of government, this was a considerable achievement (ICR, para. 57).



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following two lessons in the ICR stood out as important and relevant to other CDD-type projects
and are presented here with some editing.

Building strong community ownership and links between communities and local
governments ensures that communities maintain infrastructure through active partnership
with local authorities. Operations and maintenance of community-driven investments in rural
infrastructure are usually inadequate after the project interventions are completed. The project
established community infrastructure committees and supported them to strengthen their sense of
ownership and relationships with local governments. This contributed to the finding of independent
technical audits that 98 percent of infrastructure financed by the preceding and this project remained
in good or fair condition after 10 years.

Selecting livelihoods investments based on existing local expertise or existing market needs
strengthen their commercial viability. During the project implementation, communities identified
the livelihoods microprojects based on two key criteria: (i) existing expertise within communities,
such as poultry incubation; and (ii) existing market needs due to the lack of supply chain, such as
milk collection and fodder processing facilities. The livelihood investments selected based on
existing expertise enabled the communities to initiate and sustain activities with minimal technical
assistance. The livelihood investments selected based on existing market needs enabled the
communities to swiftly begin providing services to other businesses and producers at the local




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       RURAL INVSMT (AZRIP) 2 (P122944)



level. As a result of successful selection of livelihood investments, 92 percent of community-led
enterprises were active and commercially viable at project closing.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a thorough overview of the project with a concisely and well written narrative structured
around the project development objective that supports the ratings. In addition, the ICR clearly presented the
results chain described in the PAD, though the figure on the Theory of Change (para. 10) could have been
improved by including a detailed explanation of intermediate results between outputs and outcomes, as well as
critical assumptions relevant to the TOC. The ICR offers a detailed description of the implementation
challenges faced by the project, how they were addressed, and of the changes brought by restructurings.
Furthermore, the ICR includes a candid discussion of Bank performance. The quality of the evidence and of the
analysis is solid. On the other hand, the ICR could have provided more specific explanations on "modest
shortcomings in the achievement of some of the project development indicators" (para. 47) which led to the
moderately satisfactory rating for outcome, as well as on a rationale on the lack of economic analysis at
appraisal.. Notwithstanding these shortcomings, overall, the quality of the ICR is rated by this review as
substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 18
