     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Fujian Meizhou Bay Navigation (P124848)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022013

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P124848                                   CN-Fujian Meizhou Bay Navigation

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                     Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82270                                30-Jun-2018                                        49,566,277.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Feb-2013                               30-Jun-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              50,000,000.00                                          0.00

 Revised Commitment                               49,566,277.00                                          0.00

 Actual                                           49,566,277.00                                          0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Kavita Mathur              Ebru Karamete                 Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objectives (PDOs) were "to improve the capacity of the main navigation channel
   in Meizhou Bay and enhance the management capacity of Meizhou Bay Harbor Administration Bureau
   (MBHAB)" (PAD para 15 and Loan Agreement page 5).

   No changes were made to the PDOs throughout the project lifecycle.



                                                                                                Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Fujian Meizhou Bay Navigation (P124848)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  29-Jan-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Project consisted of two components, as described below.

   Component 1: Improvement of main navigation channel (appraisal estimate US$128.0 million
   (excluding contingencies); actual cost US$94.4 million). This component intended to upgrade the 51.2 km
   long main navigation channel in Meizhou Bay to a 300,000 Deadweight Tons (DWT) standard to allow for
   unidirectional tide-independent navigation of Q-MAX LNG ships, as well as unidirectional tide-dependent
   navigation for 400,000 DWT bulk cargo vessels. The construction and installation works included: (i)
   deepening and widening of the navigation channel by dredging and rock blasting; (ii) installation of
   navigation buoys; and (iii) sand/gravel clearing and disposal by out-dumping and landfilling for berths under
   construction in Meizhou Bay.

   Component 2: Capacity building to enhance management capacity (appraisal estimate US$1.4 million
   (excluding contingencies); actual cost US$1.2 million). This component would finance two technical
   studies: (a) Strengthening Comprehensive Competitiveness of Meizhou Bay Harbor, and (b) Establishment
   of Modern Logistics System for Meizhou Bay Harbor. In addition, this component would also provide training
   to build the management capacity of MBHAB. Training would also include domestic/overseas study tours
   covering aspects of modern port construction and operation, modern logistics and supply chains, and
   project management.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The actual total project cost was US$97.8 million, significantly lower that the appraisal
   estimate of US$138.2 million. This was due to (a) exchange rate variations (the value of the RMB vis-a-vis
   US dollar changed from 6.33 at project appraisal to 6.89 at project completion; and (b) lower contract prices
   due to international competitive bidding and optimized design of civil works. The project team explained that
   the ICB contributed to around 16% of total cost savings, and optimized design saved around 4% (see
   section 5 for details).

   Financing. At appraisal, the IBRD commitment was US$50 million. The actual disbursement was US$49.6
   million.

   Co-financing. There was no co-financing.


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Fujian Meizhou Bay Navigation (P124848)



   Borrower contribution: The actual Borrower contribution was US$48.2 million, roughly half the appraisal
   commitment of US$88.2 million.

   Dates. The project was approved on February 28, 2013 and became effective on June 13, 2013. The mid-
   term review was carried out very late on June 4, 2018, one year prior to the project closing. The
   project closed on June 30, 2019, after a delay of one year due to intermittent construction delays caused by
   factors such as typhoons, government ban on explosives during national holidays, and important state
   events (ICR para 12).

   Restructuring and Split Rating. The project was restructured on Jan 29, 2018 to (b) change the loan
   closing date, (b) reallocate funds between disbursement categories, and (c) revise the results
   framework. The loan disbursement percentage for the category of ‘Works, non-consulting services and
   goods under Part A of the Project’ was increased from 60% to 100%, with retroactive application from
   November 1, 2016. During the first half of the implementation, Fujian had prioritized the use of co-finance
   and subsidies from the central and provincial government, resulting in slow disbursement of the loan. The
   increase in loan disbursement percentage was to ensure smooth completion of project activities when
   counterpart funds from national and provincial sources came under stress during the second half of
   implementation (ICR para 11).

   The targets for the two PDO indicators (a) annual traffic throughput of Meizhou Bay Port (total tons loaded
   and unloaded); and (b) use of the port by large vessels (movements of vessels of 100,000 DWT and
   above) were revised downwards. The target value was determined by the historical demand. With the
   unanticipated global economic slowdown and a change in China’s growth strategy, the targets proved
   unrealistic and were revised through a restructuring (dated January 29, 2018). A split rating would not be
   carried out as the project’s scope/ambition did not decrease with the downward revision of targets.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Development Context

Between 1990 to 2009 (at the time of appraisal), China’s overseas trade had increased in value by over
eighteen times. The total tonnage handled by China’s seaports increased by almost ten times from 483
million tons in 1990 to 4.8 billion tons in 2009. The role of China’s waterway transport had become crucial in
three main ways: (i) in facilitating inter-regional shipping movements of bulk raw materials such as timber,
grain and building materials, and coal from northern to southern China; (ii) in the import of internationally-
sourced raw materials such as crude oil and iron ore to fuel China’s heavy industries; and (iii) in the
international export of industrial and consumer goods to overseas markets (PAD para 1). Therefore, the
expansion of port navigation capacity was a prominent economic development and environmental
challenge for China.

Transport Context

Meizhou Bay Port was one of the three main integrated seaport groups in Fujian Province. It transported
substantial bulk cargo “to and from” industries in Fujian, Jiangxi and Hunan provinces. At appraisal,

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CN-Fujian Meizhou Bay Navigation (P124848)



               Meizhou Bay had a throughput of 40 million tons of freight. The National Seaport Plan, and the Regional
               Development Plan for the Strait West Economic Zone (the ‘SWEZ Regional Plan’) included development of
               Meizhou Bay as a hub port for southeast China.

               Alignment with Borrower and Bank Strategy.

               The PDOs remained aligned with China’s 13th Five-Year Plan (2016-20) that emphasized on creating a
               less energy-intensive transport system by reducing the average length of haul between inland traffic
               generating activities and their seaports of import/export. The PDOs remained aligned with the National
               Seaport Plan (2006) which aimed to ensure sufficient port capacity to sustain growth in industrial production
               and international trade (ICR para 2).

               At appraisal, the PDOs were well aligned with the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for China for
               the period FY2013 -16. Specifically, with the achievement of the PDOs, the project addressed the CPS
               themes of (a) “Supporting Green Growth” by reducing land transport distances needed to serve inland
               areas and thus reducing GHG emissions from road transport through trucks, and “Promoting More Inclusive
               Development” by improving transport connectivity of the land-locked western Fujian, Jiangxi and Hunan
               provinces with ports and cities in the more economically dynamic coastal region. At completion, PDOs were
               aligned with the pillar “Promoting Greener Growth” under engagement area “2.5 Promoting low-carbon
               transport and cities” of the Bank’s China CPF for the period FY2020 - 25.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the capacity of the main navigation channel in Meizhou Bay.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for the first objective was that upgrading of the main navigation channel to a 300,000
                             DWT standard including widening and deepening, and provision of navigation bays would allow larger carriers
                             and greater traffic throughput. This would be measured through (a) the annual traffic throughput of Meizhou
                             Bay Port; and (b) number of vessels of 100,000 DWT and above using the Meizhou Bay Port. The main
                             assumptions for achieving this objective were: (a) the overseas trade demand on China’s seaports would
                             continue to increase; and (b) seaborne transport of bulk cargo would increasingly rely on larger vessels.

                             One caveat was that the development objective statement was output oriented by limiting itself to the
                             upgrading of the navigation channel.



                                                                                                                             Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Fujian Meizhou Bay Navigation (P124848)



Outputs

      The 52.1 km of the main navigation channel of Meizhou Bay was upgraded to a 300,000 DWT
       standard (as targeted). This included upgrading of (a) a 34.6 km long, 500 m wide and 23 m deep
       section (outside the bay); and (b) a 17.5 km long, 350 m wide, and 21.5 m deep section within the
       bay.

      Four buoys were installed.

Outcomes

The performance against the two outcome indicators (a) annual traffic throughput of Meizhou Bay Port (total
tons loaded and unloaded), and (b) use of the port by large vessels (movements of vessels of 100,000 DWT
and above) was as follows:

      The annual traffic throughput of Meizhou Bay Port increased from 39.1 metric ton (million) baseline
       (2010) to 104.8 (estimate for 2019), achieving the revised target of 85 (original target was 110). While
       the increase in port throughput is partially dependent on global trade and demand conditions, it is also
       attributable to the improved navigational flexibility in the upgraded main channel, as it allows larger
       carriers to use the Bay: 300,000 DWT in all tide conditions and 400,000 DWT tide-dependent. The
       ICR (para 21) notes that five railway branch lines are currently in operation connecting the ports inside
       Meizhou Bay, and four of them were constructed in the last five years to accommodate the greater
       capacity of the navigation channel. The total transshipment volume of bulk cargo at Meizhou Bay ports
       has gone up rapidly: from January to September 2019, total sea-rail and sea-inland-waterway
       transport increased respectively by 73% and 29% year on year.

      The number of vessels of 100,000 DWT and above using the Meizhou Bay Port increased from 110
       (baseline in 2010) to 392 (estimate for 2019), achieving the revised target of 350 (original target was
       650). At appraisal, the target value was determined by the historical demand. The target was revised
       to reflect the impacts of the economy slow-down on the freight traffic of the Meizhou Bay ports
       (Restructuring paper, para 9).

Based on this, while the indicator targets were reduced, the project substantially increased the capacity of the
navigation channel as stated by the PDO.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhance the management capacity of Meizhou Bay Harbor Administration Bureau.

Rationale


                                                                                                  Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Fujian Meizhou Bay Navigation (P124848)



The theory of change for the second objective was based on the premise that targeted studies on
“strengthening the competitiveness of Meizhou Bay Harbor” and “establishment of modern logistics system
for Meizhou Bay Harbor” along with the training of the port staff on modern port management, logistics and
supply chain and port management would enhance the capacity of the Meizhou Bay Harbor Administration
Bureau (MBHAB). The main assumption for achieving this objective was that the MBHAB would adopt the
recommendations from the studies and effectively utilize the learning from training events and study tours.

Outputs

      The technical study on strengthening comprehensive competitiveness of Meizhou Bay Harbor was
       completed as planned.

      The technical study on the establishment of a modern logistics system in Meizhou Bay Harbor was
       completed as planned. The study recommended a paradigm shift for Meizhou Bay to transition into a
       high-productivity and high-quality modern logistics hub and defined a port logistics system that
       included aligned logistics infrastructure, logistics information platform and institutions (ICR para 23).

      By project closing, a total of 27 training events and domestic/overseas study tours were organized and
       were attended by 672 persons (no targets were set at appraisal). The ICR indicates (para 26) that the
       training enhanced knowhow on the following topics: modern port management (including port planning
       and construction, financing, connectivity and accessibility), logistics, operations and services, and
       green and smart ports.

Outcomes

No outcome indicators were designed to measure the achievement of this objective except for "submission of
deliverables of technical studies" and number of trainees (person months)". The ICR provided evidence that
the project led studies and trainings helped to develop a master plan for Meizhou Bay, a comprehensive
competitiveness index for self-assessment and comparison with peers on port performance, as well as
facilitated MBHAB in transitioning the Meizhou Bay Port into a modern logistics hub..

      The ICR reports (para 24) that in 2014 MBHAB created a new logistics department responsible for the
       planning, coordination and implementation of the port’s logistics development. The project team
       explained that the two studies on port competitiveness and logistics were started early on during the
       project implementation and were completed in January 2015. During the TA implementation, the
       consultants had substantial discussions with MBHAB, and provided good quality analysis, information,
       and suggestions to MBHAB and all of these contributed to the establishment of the logistics division.

      The technical study on strengthening comprehensive competitiveness of Meizhou Bay Harbor helped
       MBHAB develop a “Comprehensive Competitiveness Index System” for self-assessment and
       comparison with peers on port performance.

      A Meizhou Bay Harbor Logistics Development Master Plan was completed in December 2016. The
       plan is expected to facilitate MBHAB in transitioning the Meizhou Bay Port into a modern logistics hub.




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               CN-Fujian Meizhou Bay Navigation (P124848)




                                  The feedback from the training events found that the discussions on good practices from other
                                   seaports in China and abroad helped the participants consider optimal ways to accelerate Meizhou
                                   Bay development.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project substantially upgraded the standard of the main navigation channel in Meizhou Bay to a 300,000
                            DWT, thereby allowing larger carriers to use the Bay: 300,000 DWT in all tide conditions and 400,000 DWT
                            tide-dependent. The training and technical studies substantially contributed to the enhancement of the
                            management capacity of the MBHAB. A Meizhou Bay Harbor Logistics Development Master Plan was
                            completed in December 2016 and the plan is expected to facilitate MBHAB in transitioning the Meizhou Bay
                            Port into a modern logistics hub.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency

   The project prepared an economic analysis both at appraisal and at closing. The benefits quantified included: (a)
   increased waterway traffic volume and improved transport efficiency due to the increased carrying capacity of
   the main navigation channel and the use of larger vessels (the TTL explained that the traffic volume used in the
   analysis reflected the actual figures during the implementation period, and the future traffic volume was
   estimated based on the current trend); and (b) savings in vessel operating costs by reducing waiting time
   outside the port. Economic costs of the project were identified as capital investments and operation and
   maintenance (O&M) costs during project operation.The ICR used the discount rate of 12%.

   The ex-post ERR at completion was 16.4%, compared to the ex-ante ERR of 13.2%. The Net Present Value
   (NPV) at completion and appraisal were RMB 428.1 million and RMB 500.6 million, respectively. The reason for
   the lower NPV at completion is explained by the project team stating that " this was due to the use of 2013 as
   the baseline year and the one-year extension of the loan closing date". However, since the figures for one of the
   main benefit streams - "increased waterway traffic volume" - were much lower at closing than the estimated
   figures at appraisal, this should have an effect to lower both the ERR and NPV figures.



                                                                                                                          Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Fujian Meizhou Bay Navigation (P124848)



The ICR also conducted a sensitivity analysis which assumed a 5% increase in total cost, a 15% decrease in
total benefits, and the two of them combined. The ERR decreased from 16.4% (baseline) to 14.3%, 13.9% and
12.0% respectively. The NPV also decreased from RMB 428.1 million (baseline) to RMB 354.1 million, 289.7
million and RMB 220.8 million respectively (ICR page 31).


Administrative Efficiency

The ICR (para 32) notes that the project preparation was administratively efficient because of (a) streamlined
design (the project team explained that the PIU communicated smoothly with the design institute, and helped
designers for better data collection and alternative analysis that resulted in efficient project preparation,
implementation, and operation); (b) strong client capacity - all contracts were procured in a timely manner and
below the appraisal cost; and (c) well-resourced technical and project management support by the Bank.

The project was extended for one year due to intermittent construction delays caused by external factors such
as typhoons, government ban on explosives during national holidays and important state events.

The project resulted in a 29% cost saving, which were due to: (a) exchange rate variations (the value of the
RMB vis-a-vis US dollar changed from 6.33 at project appraisal to 6.89 at project completion; (b) lower contract
prices due to international competitive bidding (from RMB 724 million at appraisal to RMB 608 million at
completion); and optimized design of civil works (the initial design was improved through adjustments to scope
of dredging, coordination of dredging and rock blasting, utilization of favorable tide conditions, and employment
of advanced construction techniques and machinery) (ICR para 33 and 41). The project team explained that the
ICB contributed to around 16% of total cost savings and optimized design saved around 4%.

Based on the above assessment of economic and administrative efficiency, the overall efficiency of the project is
rated substantial




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    92.00
 Appraisal                                                 13.20
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    96.50
 ICR Estimate                                              16.40
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Fujian Meizhou Bay Navigation (P124848)



6. Outcome

The project objectives were substantially relevant to the development context for China and aligned with the
Bank and Borrower’s strategies at appraisal and closing. The project substantially improved the capacity of the
main navigation channel in Meizhou Bay. The training and technical studies substantially contributed to the
enhancement of the management capacity of the MBHAB. The project resulted in a 20% cost saving and an
ERR of 16.4%, leading to substantial efficiency. The overall outcome of the project is rated as satisfactory




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional Risk. The institutional risk is negligible as the project strengthened the MBHAB’s knowledge
base and management skills for sustained operations of Meizhou Bay Port. The project has also helped to
broaden the vision of the harbor administration to respond to the megatrends in the sector with strategic
planning and investments that are closely relevant to the project outcomes.

Competition Risk. There is a modest risk that Meizhou Bay Port may face potential competition from other
ports in Fujian province. The implementation of the recommendations of the Competitiveness would help
mitigate the risks from competing ports in China.

Environmental Risk. The environmental risk is negligible as the Green Port concept was fully adopted in
port planning, design and operation for energy efficiency and disaster resilience.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was developed and prepared with a straightforward design to support Meizhou Bay’s
  development through infrastructure investments and forward-looking institutional strengthening. The PAD
  (para 32) notes that overall implementation risk was moderate. All the risk categories were rated either
  moderate or low, except social and environmental, which were rated substantial. To mitigate this risk,
  a comprehensive EIA and EMP were prepared including arrangements for implementation, including
  external monitoring by independent social and environmental monitoring agencies. The project was
  appropriately assigned environmental category “A” under the Bank’s environmental and social safeguard
  policies, given the scale and nature of construction. When the project was prepared, Fujian Provincial

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Fujian Meizhou Bay Navigation (P124848)



  Transport Department (FPTD) had already established the Project Management Office (FPMO) with
  designated staff for safeguards, financial management, and procurement. The PAD indicated
  that the project would incorporate lessons learned and best practices on planning and operational models
  from China and the world, which can be adopted for Meizhou Bay. The M&E design had some
  weaknesses in terms of the lack of an outcome-level results indicator for the institutional strengthening
  element of the PDO.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR notes (para 64) that the Bank provided proactive and effective implementation support to the
 project through eight field missions, four desk reviews, five training events, and as needed guidance to the
 PMO on Bank policies and standards. Each Bank supervision mission included technical, fiduciary and
 safeguard specialists.

 The safeguards supervision was satisfactory. The Bank organized four training workshops on
 environmental safeguards and sustainability for stakeholder agencies in Fujian from 2013 through 2018,
 and seven study tours in/outside China with port environmental protection as a key topic (ICR para 66).

 There were some minor shortcomings: (a) the mid-term review was carried out quite late (just one year
 before project closing), and (b) M&E was not revised to include better indicators to measure the capacity
 building component results.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The two PDO indicators (a) annual traffic throughput of Meizhou Bay Port (total tons loaded and unloaded);
 and (b) use of the port by large vessels (movements of vessels of 100,000 DWT and above) were

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Fujian Meizhou Bay Navigation (P124848)



 not strong indicators to measure the first part of the objective “improved capacity of the main navigation
 channel in Meizhou Bay”, as these indicators were also dependent on the global demand that was beyond
 the control of the project. At appraisal, the target value was determined by the historical demand. With the
 unanticipated global economic slowdown and a change in China’s growth strategy, the targets proved
 unrealistic and were revised through a restructuring (dated January 29, 2018) (ICR para 10 and 49).

 For the second part of the objective “enhance the management capacity of MBHAB”, the results framework
 included only an intermediate indicator for the delivery of TA activities and the person-months of training.
 The lack of outcome indicator for the second objective is a major weakness of the M&E design.



 The M&E design included appropriate arrangements for data collection, compilation, analysis and
 reporting.



b. M&E Implementation
  As discussed above, the target values of two PDO indicators were revised. The ICR reports (para 52)
  that the Project Management Office provided good quality reports to the Bank on a regular basis as per
  the agreed schedule. The supplementary data for 2019 was collected form the operational records of the
  Meizhou Bay Port.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (para 53) indicates that the M&E data was used by both Fujian Provincial authorities and the
  Bank to assess progress and make appropriate adjustment such as carrying out project restructuring.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category "A" under the Bank’s environmental and social safeguards polices,
   given the nature and scale of project activities and anticipated environmental and social impacts, particularly
   during construction. Accordingly, three Bank safeguards policies were triggered: Environmental Assessment
   (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). There was no
   ethnic minority presence in the project area, so the Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) was not triggered.

   A full environmental assessment was conducted and all relevant Environmental Assessment (EA)
   documents (including an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Report and an EA Executive Summary)
   were prepared. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was developed based on the findings of the
   EIA report. The EMP provided details on the organizations responsible for environmental management and

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CN-Fujian Meizhou Bay Navigation (P124848)



  supervision and their responsibilities, mitigation measures for construction and operational impacts,
  capacity training plan, monitoring plan, and budget estimates for EMP implementation (PAD para 53).

  During the EA process, the negative impacts of the project on marine ecology and habitats were identified
  and quantified, and an offset plan was designed as part of the EMP to compensate for the anticipated
  ecological loss, namely, the fish breeding and release program and the mangrove restoration program.

  The project was not expected to cause any physical relocation of households, and the direct resettlement
  impacts were to be minor (dismantling of an aqua farm on which a household with 9 persons relied). An
  overall Resettlement Plan (RP) was prepared.

  Environmental Safeguards. The ICR (para 55) reports that the EMP was implemented satisfactorily. The
  project was recognized as Best Practice by the Bank’s regional safeguards team in the application of
  environmental and social safeguards policies, particularly in relation to the design and implementation of the
  ecological offset program (Natural Habitats safeguards). During the project implementation (2015-2019), six
  rounds of fish fry were released for a total of 266.3 million fish/shrimp fries, 31% beyond the planned
  number. Mangrove restoration was successfully implemented over a total surface of 40.84 ha, 9.8% beyond
  the original target (ICR para 56).

  The ICR (para 55) notes that no Occupational Health and Safety incidents were reported.

  Social Safeguards. The ICR (para 57) reports that the project did not require any resettlement but affected
  the livelihoods of 98 households (506 persons). The project complied with the Resettlement Plan and the
  affected households/people were fully compensated. Internal and external monitoring was used to collect
  information on resettlement implementation, to improve policies, and to resolve any issues. The
  resettlement activities also provided the affected people with employment opportunities and vocational
  training (ICR para 59).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management (FM). The ICR reports (para 61) that the FM performance was satisfactory. All
  audit reports were issued on time and were unqualified. The minor FM related issues identified in the audit
  reports were addressed in a timely manner. There were delays in the interim financial reports and these
  were quickly resolved by the project agencies.

  Procurement. The ICR reports (para 60) that the procurement performance was satisfactory. All contracts
  were procured in a timely manner and below the appraisal cost and in accordance with the Bank’s
  procurement guidelines.




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CN-Fujian Meizhou Bay Navigation (P124848)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are adapted from the ICR:

Embedding strategic institutional strengthening support in infrastructure lending projects
can be a good way to address institutional gaps in infrastructure development and service
delivery. The design and timing of institutional strengthening and capacity building interventions,
even if accounting for a relatively small amount of loan financing, can generate significant impact
beyond the physical infrastructure and the project lifecycle. For this, TA design needs to take a
diagnostic approach to help client identify institutional and capacity gaps, and an analytical tool to
inform upper-stream design and enforcement in a systematic and effective way.

Appropriate indicators need to be developed for measuring results from institutional and
capacity building activities. This project shared the common challenge facing Bank projects on
measuring results from institutional strengthening and capacity building activities beyond the output
level, due to the absence of appropriate indicators, including corporate indicators.

Supporting best practice for environmental sustainability in ports and logistics projects can
lead to mainstreaming the development of green ports. The project supported Meizhou Bay’s
development as a green hub port. With the successful adoption of two biological compensation
programs, the project demonstrated best ESIA practice and went beyond China’s EA standards and
Bank compliance requirements for environmental safeguards. This good practice can be
mainstreamed.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Fujian Meizhou Bay Navigation (P124848)




14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is results-oriented, clearly written, and is largely consistent with the guidelines except for the length.
The safeguards discussion in the ICR is good. The lessons were derived from the project’s experience.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 14 of 14
