     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Coastal Watersheds Conserv Project (P131709)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0021996

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P131709                                  MX Coastal Watersheds Conserv Project

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Mexico                                   Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-15475                                 30-Jun-2019                                         39,518,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Nov-2013                              28-Jun-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          39,518,000.00                                   39,518,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           39,518,000.00                                   39,518,000.00

 Actual                                       39,518,000.00                                   39,518,000.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Chikako Miwa               J. W. van Holst             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective was to promote integrated environmental management of selected coastal watersheds as a
   means to conserve biodiversity, contribute to climate change mitigation, and enhance sustainable land
   use. (Global Environment Facility Grant Agreement, Schedule 1, page 8).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
                                                                                                Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Coastal Watersheds Conserv Project (P131709)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Creation and Consolidation of Protected Areas (Appraisal costs: US$75.018 million of
   which GEF was US$20.349 million. Actual costs were the same as the appraisal costs.)

   Component 1 intended to support creating new protected areas (PAs) and consolidating the existing PAs.
   The key activities included: capitalizing the Coastal Watersheds Fund (Fondo para Cuencas Costeras—
   FCC) for financing activities to conserve biodiversity and raising additional funding outside GEF to
   strengthen sustainability of the FCC.

   Component 2: Promoting Sustainability within Watersheds (Appraisal costs: US$153.93 million of
   which GEF was US$17.096 million. Actual costs were the same as the appraisal costs.)

   Component 2 aimed to promote sustainability of watersheds and mitigate climate change. The key activities
   included: capitalizing the Biodiversity Endowment Fund, improving Payment for Ecosystem Services (PES),
   and implementing subprojects to strengthen capacities of communities to sustainable manage forests and
   lands.

   Component 3: Enabling Adaptive Management by Strengthening Monitoring Capacities (Appraisal
   costs: US$11.189 million of which GEF was US$0.439 million Actual costs were the same as the appraisal
   costs.)

   Component 3 envisioned enabling adaptive management of watersheds. The key activities included:
   identifying priority sites and implementing activities on integrated watershed management including
   developing integrated watershed/sub-watershed action plans (IWAPs) and strengthening community
   monitoring of ecosystem services.

   Component 4: Innovative Mechanisms for Inter-institutional Collaboration and Promoting Social
   Participation (Appraisal costs: US$16.892 million of which GEF was US$0.979 million. Actual costs were
   the same as the appraisal costs.)

   Component 4 aimed to enhance cross-sectoral coordination and social participation to the IWAPs. The key
   activities include establishing and managing innovative collaboration mechanisms such as networks,
   forums, and learning communities.

   Component 5: Project Management (Appraisal costs: US$10.768 million of which GEF was US$0.655
   million. Actual costs were the same as the appraisal costs.)

   Component 5 intended to support implementation and supervision of the project. The key activities included
   procurement of goods and provision of technical assistance and training to the institutions that participated
   in project coordination, regional coordination, and technical oversight.




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Coastal Watersheds Conserv Project (P131709)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: At appraisal, the original cost estimate was US$267.797 million. The actual cost was the
   same amount as the estimate.

   Financing: At appraisal, the GEF grant and the total co-financing from the Borrower was estimated at
   US$39.518 million and US$228.279 million, respectively. The actual GEF grant and the total co-financing
   were the same amounts as the appraisal estimates.

   Dates: The project had a Level-II restructuring on June 19, 2018 to modify the results indicators and
   reallocate funds between disbursement categories. Funds were reallocated from the category for
   subprojects to the category for management effectiveness activities of PAs. The project closed on June 28,
   2019, in line with the original schedule.

   The modifications of the results indicators did not lower the level of ambition of the project’s objectives and
   therefore there will be no split rating of outcomes in this review.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context. Mexico’s past economic expansion enabled the country to position it as the second
largest economy in Latin America. Nevertheless, the economic growth induced the land use conversion and
the unsustainable land use practices, such as expanding urban development, encroaching agricultural
fields, cattle ranching, slash-and-burn agriculture, sugar cane cultivation, rapid coastal development, and
other human activities. These caused serious environmental degradation including deforestation and
biodiversity loss. According to the National Geographic and Statistics Institute of Mexico, it was estimated
that 35 percent of the country’s forests disappeared over the past two decades, which contributed 2,606
species to be under threat (ICR, para.1, page 5).

Sector Context. In the Gulf of Mexico and the Gulf of California regions, land use conversion and the
unsustainable land use practices caused degradation of the aquatic ecosystem, such as an increase in
runoffs and a contamination of watersheds by wastewater. According to the National Water Commission
(Comisión Nacional del Agua - CONAGUA), 38 percent of Mexico’s rivers were considered to be highly
polluted in 2013 (ICR, para. 2, page 5). Compounding these challenges, climate change would increase the
severity of natural disasters, such as flooding, landslides, drought, and forest fires. The impacts of
climate change would be most evident in the coastal watersheds of the Gulf of Mexico and the Gulf
of California, where deforestation and depletion of carbon stocks were driven by demographic growth,
urban expansion, and lack of enforcement of environmental regulations. If no remedial action would be
taken, an additional 35 percent of rain forests and 18 percent of temperate forests would be lost in these
two regions by 2050, leading to additional increase in greenhouse gas emissions (PAD, para. 8).

Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies. At appraisal, the project objective was relevant to the Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY08-13, supporting the environmental sustainability pillar. At project closure,
the project objective was relevant to Theme 4. “Promoting Green and Inclusive Growth” in the CPS FY14-
19.


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MX Coastal Watersheds Conserv Project (P131709)



Relevance to Government Strategies. At appraisal, the project objective was relevant to the National
Development Plan 2013-2018, specifically to the pillar on promoting prosperity, which empathized the
sustainable use of natural resources and the preservation of environment and biodiversity. At project
closure, the project objective was relevant to the National Development Plan 2019-2024, particularly with
regards to sustainable livelihoods, agroforestry management, and biodiversity. Moreover, the project
objective was in alignment with the country’s international commitments (PAD, para 48). The project
contributed to reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 30 percent by 2020 stated in the national green
growth agenda and the Climate Change Law of 2012. The project objective was also in alignment with the
global climate change mitigation goals under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC). The project contributed to Aichi goal 11 under the Convention on Biological Diversity
(CBD) by reducing pressures on biodiversity and strengthening PA systems.

Institutional Capacity and Realism. The Borrowers were the Mexican Fund for the Conservation of Nature
(Fondo Mexicano para la Conservación de la Naturaleza—FMCN), National Forestry Commission
(Comisión Nacional Forestal - CONAFOR), and Nacional Financiera, S.N.C (NAFIN). The fund
managements were mainly conducted by FMCN and CONAFOR, while NAFIN played a role of a financial
agency for the part 2.1 of the Project. The Implementing Agencies were the National Commission of
Protected Areas (Comisión Nacional de Áreas Naturales Protegidas—CONANP) and the National Institute
of Ecology and Climate Change (Instituto Nacional de Ecología y Cambio Climático—INECC). FMCN,
CONAFOR, CONANP and INECC had previous experience working with the World Bank and other donors
to address issues on biodiversity loss and natural resources degradation. The project had a project
coordination unit (PCU) run by FMCN and a regional coordination unit (RCU) for each regional fund (FGM
and FONNOR) in each of the two regions, both overseen by a Technical Project Committee (TPC). The
TPC was composed of representatives of CONANP, CONAFOR, INECC, and FMCN and approved
operational procedures, provided policy guidance, and supervised and supported the implementing
agencies. FMCN supervised the project operations through grant agreements with two regional funds, the
Fund for the Gulf of Mexico (Fondo Golfo de México— FGM) and the Northwest Fund (Fondo Noroeste—
FONNOR), as well as through direct administration of subproject finances. The procurement team within
FMCN had a sound knowledge of World Bank procurement policies from its prior experience implementing
the World Bank projects. FMCN was accountable for all the procurement activities, including subproject
and operating cost to be conducted by FGM and FONNOR.

Previous Sector Experience. The World Bank had stages of climate change engagements in the country, as
summarized in Annex 8 in PAD. The key achievements were as follows: investments in protected areas
were increased by 90-folds since 1995; the Mexican Forest Fund was established, which provided the
largest Payment for Ecosystem Services (PES) in Latin America and supported protecting over 1
million hectares of forest area along the Gulf of California and Gulf of Mexico; and monitoring initiatives
such as the National Forest and Soil Inventory and an integrated watershed monitoring system were
implemented. In particular, this project coordinated with the Adaptation to Climate Change Impacts on
the Coastal Wetlands in the Gulf of Mexico Project (P100438, FY11-16), which targeted different
watersheds in the Gulf of Mexico. The project received the information on costs and benefits of alternative
approaches from the preceding project, in order to design the pilot measures to reduce the vulnerability of
those coasts to climate change (PAD, para. 4, page 1). The Consolidation of the Protected Areas System
(Sistema Nacional de Áreas Protegidas-SINAP II) Project (P065988, FY02-10) set up Information System
for Project Follow-up (Sistema de Información y Seguimiento de Proyectos - SISEP) that supported
implementation and supervision of the project.




                                                                                                 Page 4 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MX Coastal Watersheds Conserv Project (P131709)



               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Project Development Objective (PDO) in the grant/legal agreement: To promote integrated environmental
                             management of selected coastal watersheds as a means to conserve biodiversity, contribute to climate
                             change mitigation, and enhance sustainable land use.
                             The Global Environmental Objective (GEO) was exactly the same as the PDO in the grant/legal agreement.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC) for the project:

                             Capitalizing funds would support consolidating the Protected Areas (PAs) and improving the Payment for
                             Ecosystem Services (PES). Developing integrated watershed/sub-watershed action plans (IWAPs) in an
                             inclusive manner with a wide variety of participants including communities would foster an enabling
                             environment for implementing a landscape approach and strengthen local capacities to monitor and manage
                             natural resources. Enhanced and strengthened PA systems, improved PES mechanisms, and developed and
                             adopted IWAPs would lead to promote integrated environmental management of coastal watersheds.
                             Improvements in integrated management watersheds would enhance sustainable use and management of
                             land and forests, contributing to reductions of forest loss and carbon emissions. Reduction in greenhouse gas
                             emissions would contribute to climate change mitigation and biodiversity conservation, leading to a further
                             enhancement of sustainable land use. In the long-term, the project would contribute to conserve forest and
                             watershed resources providing the basis for increased biodiversity, enhanced resilience and stability, and
                             hence reduced land degradation in critical coastal watersheds. Key assumptions of the TOC included: (1)
                             legal framework to create new PAs would come into effect in a timely manner; (2) the stakeholders in local
                             communities and the municipal, regional, and federal governments had capacities and commitments to adopt
                             the newly developed IWAPs through inter-institutional coordination; and (3) The PAs and CONAFOR had
                             financial capacities to manage the funds and the PES in a sustainable manner.

                             Inputs:

                             Provision of goods, consultants, and training/workshops for technical support and capacity strengthening to
                             conduct the following key activities:

                                        Creating new Protected Areas (PAs) and consolidating existing PAs in six project sites in coastal
                                         watersheds: Tuxpan, Antigua, and Jamapa in the Gulf of Mexico, as well as Baluarte, San Pedro, and
                                         Region Vallarta in the Gulf of California.
                                        Capitalizing the Coastal Watersheds Fund (Fondo para Cuencas Costeras— FCC) and raising
                                         additional funding outside GEF to strengthen sustainability of the FCC


                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX Coastal Watersheds Conserv Project (P131709)




      Capitalizing the Biodiversity Fund at CONAFOR to improve Payment for Ecosystem Services (PES)
      Developing Annual Operational Plans (AOPs) in the PAs to support key biodiversity conservation
         activities
      Implementing subprojects to strengthen capacities of communities to sustainable manage forests and
         lands
      Developing IWAPs through encouraging participations of a wide variety of stakeholders to realize a
       landscape approach
      Strengthening community monitoring of ecosystem services
      Establishing and managing innovative inter-institutional collaboration mechanisms, such as networks,
       forums, and learning communities

Outputs:

Key outputs of the project were as follows:

      Ten PAs of 1,106,919.27 hectares were consolidated. One new PA of 354,849 hectares was created.
      The FCC was capitalized with the total fund of US$39 million, including matching finance equivalent to
         US$19.518 million from private and public sources. This strengthened financial sustainability of the
         PAs.
        The Biodiversity Endowment Fund was capitalized with a total fund of US$18.2 million, including
         matching finance equivalent to US$9.1 million from the Mexican Government. The total initial funds
         continued to accrue interest beyond project closure (ICR, para. 34) . The interest earnings from the
         funds supported the PES mechanism, under which forest remnants were to be conserved and serve
         as connecting units within the watersheds.
        There were 1,669 workshops held for community members to strengthen technical and administrative
         capacities for monitoring and managing natural resources. There were 16,173 participants—6,585
         women and 9,588 men. Of which, 1,605 women and 1,980 men were indigenous people from 5 ethnic
         groups.
        Six IWAPs were developed through the workshops in a participatory manner. In accordance with the
         IWAPs, the PES supported by the Biodiversity Endowment Fund and the subprojects on agro-
         ecosystem and forest management were implemented, covering an area of 35,784 hectares. This
         surpassed the intermediate results indicator target of 18,696 hectares (191 percent of the original
         target).
        Thirty-two subprojects on agro-ecosystem and forest management were implemented, covering a total
         area of 23,572 hectares. Of which, 90 percent of subprojects reported continuity in their activities at
         project closure. The subprojects were closely monitored by community members who participated in
         the workshops.
        Six local organizations incorporated better land use and biodiversity friendly practices derived from the
         interaction with the project in two states (Veracruz and Jalisco): Fondo Ambiental Veracruzano,
         Instituto de Ecología, Asociación de Industriales de Veracruz, Ayuntamiento de Xalapa, Junta
         Intermunicipal de Medio Ambiente Sierra Occidental y Costa (JISOC), Fondo Ambiental de Jalisco. It
         achieved the IR target of 6 local partners (100 percent of the original target).

Outcomes:



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               MX Coastal Watersheds Conserv Project (P131709)



                            The achievements of PDO outcome indicators were as follows:

                            1. Consolidation of at least 1.1 million ha of protected areas, including at least two new protected
                            areas of an estimated 500,000 ha (End Target: 1,100,000 ha). Consolidated 1,748,205 hectares of PAs
                            achieved, exceeding the target of 1,100,000 hectares (158 percent of the original target). The consolidation of
                            PAs supported them to secure endowment funds in order to improve their financial sustainability in the long-
                            term. On the other hand, only one new PA of 354,849 hectares in Río Ameca was created, not meeting the
                            PDO outcome targets of “estimated 500,000 hectares in at least two new protected areas” (71 percent and 50
                            percent of the original targets on creation of PAs, respectively). In addition, development of a decree for
                            designing new PAs was delayed; because, it was challenged by the mining sector in the region and because
                            it overlapped with pre-existing decrees for Marine Protected Areas that received federal priority for attaining
                            the Aichi biodiversity targets. While waiting for the creation of new PAs, only existing PAs (10 PAs) were able
                            to implement activities on improving their management effectiveness, not meeting the intermediate results
                            target of 12 PAs (83 percent of the original target). Two new PAs were expected to be decreed by December
                            2021 (ICR, para. 40).
                            2. Improved land and forest management with reduced carbon emissions in selected sites in six
                            watersheds (End Target: 1,027,554 ha). The watershed areas with improved land and forest management
                            were increased from the baseline of 1,008,858 hectares to the achievement of 1,092,027 hectares (102
                            percent of the original target) and contributing to carbon emissions reductions. There were 5.53 Mt CO2
                            emissions avoided and sequestered in the targeted watersheds/sub-watersheds, exceeding the intermediate
                            results target of 4.015 Mt CO2 (137 percent of the original target).
                            3. Integrated watershed/sub-watershed action plans (IWAPs) adopted by different government levels
                            (municipal, regional, or federal) or local actors (End Target: Six watersheds). Six integrated
                            watershed/sub-watershed action plans (IWAPs), also known as Action Plans for the Integrated Management
                            of Watershed (Planes de Acción de Manejo Integrado de Cuenca - PAMIC), were finalized at the six project
                            sites, fully meeting the target (100 percent of the original target). The IWAPs were adopted at different
                            government levels (municipal, regional, or federal) or local actors. The PES mechanism was operated in
                            alignment with the IWAPs.

                            Summarizing the positive achievements, the project contributed to the promotion of “integrated environmental
                            management of selected coastal watersheds” by enhancing the integrated watershed management at
                            government and community levels, improving inter-institutional collaboration among the stakeholders for
                            sustainable natural resources management, decelerating forest loss by strengthening the financial
                            sustainability of protected areas (PAs), and reducing carbon emissions. On the other hand, the delay in
                            legalizing new PAs hindered implementing the activities on effective management of these areas. On
                            balance, the achievement of the objective was substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                             Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MX Coastal Watersheds Conserv Project (P131709)



  The project promoted “integrated environmental management of selected coastal watersheds” and
  contributed to biodiversity conservation, climate change mitigation, and sustainable land management. The
  overall efficacy of the achievement of the project’s development objective was therefore rated substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis: At appraisal, the economic analysis in PAD (Annex 6, page 61) provided the Internal
Rates of Return (IRR) for sub-components of the project, while unable to provide the IRR for the whole project
due to the lack of quantified data on expected benefits on biodiversity and hydrological services.

At project closure, the ICR (Annex 4, para. 5) noted that according to the latest official estimates the average
yearly deforestation rate from 1993 to 2011 was 0.7 percent. It was assumed that the project had helped to
reduce deforestation by 20 percent, based on evidence in a paper published by Sims and Alix-Garcia in 2017.
This reduction was used in the application of the FAO’s Ex-Ante Carbon-balance Tool (ExAct) model to estimate
reduced CO2 emissions in the project’s PAs. It was found that “protecting” one hectare would, on average,
reduce CO2 emissions by approximately 518 tons equivalent. In the case of “restoration”, a hectare protected
was estimated to reduce emissions by 441 tons. Thus, based on the protection and restoration activities in the
project’s PAs, the project interventions (such as the PES program) prevented an additional 1.67 Mt CO2 from
entering the atmosphere (Annex 4, Table 1). Assuming a shadow price for CO2 emission of US$40 per ton
following the Bank's guideline, and based on a time horizon of 20 years and a discount rate of 6 percent, the net
present value of benefits in terms of reduced CO2 emissions generated by the project was estimated to be
US$402 million and the estimated internal rate of return was 46 percent.

These results were robust against adverse changes in the key parameters as shown in Table 2 of Annex 4 in
the ICR. For example, in the worst-case scenario, reduction of benefits by 50 percent, the NPV was still positive
(US$82 million) and the IRR was 33 percent.

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis: At appraisal, according to CONAFOR’s study in 2014, the similar preceding
projects used US$55 per hectare annually for agroforestry management, US$446.15 per hectare annually for
sustainable forest management, and US$230.77 annually for agroecosystem activities. At project closure, the
ICR (para. 44) reported the sustainable forest management and agroecology subproject had a cost per hectare
of US$69.75 per year. In general, the cost was on the lower side when compared with the component costs for
the other projects implemented for the sector.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Coastal Watersheds Conserv Project (P131709)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   95.00
ICR Estimate                                              46.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective was high, due to the project’s alignments with the main strategies for the country and
its continuity from the preceding interventions which gradually strengthened the sector’s capacities and
systems. The efficacy was substantial, as the project contributed to biodiversity conservation, climate change
mitigation, and sustainable land management by successfully integrating environmental management of
selected coastal watersheds. The efficiency was substantial, as the internal rate of return and the net present
value at project closing showed good results throughout a range of scenarios with different assumptions. The
project had minor or no shortcomings in its relevance, achievement of objectives, and its efficiency and
therefore the project’s overall outcome has been rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The anticipated risk to development outcome was decreasing engagements by the implementing partners
over the long-term. To mitigate the risk, at project closure, the Technical Project Committee (TPC) developed
a legal agreement and an implementation plan for its four member institutions (CONAFOR, INECC,
CONANP, and FMCN) to follow. This arrangement enabled the TPC to continue operating after the project
duration by expanding its operational scope from the activities under this Project only to a wider area of
topics in the watershed ecosystem management across institutions and projects. Based on these actions
this review agrees with the conclusion in the ICR that the risk to the development outcome for this project is
moderate (para. 81).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Coastal Watersheds Conserv Project (P131709)



  Strategic relevance and approach were thoroughly considered, by focusing on gaps and opportunities for
  interventions in Mexico’s environment sector to conserve coastal watersheds to achieve national goals
  and international commitments. Major relevant aspects such as technical, financial, economic,
  institutional, and procurement were adequately considered to develop the project design. The
  assessments on risks and mitigation measures were sufficiently assessed and the project’s M&E design
  was adequate. The task team at entry had the appropriate mix of technical expertise on environment,
  social, financial management, and procurement.

  On this basis, the quality the Bank's performance at entry was rated as satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR, the project benefited from a continuity of some task team members working on the
 project from design to the end of implementation. The task team conducted supervision missions
 approximately every 6 months. The disbursements were made at a steady rate throughout the project
 duration. The project restructuring and funds reallocation were timely. The Bank task team supported
 inclusiveness during implementation, collecting and reporting data on beneficiaries who were female and/or
 had indigenous identities.

 On this basis, the quality of the Bank's supervision was rated as satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Results Framework was designed well as the basis for monitoring achievements of the intended
 results. The retro-actively formulated theory of change reflected the project’s design and results
 chains. The PDO outcome indicators and intermediate results indicators, in general, met the criteria of
 being specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound. All indicators had baselines and targets
 at appraisal. The project coordination unit (PCU) in the FMCN was arranged to be responsible for the M&E,
 collecting technical data from the regional coordination units (RCUs) and reporting to the Technical Project
 Committee (TPC) and the Bank. The project lacked gender-specific indicators, as there were no person-



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Coastal Watersheds Conserv Project (P131709)



 level indicators. Nevertheless, the project engaged in development of the gender strategy and the
 indicators, which encouraged female stakeholders to participate in the project.

 Adjustments to the indicators were made during the restructuring in 2018 to strengthen the ownerships of
 governmental and community levels on Component 3. PDO outcome indicator 3 was revised to include the
 local actors as a key stakeholder to adopt the IWAPs. IR indicator 2.3 was dropped, as it was similar to IR
 Indicator 3.1 and ambiguous in target description. IR indicator 3.1 was revised to drop the descriptions on
 data collection measures.



b. M&E Implementation
  The progress of project implementation was monitored in accordance to the Result Framework. There
  was a bi-annual Monitoring and Evaluation Plan which aligned with bi-annual Bank supervision missions.
  This ensured that all watersheds were visited and effectively monitored by the relevant implementing
  partner and the Bank team. Data for GEF's Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT) were
  collected starting at project inception, the Mid-Term Review (MTR), and project closure. Monitoring teams
  across implementing partners relayed information to the TPC, which FMCN compiled and systematically
  recorded and reported on the advances in activities and towards overall outcomes (ICR, para. 65).



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data and information were well utilized to monitor the progress of implementation, providing
  support for making administrative decisions, and facilitating corrective actions as needed. The
  MTR utilized the M&E data to trigger the restructuring process to revise the indicators as described
  in 9.a and to reallocate funds across disbursement categories. Lastly, M&E data and information
  supported development of the IWAPs and the guidelines for PES and subprojects (ICR, para. 66).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was designated a “B” safeguards category. Six safeguards consisting of four
   environmental safeguards and 2 social safeguards were triggered, which were: Environmental Assessment
   (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Forests (OP/BP 4.36); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP
   4.11); Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12). An environmental
   assessment was completed and disclosed on July 31, 2012. The project followed guidelines established in
   the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
   (IPPF), and Process Framework (PF). The project also developed and applied a gender strategy.




                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Coastal Watersheds Conserv Project (P131709)



   At project closure, it was confirmed that all safeguards categories consistently received Satisfactory ratings
   vis a vis compliance. There was no significant environmental issue. The Grievance Redress Mechanism
   received only one formal grievance related to social safeguards, which was resolved satisfactorily.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   The project’s asset management transactions, financial reporting, expenditures, and audits were all
   reviewed by Bank personnel and found to be Satisfactory. The project’s TPC followed the Bank’s
   standards on financial management. The FMCN grants specialist provided an oversight for all accounting
   and reporting activities to ensure compliance. Financial transactions were recorded digitally, which
   materialized in timely submission of quarterly interim financial reports. Project funds were audited by
   external auditors, as part of the entity-wide financial statements prepared by the implementing partners
   and led by the TPC. The audit reports prepared by external auditors were provided on time and accepted
   by the Bank. The implementing partners also promptly submitted audited financial reports that did not
   contain any internal control inadequacies with regard to the project.

   Procurement:

   The Mexican Fund for the Conservation of Nature (FMCN) was directly responsible for monitoring
   procurement activities outlined in the Operating Plans of the PAs. The PCU (FMCN) and the RCUs (FGM
   and FONNOR) utilized the Information and Tracking/Monitoring System (SISEP) tool for managing
   procurement-related activities. All goods and technical services procured under the project followed Bank
   guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were positive unintended impacts, as follows. First, FMCN was accredited by the Green Climate
   Fund (GCF), enhancing Mexico’s opportunities for raising fund to address biodiversity conservation and
   climate change. Second, environmental monitoring at the community level was strengthened with
   development of simplified methodology. Third, two regional funds were created, with the aim to support
   community involvement, establish new partnerships, and build trust. Fourth, two state environmental
   governance committees and two localized watersheds committees were created, expanding the project
   coverage to encompass the watersheds in the states of Veracruz and Tabasco, as well as the Baluarte
   River and the San Pedro River in the Gulf of California (ICR, para. 54).



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MX Coastal Watersheds Conserv Project (P131709)



                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

Based on the lessons in the ICR, this review has summarized the main generally applicable lessons
which this review has highlighted – with some editing.

When communities work together it facilitates knowledge exchange and strengthens bonds
across them. These bonds can lead to the creation of coalitions which continued to operate after
this project’s closure, such as the Coalition of Organizations of the Jamapa-Antigua Bio-basin. In
addition, community enterprises can be strengthened by regional networks with their support for
enlarging scale for activities such as collective marketing, and community integration into the local
economy as they were in this project.

Participation in environmental monitoring inspires communities to raise awareness on the
importance of natural resource conservation and management. For example, the community
that monitored water quality and biodiversity built a sense of stewardship towards the resources and
enhanced monitoring methodologies through creation of Community Biological Monitoring
(Monitoreo Comunitario de la Biodiversidad - BIOCOMUNI) and application of the National
Biodiversity Monitoring System (SNMB) under coordination of National Commission for
the Knowledge and Use of Biodiversity (Comisión Nacional para el Conocimiento y Uso de la
Biodiversidad - CONABIO).

Communicating protective area (PA) creation plans early on can ensure that these plans are
aligned with policy objectives for conservation and climate change. In this project coordination
between the national government and communities to integrate the PA creation plans into pre-
existing conservation plans avoided overlaps in target areas, leading to acceleration in PA creation
process. At the local level, communicating plans for PAs early minimized conflicts among existing
resource users, reducing potential opposition against restrictions in land use and access associated
with the PAs.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MX Coastal Watersheds Conserv Project (P131709)




The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. The ICR was candid and the text was generally aligned to
the achievement of the project development objective. The project’s presentation of the Theory of Change in
the ICR thoroughly explained the causal relationships among inputs, outputs, outcomes, and impacts. The
quality of evidence and analysis (with the exception of some aspects of the efficiency analysis e.g. the price of
carbon was not specified in the ICR but later provided to IEG by the Bank’s project team) is substantial and
informs all aspects of the ICR and there are few lapses in the quality of data and information.

On this basis, the quality of the ICR was rated as substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 14
