     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Skills and Trg. Enhancement Project (P090807)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022000

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P090807                                    BD: Skills and Trg. Enhancement Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Bangladesh                                 Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-47640,IDA-57360,TF-15113               30-Jun-2016                                       190,082,979.21

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Jun-2010                                30-Jun-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            79,000,000.00                                  15,709,907.00

 Revised Commitment                            194,415,932.27                                  15,670,555.48

 Actual                                        190,082,979.21                                  15,670,555.48




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Salim J. Habayeb             Joy Behrens                   IEGHC (Unit 2)




 P145118_TBL
 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P145118                                    Additional Financing- Bangladesh STEP ( P145118 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                                0

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Sep-2013

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Skills and Trg. Enhancement Project (P090807)




                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                        0.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                                         0.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                                     0.00                                               0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (p. 5), the project's objective was "to strengthen training institutions to
   improve training quality and employability of trainees, including those from disadvantaged socio-economic
   backgrounds."



   Several key outcome targets were revised upward at a 2016 additional financing (AF). As the project's scope
   increased commensurately with the AF, no split rating will be performed.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  21-Jan-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project contained four components:



   1. Improve the Quality and Relevance of Training (appraisal: US$72.9 million; actual: US$ 155.7 million).
   This component was to be offered through two windows. The first window was to support 25-30 public and
   private institutions offering diploma-level programs. The second was to support 40-50 public and private
   institutions providing short-term vocational and technical training. Eligibility criteria for selection were to

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BD: Skills and Trg. Enhancement Project (P090807)



  include such factors as years in existence, annual intake, capacity utilization, number of graduates,
  ownership or land title, principal and teacher availability, teacher vacancies, presence of a placement cell,
  accreditation, links to industry, and apprenticeship programs. Under the first window, a participating
  institution was to develop an Institutional Development Plan (IDP) including proposed activities, year-wide
  implementation plans, and a cost and expenditure plan for five years. Each IDP was to define performance
  indicators and set annual targets. The grants to finance IDPs could include infrastructure rehabilitation and
  refurbishment, modernization of equipment, capacity development, remuneration for guest faculty from
  industry, teacher and student training materials, and improvements to institute administration, outreach,
  communications, and student placement. Stipends were to be offered to students from socio-economically
  disadvantaged backgrounds. Under the second window, institutions were to develop proposals for training
  programs of a minimum of 360 hours within a duration of six months or less. The grants to finance these
  training programs could include tuition costs to the institution and stipends to students enrolled in the
  courses. Under both windows, funds were to be released in tranches conditioned on reaching pre-defined
  performance benchmarks.



  2. Pilots in Technical and Vocational Education Training (TVET) (appraisal: US$5.5 million; actual: US$6.2
  million). This component was to finance two types of pilot activities. The first was to support Industry Skills
  Councils (ISCs, which provide information to the TVET sector about current and projected human resource
  and training needs in selected industries) and the National Skills Development Corporation (NSDC, which
  guides the overall regulatory and legislative framework for TVET) through the establishment of offices and
  outreach activities. The second was to strengthen the Secondary School Certificate (Vocational) (SSC
  (Voc)), which provides basic vocational training and internships to students who are likely to take up
  employment immediately after secondary education, by experimenting with more effective forms of program
  delivery. These pilots were to be rigorously evaluated to assess their effectiveness in improving training
  opportunities.



  3. Institutional Capacity Development (appraisal: US$4.7 million; actual: US$34.8 million). This component
  was to strengthen the capacity of the government to manage the TVET sector by supporting quality
  assurance activities, curriculum development, monitoring and certification capabilities, capacity for research
  and planning, and other areas for the Directorate of Technical Education (DTE), the Bangladesh Technical
  Education Board (BTEB) under the Ministry of Education (MOE), and the Bureau of Manpower Employment
  and Training under the Ministry of Expatriate Welfare and Overseas Employment.



  4. Project Management, Communications, and Monitoring and Evaluation (appraisal: US$4.9 million; actual:
  US$13 million). This component was to establish a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and carry out
  monitoring and evaluation of project progress and outcomes.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost, financing, and borrower contribution: The project was originally to be financed by a US$79 million
  Credit from the International Development Association (IDA) and US$9 million from the government, for

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Skills and Trg. Enhancement Project (P090807)



   total planned project costs of US$88 million. It received US$16.71 million in AF in January 2014 under a
   multi-donor trust fund with funding from Canada, to scale up institutional grants, support high demand for
   student stipends, expand stipend support for female students, and implement capacity building and
   evaluation activities. A second AF of US$100 million in the form of an IDA Grant was approved in January
   2016. This second AF again scaled up institutional grants, fine-tuned the mechanisms for some ongoing
   interventions, and introduced several new innovations, including digitization of teaching and learning
   materials, improving in-service teacher training, and conducting an impact evaluation. All Bank and trust
   fund financing was fully disbursed. The government contributed significantly more than planned, for a total
   of US$25.2 million. Total final project costs were US$215.3 million, with differences between planned and
   actual costs due to exchange rate fluctuations.



   Dates: The project was approved on June 10, 2010 and became effective on August 22, 2010. The first
   restructuring and AF was approved by the Board on January 18, 2014, and the second on January 21,
   2016. At the second AF, outcome indicators and targets were revised; the closing date for the original Credit
   and the trust fund were set to June 30, 2017; and the closing date for the second AF was set at June 30,
   2019. The project closed on June 30, 2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project's objectives were highly relevant to country context, government strategy, and Bank strategy at
the time of appraisal. Export of manpower and goods contribute significantly to Bangladesh's economy.
Approximately 0.8 million migrants had left the country in 2008, sending back remittances amounting to
about 10% of gross domestic product. The government was aiming to hedge against economic downturn by
increasing the skills level of the workforce to ensure competitiveness in both labor and product markets.
The existing TVET system suffered from weak governance structures, low quality, lack of relevance to the
needs of the labor market, high internal inefficiency, and financing constraints. The government's 2009 New
Education Policy envisioned an expansion of student participation in the TVET system through improved
governance, quality, and relevance. The Bank's 2006-2009 Country Assistance Strategy viewed skilling of
human resources as a critical input for maintaining a competitive edge in global markets.



The objectives remain highly relevant. The government's Seventh Five-Year- Plan (2016-2020) identifies
addressing the skills challenges faced by industry as one of the key drivers of future growth. The Bank's
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2016-2020 cites human development as one of its three
foundational areas, with a specific priority of improving the quality of public services, especially workforce
skills development. Its Focus Area 2 (Social Inclusion, p. 17) notes that sustained growth will require
attention to worker productivity. The Bank's program is specifically oriented toward helping the poor secure

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BD: Skills and Trg. Enhancement Project (P090807)



               better access to formal employment both at home and abroad, and toward continuing "efforts to reform
               technical and vocational skills development to forge stronger links with industry" (CPF, p. 24).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen training institutions to improve training quality

                             Rationale
                             The project's theory of change held that grant support for IDPs at select public and private institutions offering
                             both diploma and short-term training programs, strengthening of the BTEB and other MOE institutions for
                             curriculum development and quality assurance, and implementation of teacher training would lead to
                             increased sectoral capacity to deliver higher-quality TVET programs.



                             Outputs



                             635 staff were trained in leadership and management, exceeding the target of 150. Managerial and
                             administrative leadership training, both nationally and internationally, was provided to BTEB and the DTE
                             under the MOE.



                             Awareness-raising efforts, intended to improve public perception of technical education, increase the number
                             and quality of students, and attract industry collaboration, were implemented through posters, radio and
                             television clips, the internet, and other means. 36 awareness-raising campaigns were conducted, exceeding
                             the original target of 12 and the revised target of 30.



                             According to the project team, 53 diploma-granting institutions received institutional development grants.
                             Funding was delivered in tranches, as planned, contingent on agreed performance benchmarks and
                             utilization of prior disbursements. In those institutions: 96.6% of institutional development grants were used,
                             exceeding the target of 95%. 7,980 faculty were trained in supported courses, exceeding the target of 6,000.
                             The share of vacancies in sanctioned faculty posts decreased from 25% in 2010 to 3% in 2018, exceeding

                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Skills and Trg. Enhancement Project (P090807)



the original target of 10% and the revised target of 5%. In addition, 71 institutions were supported in the
development of short-term training programs. The project established the Dhaka Technical Teachers Training
Institute, which trained almost 2,500 teachers, and entered into training partnerships with institutes in
Singapore and China that trained over 2,000 teachers and 200 managers. Beneficiary surveys covering
teachers, students, and employers conducted in November 2015 and December 2018 found levels of
satisfaction significantly higher than those of the control group in non-project institutions (ICR, pp. 16-17).



There were 706,847 direct project beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 420,000. Of these, 20.7% were
female, exceeding the target of 17%.



Outcomes



In the institutions offering short-term training courses: Completion rates for trainees increased from 50% in
2010 to 96% in 2019, exceeding the original target of 70% and the revised target of 95%. The percentage of
trainees who were female increased from 5% in 2010 to 32% in 2019, exceeding the original target of 20%
and the revised target of 30%.



In the institutions offering full diploma courses: Enrollment as a percentage of sanctioned intake capacity
increased from 55% in 2010 to 99% in 2019, exceeding the original target of 65% and the revised target of
95%. A July 2015 study found that the application process became more competitive, with acceptance rates
dropping from 37% in 2010 to 26% in 2013 (ICR, p. 20). The transition rate of students from the second
semester to the third semester in supported courses increased from 80% in 2010 to 98% in 2019, exceeding
the original target of 90% and the revised target of 95%. Overall pass rates of students from project-
supported diploma programs increased from 50% in 2009 to 86.5% in 2019, exceeding both the original
target of 60% and the revised target of 65%. Female pass rates increased from 66% in 2015 to 89.5% in
2019, exceeding the original/revised target of 68%. The ICR (p. 15) noted that project-supported
diploma institutions had "significantly higher" pass rates than the national average, but it did not offer specific
data, and it also acknowledged that project institutions were selected based on merit and therefore were
already likely to have had better pass rates than others.



Student pass rates, the main outcome indicator for this objective, significantly overachieved targets. Without
corroborating information, it is not clear that pass rates are adequate indicators of training quality, and it
would have been helpful to have additional information such as results of independent skills certification
assessments. However, the employment data for trainees provided under the second objective below,
particularly in a context of a stagnant overall labor market, indicate that skills of graduates were assessed by
the labor marketplace has having improved, adding confidence that increased pass rates were indeed
markers of improved training quality.


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Skills and Trg. Enhancement Project (P090807)




Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen training institutions to improve employability of trainees, including those from disadvantaged
socio-economic backgrounds

Rationale
The project's theory of change held that efforts to support the responsiveness of training to labor market
needs, a direct contributor to trainee employability, would increase employment levels for graduates of
project-supported institutions. These efforts were to include private sector participation in managing
institutions through the development of Institution Management Committees for each institution;
administrative, academic, and financial autonomy for participating institutions; competition between public and
private institutions for project resources; pilot programs on internships and Recognition of Prior Learning
(RPL); and support for strong monitoring, evaluation, and dissemination of information on institutions'
progress. Disadvantaged students were to benefit disproportionately through the granting of targeted
stipends.



Outputs




Over 300 formal partnerships were established with industry, promoting the refurbishment of labs and
facilities, industry exposure for students through seminars by guest lecturers, and support for job placement.
Job placement cells were established in all project-supported institutes, and 33 job fairs were held. A National
Skills Competition was inaugurated in 2014 to showcase the skills of institute graduates. Twelve Industry
Skills Councils, with institutional mandates to create linkages between skills program providers and private
industries, were supported and functioning during the project as of December 2019 (ICR, p. 19), exceeding
the original target of two and the revised target of seven.



An evaluation of the SSC (Voc) pilot program was completed as planned. 9,125 students participated in
internships under the program in five trades: electrical, refrigeration and air conditioning, welding,
dressmaking and tailoring, and food processing. Although only 5% of these students sought employment
immediately after completion, as most of them were still in the education system, the average monthly income
of the employed graduates was about 250% above that of employed graduates in the control group (ICR, p.
18).



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BD: Skills and Trg. Enhancement Project (P090807)




                            31,804 individuals were assessed for Recognition of Prior Learning (certification of skills in workers lacking
                            formal training) in project-supported centers, exceeding the target of 30,000. An August 2016 assessment of
                            the program founds that it significantly increased full-time and part-time wage employment, increased wages,
                            and decreased self-employment and unemployment among those certified (ICR, pp. 18-19).



                            Outcomes



                            Employment rates for trainees of short-term courses within six months of course completion increased from
                            30% in 2009 to 51% in 2019, exceeding the original target of 44% and the revised target of 46%. Among
                            females, the employment rate reached 58% in 2019 (no baseline was provided), exceeding the target of 46%.
                            The ICR (p. 17) noted that this achievement was particularly remarkable in the context of Bangladesh's labor
                            market environment for young adults, which had not improved from 2010 to 2017.



                            285,422 diploma students and 139,477 short-course students from disadvantaged backgrounds (selected on
                            household means testing criteria) were supported with stipends, exceeding the original target of 160,000 and
                            the revised target of 175,000 for diploma students. At the first AF, a universal female stipend was introduced.
                            Pass rates of disadvantaged students from project-sponsored diploma programs increased from 55% in 2015
                            to 92.5% in 2019, exceeding the original/revised target of 60%. The September 2015 tracer study found that
                            the project was successful in attracting poorer students to the short courses through stipends and free tuition
                            (ICR, p. 20). No information was provided on employment outcomes specifically for disadvantaged students.



                            The December 2018 satisfaction survey found that 59% of employers thought there was strong demand for
                            graduates of project-sponsored institute programs in the job market, and 82% found the graduates to be good
                            workers with desirable skill sets. Over three-quarters of employers were satisfied with the graduates of
                            project-supported institutes whom they had hired in the preceding twelve months (ICR, pp. 16-17).



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project far exceeded targets for outcomes related to improved training quality and overall improved
                            employability of trainees at project-supported institutions. The ICR did not provide employment data

                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Skills and Trg. Enhancement Project (P090807)



  specifically for disadvantaged students, but given overall increases in graduates' employment rates and in
  employer satisfaction, it is reasonable to speculate that the strongly improved pass rates for disadvantaged
  students (reaching 92.5% in 2019) translated into favorable employment opportunities.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  High



 5. Efficiency
The economic analysis at appraisal focused on the grants for IDPs and stipend support to institutions offering
diploma-level programs (PAD, pp. 82-91). Costs included direct project support for the IDP support part of the
first component, out-of-pocket expenses for students, and indirect costs of earnings foregone due to
education. The analysis found that, if wages increased at the same rate as prior to the project, the project would
be economically justified only if at least 30% of beneficiaries found employment under a 5% discount rate; the
threshold rose to 50-60% under a 10% discount rate. If project beneficiaries were to experience higher wages, a
smaller level of employment among those graduates would justify the project economically. The cost-benefit
analysis found that under an average scenario, a 65% pass rate and 3% wage premium due to quality
improvements, the project's interventions would yield a net present value (NPV) of US$314 million (ranging from
US$137 million to US$620 million under all scenarios), and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 12%.



The analysis in the ICR (pp. 47-51) incorporated three benefit streams: graduates who would not have
entered/completed programs in the absence of the project's institutional quality improvement efforts; graduates
who would not have entered/completed programs in the absence of project-supported stipends; and employed
graduates of short-term programs. The costs included both direct costs (project costs and students' out-of-
pocket costs) and indirect costs (students' foregone labor earnings). The lowest-impact scenario (30%
enrollment increase for stipend beneficiaries and 10% wage premium for short-course graduates) yielded an
NPV of US$495 million and IRR of 18.7%. The highest-impact scenario (50% enrollment increase for stipend
beneficiaries and 30% wage premium for short-course graduates) yielded an NPV of US$576 million and IRR of
19.2%. The project's results appear to have justified its investments.



Implementation efficiency was strong. There was an initial delay in creation and implementation of IDPs by
participating institutions because of their novelty as a concept and need for substantial capacity development for
fiduciary management. However, these delays were promptly overcome (ICR, p. 22). The PIU efficiently
procured some common items centrally for distribution to training institutions. Project management costs were
only 5.2% of total project costs. The PIU exhibited strong and efficient performance, with minimal turnover
during the project implementation period (ICR, p. 26).


Efficiency Rating


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Skills and Trg. Enhancement Project (P090807)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     66.90
Appraisal                                                  12.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
ICR Estimate                                               18.70
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's objectives remain highly relevant to country conditions, government strategy, and Bank strategy.
Both objectives were achieved, with a lack of direct measurement of employment outcomes among
disadvantaged students but overachievement of targets along all other dimensions of both objectives. Efficiency
was substantial, based on strong cost-benefit analysis and implementation efficiency. These ratings indicate no
meaningful shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation, producing an Outcome rating of
Highly Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Enhancement of vocational-level training remains a high government priority, as is targeting of that training to
people from disadvantaged backgrounds and women. Some of the project's activities have been adopted
into government programs and budgets, most notably student stipends. According to the Borrower's ICR (p.
52), the government has recruited 20,000 teachers beyond those hired under the project in technical
education institutions. Institutional development at participating TVET institutions and ISCs was substantial
and appears likely to be sustained. The Bank is preparing a follow-on project, the US$500
million Accelerating and Strengthening Skills for Economic Transformation (ASSET) project, expected to be
submitted to the Board in September 2020. Continuing challenges include securing financing for training
equipment, which continues to evolve as the technology needs of industry change (ICR, p. 30).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Skills and Trg. Enhancement Project (P090807)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project built on the experience of two previous Bank projects in the TVET sector (Vocational Training
  Project, 1979-1987, and Technical Education Project, 1984-1992) and on a 2008 policy note, "Learning
  for Job Opportunities: An Assessment of the Vocational Education and Training in Bangladesh." Key
  lessons were learned and reflected in project design (PAD, pp. 11-12): that implementation of effective
  reforms takes time and requires capacity building and involvement of all partners; that linkages with the
  labor market must be strengthened; that decision making must be decentralized to institutions; that the
  government plays a key role in disseminating information on TVET; and that skills development must
  target poor and disadvantaged groups. Implementation arrangements were clearly spelled out in the PAD
  (pp. 49-58). Overall program risk was rated high prior to mitigation, with specific high risks related to
  systemic corruption, sector governance, implementation capacity, financial management, and
  procurement. Detailed mitigation measures (including an institutional capacity assessment) were
  specified (PAD, pp. 14-17, 100-103). The project team coordinated closely with teams from the European
  Commission, International Labor Organization, and Asian Development Bank who were preparing or
  implementing parallel TVET programs in the country (ICR, p. 25). The results framework was concise and
  logical, with the exception of the omission of an outcome indicator to measure employability among
  disadvantaged graduates.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Throughout implementation, the Bank team, led by Country Office-based staff, sustained a continuous
 dialogue with the PIU and other sector institutions, including the training institutions. The team effectively
 incorporated the findings of the many studies and surveys carried out during the implementation period, as
 well as findings from periodic workshops with stakeholders. The preparation and documentation of the AFs
 were timely and responsive to government priorities and to lessons learned from project experience.
 According to the ICR (p. 29), aides-memoire and implementation status and results reports were succinct
 and results-focused. The Bank team forged partnerships with the private sector through the IMCs, and by
 piloting enterprise-based training by private sector organizations. Formal training partnerships were also
 created with several other countries, benefiting both managers and trainers. Collaboration with the
 European Commission - International Labor Organization was strong, with the EC-ILO focusing on the
 devising and defining of policy innovations, and the Bank focusing on implementation (ICR, p. 30).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Skills and Trg. Enhancement Project (P090807)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD (pp. 31-36) included a detailed and logical results framework, with indicators, baselines, and
 targets clearly specified. All elements of the objectives were reflected in outcome indicators, with the
 exception of employment outcomes specifically for disadvantaged students. The M&E Unit of the PIU was
 to collect, report, and analyze routine data on project training activities, and surveys were to cover annual
 institutional performance audits (with progress measured against institutional IDPs), evaluation of the SSC
 (Voc) pilot, and tracer studies. Data from training institutions was to be collected every six months through
 a set of performance monitoring data formats developed specifically for the project. Quality assurance
 surveys were to be regularly conducted to measure change from the perspective of students and
 employers. Third-party evaluation studies were to be carried out at the project's mid-term and closing,
 including collection of data from both project and comparable non-project institutions (PAD, p. 13). The
 planned time frame of the project, 5.5 years, was designed to allow an entire cohort of students to graduate
 through the four-year diploma program and for the completion of several cycles of short-term training,
 facilitating complete assessment of project impact for these initial cohorts.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was slow to begin because of the absence of an integrated system of data
  management and analysis, delays in systematic reporting, and weak use of M&E data for timely decision-
  making. The PIU addressed these issues through staffing of its M&E Unit and design, development, and
  implementation of a functional management information system for the project. Especially after the two
  AFs, reporting was provided regularly, and the results framework was continuously updated with
  information collected from beneficiary institutions. A large number of assessments, surveys, tracer
  studies, and other studies were carried out (some by the Bank as technical assistance).



c. M&E Utilization
  Semi-annual progress reports were prepared in a timely manner and submitted prior to each joint review
  mission. These reports enabled the government and Bank team to monitor progress and identify
  challenges. Project M&E data and analysis were effectively used to introduce project design
  modifications at the two AFs and to design a follow-on operation under preparation (ICR, p. 27).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Environmental Assessment category B and triggered OP/BO 4.01, Environmental
   Assessment, and OP/BP 4.10, Indigenous Peoples. Its activities were to include rehabilitation and


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Skills and Trg. Enhancement Project (P090807)



   renovation of existing buildings and classrooms, but not long-term acquisition of land or construction of new
   buildings. These small-scale construction activities were not anticipated to cause major environmental
   impacts. An Environmental Management Framework was prepared and disclosed, and individual
   Environment Management Plans were to be developed for any sub-project found to have potential for
   significant impact after an environmental analysis screening. The project was expected to lead to positive
   environmental impacts because an Environment Management program was to be introduced to the TVET
   curriculum for the first time. According to the ICR (p. 28), the M&E Unit of the PIU conducted regular
   monitoring of environmental and social safeguard compliance and reported its findings to the Bank and to
   the government. No significant issues were encountered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project financed the contracting of procurement and financial management specialists for the PIU, and
   the PIU in turn provided hand-on support and training for the training institutions. Other than minor delays
   in staffing at the project's outset, according to the ICR (p. 28), neither procurement nor financial
   management experienced significant problems. Procurement plans were updated regularly, and project
   audit reports were submitted in a timely manner. With a few minor exceptions on unreconciled balances of
   the use of funds between the designated account and Client Connection, unaudited financial reports were
   acceptable to the Bank. The project financed the introduction of e-government procurement in the PIU,
   DTE, and BTEB, and in training institutions on a pilot basis; no significant issues were encountered during
   this process.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory      Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory             Satisfactory
                                                                                   Lack of outcome indicator/data
                                                                                   for employment outcomes
Quality of M&E                  High                     Substantial
                                                                                   among disadvantaged
                                                                                   students/graduates.



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Skills and Trg. Enhancement Project (P090807)



Quality of ICR                   ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 30-31) offered several insightful lessons, but most were not derived from details of the
project's preparation or implementation experience as described in the body of the ICR; instead, the
ICR's lessons offered additional information about implementation experience. IEG summarizes two
lessons emerging from the ICR's main account of the project:



      Strong M&E preparation, with a clear results framework and specification of institutional
       responsibility for data collection and analysis, facilitates clear and attributable assessment of
       progress and outcomes. In the case of this project, early support for the Project
       Implementation Unit's M&E Unit enabled exceptional M&E implementation, but it was a
       shortcoming that no outcome indicator was incorporated for measurement of one key
       outcome (employment outcomes among disadvantaged students).
      Clearly demonstrated results can enhance ongoing government support for Bank-financed
       interventions. In this case, technical and vocational education training was already high on
       the government's agenda, and the project's unambiguous impact led to government
       decisions to continue the student stipend and teacher recruitment efforts using its own
       resources.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  Further study could offer insight into the factors contributing to the project's highly successful and impactful
  preparation and implementation experience.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Skills and Trg. Enhancement Project (P090807)



The ICR was clear, concise, outcome-oriented, and internally consistent. It provided a strong implementation
narrative and account of the project's outcomes and impact. The Borrower's ICR offered additional insight into
the project's preparation and implementation experience. Minor shortcomings included a sparse discussion of
project outputs (which could usefully have been summarized in an appendix), and its derivation of lessons from
project experience that was not included in the main narrative.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 15
