     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



                                                                            Report Number: ICRR0022127

1. Project Data



 Project ID                            Project Name
 P107473                               INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH

 Country                               Practice Area(Lead)
 Montenegro                            Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                      Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-77160,IBRD-86430,TF-A1293        30-Jun-2014                                         26,233,006.93

 Bank Approval Date                    Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Apr-2009                           30-Sep-2019

                                       IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                       15,700,000.00                                    5,316,407.46

 Revised Commitment                        23,577,391.38                                    4,898,299.63

 Actual                                    22,287,133.26                                    5,000,677.89




 Prepared by             Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Alexandra Christina     J. W. van Holst             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Horst                   Pellekaan




 P110602_TBL
 Project ID                            Project Name
                                       MONTENEGRO INSTITU DEV AND AGR STRENGTH (
 P110602
                                       P110602 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                      Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-93405                              30-Jun-2014                                            3945873.67



                                                                                             Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)




 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Apr-2009                               30-Jun-2017

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                      0.00                                   4,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                       0.00                                   3,945,873.67

 Actual                                                   0.00                                   3,945,873.67




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The original Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Montenegro Institutional Development and
   Agriculture Strengthening Project (MIDAS) as stated in the Loan Agreement dated May 27, 2009 was “to
   improve delivery of the Borrower’ assistance for sustainable agriculture and rural development in a
   manner consistent with the European Union (EU) pre-accession requirements”, in line with the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD) dated March 23, 2009.

   The PDO was revised during implementation in December 2015, keeping the original PDO but adding two
   elements to more granularly specify intended objectives as follows “(i) to improve delivery of government
   assistance for sustainable agriculture and rural development in a manner consistent with the EU's
   pre-accession requirements; (ii) to increase the experience of Montenegrin authorities in
   administering rural development grants in accordance with EU-IPARD[1] core rules, and (iii) to
   support a selected number of agricultural holdings and food establishments in upgrading towards EU
   standards” (Loan Agreement Additional Financing dated October 5, 2016). This revised/expanded PDO is
   adopted for the purpose of assessing the project’s achievements in this Implementation Completion Report
   Review (ICRR), divided into its three elements and referred to as Objectives 1, 2 and 3 in Section 4 of the
   ICRR.

   Following the guidance of the ICRR Reviewer Manual, no split rating was adopted given that the revision of
   the PDO did not reduce the project’s level of ambition nor alter the Theory of Change and was in line with the
   original project design to address all three elements (improve delivery of government assistance for rural
   development, increase experience of authorities in administering IPARD-compatible funds, and support
   upgrades of food establishment), as outlined in the PAD (paras 20-25). IEG’s interview with the Bank’s task
   team clarified that the expansion of the PDO was based on the request of the European Union during the
   preparation of the 2015 Additional Financing (AF) of an EU grant to disaggregate the PDO according to key
   project support activities. Related to this, the AF expanded the scope of the project by allowing additional
   beneficiary groups to receive grant financing. Specifically, food establishments (i.e. small and medium sized
   agro-processors) were eligible to apply for matching grants to comply with EU food safety standards.




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



   The project also specified a Global Environment Objective related to the Global Environment Facility (GEF)
   grant obtained at original project appraisal as “to mainstream sustainable land use and natural resource
   management into MAFWM's policies, programs and investments” (ICR, para 9).

   [1] IPARD stands for the European Union’s (EU) Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance for Rural
   Development.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  11-Dec-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Strengthening MAFWM’s rural development program (Appraisal estimate: IBRD
   Original Financing and GEF Grant: EUR 8.5 million; Actual cost at ICR: IBRD Original Financing and
   GEF Grant: EUR 7.11 million; EU Grant: EUR 3.92 million; IBRD Additional Financing: EUR 0.97
   million). This component aimed (i) to improve then delivery of the government assistance for sustainable
   agriculture and rural development consistent with the EU’s pre-accession requirements and (ii) to
   mainstream sustainable land use and natural resource management into the Ministry of Agriculture,
   Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) policies, programs and investments. To achieve this, key
   activities under Component 1 were divided into two sub-components focused on (i) the provision of
   matching (i.e. cost-sharing) grants to farmers and eligible beneficiaries for IPARD-compatible (i.e. national
   grant funds that simulate IPARD principles and guidelines) rural development sub-projects and agro-
   environmental measures and (ii) the strengthening of public extension and advisory services to support
   farmers and eligible beneficiaries in grant proposal/business plan development and uptake of agro-
   environmental practices awe well as the development and mainstreaming of the Code of Good Agricultural
   Practices (CGAP) into MAFWM support programs (PAD, para 20-21 and ICR para 12-13).

   Component 2: Strengthening MAFWM’s administrative and management capacity in accordance
   with EU pre-accession requirements (Appraisal estimate: IBRD Original Financing and GEF Grant:
   EUR 7.6 million. Actual cost at ICR: IBRD Original Financing and GEF Grant: EUR 6.03 million; EU
   Grant: EUR 1.95 million; IBRD Additional Financing: EUR 1.84 million). This component complemented
   the activities of Component 1 through (i) the establishment of key agencies in line with EU requirements to -
   on the one hand- plan and program the IPARD-compatible rural development funds program and -on the
   other hand- administer these funds, (ii) the development of improved agricultural information systems in line
   with EU requirements, and (iii) the modernization of the food safety system in accordance with EU
   standards. To achieve this, key activities under Component 2 were divided into three sub-components
   focused on (i) the establishment of the Rural Development Unit in MAFWM with a planning, programming
   and organizing function and also the Proto-Paying Agency with a management and administration function

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



  of the IPARD-compatible funds; (ii) the execution of an agricultural census and establishment of key
  components of an Integrated Administration and Control System (IACS) in line with EU requirements,
  including a Farm Register with and integrated Animal Identification and Registration System; and (iii) the
  modernization of Montenegro’s food safety systems and infrastructure, including the upgrade of National
  Reference Laboratories (NRLs) to international standards, establishment of the first phytosanitary and
  veterinary Border Inspection Posts (BIPs), and supporting safe disposal of animal by-products (ABP) (PAD,
  para 22-25 and ICR para 14-16).

  Component 3: Project Management, Administration and Monitoring (Appraisal estimate: IBRD
  Original Financing and GEF Grant: EUR 0.6 million; Actual cost at ICR: Original Financing & GEF
  Grant: EUR 0.85 million; IBRD Additional Financing: EUR 1.18 million). This component entailed the
  project implementation and coordination through the establishment of a Project, as well as monitoring and
  evaluation (M&E) of project activities and impact (PAD, para 26 and ICR para 17).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost and Financing. At appraisal in March 2009, the total project cost for was estimated at
  US$23.92 million (EUR16.75 million equivalent), of which US$15.7 million (EUR11 million equivalent) was
  expected from IBRD loan financing, US$4 million (EUR2.8 million equivalent) from GEF grant financing, and
  US$4.22 million (EUR2.95 million from co-financing by the Government of Montenegro (GoM) (PAD, Annex
  5).

  In December 2015, an Additional Financing (AF) was approved for a EUR4.72 million (US$5.2 million
  equivalent) EU grant through a World Bank-administered Trust Fund (TF), complemented by EUR1.6 million
  (US$1.8 million equivalent) of GOM co-financing (ICR, paras 20 and 42). In September 2016, another AF of
  EUR3 million (US$3.34 million equivalent) IBRD loan financing was approved (ICR, paras 20 and 42).

  Applying the US$ equivalent amounts of the total project cost (original IBRD US$23.92, AF EU grant
  US$5.2 million and AF IBRD US$3.34 million), the total estimated cost was U$32.47 million. According to
  the ICR (page 2 and Annex 3), the actual total financing at project closing amounted to US$26.23 million
  (81%), mainly due to the lack of actual borrower co-financing to the original IBRD loan.

  The ICR further states that this loan and grant financing was complemented by the contribution of the
  grants’ beneficiaries (matching 35-50 percent of the grant investments), totaling to about EUR15.3 million at
  project closure (ICR, page 65).

  Borrower Contribution. At appraisal, the borrower contribution of the GoM was estimated at US$4.22
  million (EUR2.95 million equivalent) to co-finance activities in Component 1 and 2 (PAD, Annex 5). The ICR
  reports no borrower contribution in the cost table at project completion (ICR, Financing Table page 2).
  However, the ICR describes that the “contribution of the Montenegro Government to the IPARD-Like 1 and
  IPARD-Like 2 grants, ranging from 25% to 28% of the grants, for an amount of about EUR 2.6 million” (ICR,
  Annex 5). The IEG interview with the TTL confirmed that government financing was not provided to the
  IBRD loan but to the EU grant, as described in the ICR Annex 5.




                                                                                                  Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



   Dates and Restructuring. The Project became effective on July 23, 2009 and closed on September 30,
   2019. The original closing date was June 30, 2014, which was extended through restructurings in May
   2014, June 2015, March 2016, March 2018 and March 2019.

   The project underwent five restructurings and received two AFs:

         (i) in May 2014, a Level-2 restructuring involved a closing date extension of 12 months and revision
            of the project Results Framework (RF) to adapt intermediary results indicators for more accuracy in
            their definition and granular monitoring;
           (ii) in June 2015, another Level-2 restructuring allowed a 9-month closing data extension and
            reallocation of funds between the disbursement categories to transfer cost savings from the works to
            the grants category;
           (iii) in December 2015, an AF of a EUR4.72 million EU grant through a World Bank-administered TF
            was approved, accompanied by the restructuring of the PDO and RF to intensify the scope of
            Component 1 (to allow also food establishments, i.e. small and large agri-food processors, to be
            grant beneficiaries in line with IPARD eligibility criteria) and Component 2 (to provide more technical
            support to agro-processors on EU Food Safety Standards related to veterinary administration and
            inspection systems and safe disposal of animal by-products), as well as a closing date extension of
            27 months;
           (iv) in March 2016, a Level-2 restructuring led to another closing date extension of 6 months to allow
            for enough time to process the AF request, and reallocation of remaining GEF funds from the grants
            disbursement category to works;
           (v) in September 2016, another AF of EUR3 million through IBRD loan financing was approved,
            leading to the broadening of component activities (in particular on institutional capacity building and
            piloting of direct (area-based) payment scheme for rural development grants required for EU
            accession) and respective RF changes, and a related closing date extension;
           (vi) in March 2018, another Level-2 restructuring with a closing date extension of 9 months took
            place, complemented by adjustments of the RF to adjust target values upward/downward given
            progress; and

   (vii) in March 2019, the final Level-2 restructuring led to a 6-month closing date extension to September 30,
   2019 to give grant recipients sufficient time to complete their investments and be refunded upon the
   required verification/spot control, and reallocation of funds between disbursement categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Relevance of Agriculture Sector in Montenegro. Agriculture has been a priority to the GoM, given the
sector’s significant contribution to GDP and exports (10 and 5 percent respectively in 2006), rural
employment (70 percent of overall rural household income was estimated to come from agriculture at
appraisal), and hence food security and poverty reduction. Transforming Montenegro’s agricultural sector
through higher productivity and competitiveness in line with EU (pre-)accession requirements and to
prepare for the full absorption of EU grant resources under the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance for
Rural Development (IPARD) has been a policy priority throughout project implementation and up to the time

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 24
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



of this review. These objectives were in line with the GoM’s longer-term objective of EU and World Trade
Organization (WTO) membership. The project objectives were relevant at the time of appraisal and project
closing and continue to be so at the time of this ICR Review.

Context at Appraisal. At appraisal, the project objectives were strongly aligned with the GoM’s
development priorities described in its 2006 Food Production and Rural Development Strategy, which
promoted rural development and competitiveness, food safety, sustainable resource management, and
adequate standards of living in rural areas. The related 2008-2010 Multi-annual Indicative Planning
Document highlighted the need for supporting MAFWM and other sector agencies in the implementation of
the strategy, including the strengthening of advisory and extension services (PAD, para 13). In addition,
Montenegro’s EU integration process documents specified the need for improvements in the administrative
capacity to manage agricultural policy and to modernize the agriculture sector. The activities of MIDAS
were designed to address both of these needs. Moreover, the project objective was consistent with the
FY07-10 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Montenegro, which highlighted the three strategic priorities
of (i) enhancing sustainable economic growth through increasing economic freedoms and strengthening the
role of the private sector, (ii) building institutions and the rule of law, and (iii) improving standards of living
for citizens (PAD, para 14). Moreover, the World Bank had experience from lending projects and analytical
work in the agriculture sector in the Western Balkans with similar objectives of EU pre-accession, such as
Croatia, Serbia, North Macedonia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, which was considered in the MIDAS
project design (PAD, para 27).

Context at Completion. At project completion, the project objectives remained relevant in accordance with
the GoM’s 2015-2020 Strategy for Development of Agriculture and Rural Areas that supported (i) the
development of an effective, innovative and sustainable agro-food sector that provides healthy, high-quality,
specialized food products that can meet demand and compete on the EU market, (ii) the development of
economic activity and creation of jobs in rural areas, with special emphasis on rural tourism and short
supply chain in the production of quality products and services and sustainable use of natural resources,
and (iii) the promotion of rural development and social services to improve the quality of life in rural areas
and reduce migration of rural population to urban areas (ICR, para 29). MIDAS contributed to these
strategic objectives, as its activities (i) strengthened the competitiveness of the agricultural sector and
supported diversification towards high-value products intended for export and tourist markets and (ii)
improving quality of life in rural areas. Moreover, MIDAS was in line with the FY16-20 Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for Montenegro, in particular with the objective of Focus Area 2 to expand access to
economic opportunities (ICR, para 28). The project supported economic opportunities in rural areas by
increasing access to funding for the agriculture and agro-processing sector, preparing beneficiaries to
comply with EU requirements and access EU IPARD funds, and promoting agro-environmental measures.

Based on the above-mentioned information, Relevance of Objectives is rated High given the clear ambition
of the (revised) PDO, the continued relevance at completion, and the connection of the PDO to the World
Bank’s higher-level objectives of poverty reduction and enhancing shared prosperity.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                        Page 6 of 24
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Objective 1: Improve delivery of government assistance for sustainable agriculture and rural development in a
               manner consistent with the EU's pre-accession requirements

               Rationale
               According to the PAD, productivity and product quality of Montenegro’s majority smallholder farms were low
               at appraisal. It highlighted several constraining factors, including lack of resources/credit for on-farm
               investments, lack of modern technology and knowledge of improved (including agro-environmental) practices
               among the majority of farmers - leading to the deterioration of natural and agricultural ecosystems. In addition
               to these farm-level constraints, there were several institutional constraints, such as weak extension and
               advisory services, lack of experience and agencies to implement IPARD-compatible measures, and low
               (regulation and inspection) capacity to meet food safety, animal and plant health, and environmental
               requirements (of the EU).

               Theory of Change. To address the above constraints and improve the delivery of GoM’s assistance in
               agriculture and rural development, the project provided additional government funds/matching grants for EU
               IPARD-compatible rural development support measures. The Theory of Change (ToC) behind of Objective 1
               was that the familiarization of agricultural producers with EU requirements and procedures, strengthening
               their capacity to effectively apply for such funds, and ultimately modernize farm-level agricultural production
               and knowledge would result in productivity and product quality increases. Moreover, at the institutional level,
               the project support to enhance the capacity of the extension and advisory services was expected to improve
               the knowledge transfer provided by these services to agricultural producers, to ensure the effective
               absorption of rural development funds, and to expand their knowledge of modern practices, including agro-
               environmental applications. The overall objective of these measures was to prepare the sector - both at the
               farm and institutional level - for future EU grant resources under the Instrument of Pre-Accession Assistance
               for Rural Development (IPARD) program. The outputs and outcomes towards the achievement of Objective 1
               of MIDAS are described in the following:

               Outputs (based on ICR Annex 1)

                     659 (target: 400) agro-holdings made physical investments in line with IPARD measures
                     1,511 (target: 1500) clients have adopted an improved agricultural technology
                     EUR 7.7 million (target: EUR7million) of IPARD-Like grant funding awarded
                     EUR 6.5 million (target: 6.9 million) of IPARD-Like rural development grants disbursed.
                     101% (target: 90%) of IPARD-Like (2) grant funding awarded
                     87.5% (target: 75%) of IPARD-Like (2) grant funding disbursed
                     6,337 (target 6,200) direct project beneficiaries, of which 17% female (target: 15%)
                     EU-compatible Direct Payment policy measure developed and under implementation for organic
                      agriculture and the production of olive, vineyard and aromatic plants (target achieved)
                     6,678 (target: 6,000) client days of training provided, of which 1,014 to females (target: 900)
                     98.3% (target: 70%) of targeted beneficiaries satisfied with timeliness and transparency of pay-out of
                      EU-compatible direct payments

                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)




      278 (target: 200) agricultural households adopted agri-environmental measures
      2,142 (target: 2,000) hectares of land where sustainable land management practices were adopted

Outcomes (based on paras 32 and 33 and Annex 1)

IPARD-compatible Investments and Technical Assistance in Rural Development and Agro-
Environmental Measures. The ICR highlights how MIDAS addressed constraining factors at the farm-level
through the provision of (matching grant) investment funding through calls for sub-projects for
farmers/agricultural holdings (which with AF in December 2015 was also extended to small and large agri-
food processors), complemented by demand-driven technical assistance and advisory services to support
beneficiaries in sub-project/business plan proposals, knowledge of EU-IPARD requirements, and modern
agricultural practices. At project closure, MIDAS had awarded IPARD-compatible grant funding of EUR7.7
million (10 percent more than the target and 87.5 percent disbursed) to 658 eligible agricultural holdings
(exceeding the target of 400), demonstrating a strong interest in and higher than initially expected absorption
of available funds. Also, the ICR describes that 1,511 beneficiaries had adopted modern agricultural
technologies and improved production practices supported by the project (meeting the target of 1,500). While
the receipt of grant financing (and related confirmed purchase of the financed technology which were typically
infrastructure investments) verifies the adoption of modern technologies by beneficiary farms, the adoption
and continued application of improved practices is not clearly demonstrated in the ICR. The IEG interview
with the Bank task team clarified that the adoption of modern technologies is verified by on-spot controls at
any time of the grant investment duration as well as by ex-post on-spot controls up to five years after the
investment to verify their continued use, according to EU IPARD requirements.[1] The Task Team Leaders
(TTLs) at project completion mentioned that the Proto-Paying Agency of MIDAS records the results of these
on-spot controls and that no issues had been found with discontinued use of project-supported technologies
during project implementation.

With respect to the GoM’s objective to promote sustainable land use and natural resource management, the
activities piloted through MIDAS through three rounds of grant allocations for the organic agriculture sub-
measure which strengthened the capacity of Montenegro’s extension and advisory services through the
promotion and monitoring of agro-environmental measures, thereby familiarizing and preparing farmers and
sector agencies for the implementation of the respective IPARD Measure 104 (Agri-Environment-Climate and
Organic Farming). The ICR describes that the complementary GEF grant funding supported the adoption of
agro-environmental practices among 278 agricultural households (exceeding the target of 200) in a land area
of 2,142 hectares (exceeding the target of 2000), in particular related to on-farm investments to improve
manure management, protect water resources, prevent soil erosion, and regenerate pasture. The ICR does
not specifically describe how this adoption/land area was verified but confirms that starting with the fourth
MIDAS grant, beneficiaries were required to follow the project-supported Code of Good Agricultural Practices
(CGAP). As mentioned before, the ICR and TTLs describe regular site visits/on-spot controls to inspect and
verify project investments and compliance with the supported activities (ICR para 64 and page 73). The TTL
clarified that a lot of the agro-environmental technologies supported were of a physical nature, such as the
installment/upgrading of manure pits, upgrading stable sizes to standards, etc., so that the likelihood of the
grant beneficiaries of not using those investments anymore are unlikely.

The ICR refers in a footnote to an EU-financed socio-economic impact assessment of the 2015 AF EU grant-
financing activities (ICR, page 32) but does not provide information on its finding. Upon IEG’s request, the
assessment was shared by the Bank project team. Key findings of this assessment [2] relevant to Objective 1
include that (35.5% successful applicants are familiar with the Code of Good Agricultural Practices (CGAP)
compared to 30.8% of unsuccessful applicants and 19.6% of respondents from the general public (i.e.,

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



farmers who did not apply to the grants). Moreover, 37.3% of successful applicants consider the most
significant effects of the implementation of the CGAP as environmental protection compared to 26.8% of the
general public, and 37.3% of successful applicants versus 20.6% of the general public consider CGAP
leading to be an increase in product quality. The assessment reports that all successful applicants think that
the grant support has contributed to the improvement of their agricultural practice, in particular through
increasing processing capacities (57.6%), product quality improvement (45.8%) and fulfilment of food safety
requirements (33.9%). Regarding production and processing capacities, successful applicants involved in
meat processing sector recorded an average increase of 5.7% in overall production capacity in 2018
compared to 2017. Similarly, successful applicants in the dairy processing sector recorded an average 8.7%
growth in total capacity. The highest increase was reported by the processing sector, with an average 35.5%
increase in 2018 compared to 2017 (these results have to consider the relatively low number of respondents
per sector). Regarding employment generation, the assessment report states that most of successful
applicants “indicated that there was an increase in agricultural production” (page 9): successful applicants
recorded an average income increase of 7.7% when comparing 2018 with 2017 and a decrease in production
for personal use from 2.3% to 1.4%. Also, 59.35% of successful applicants reported opening new job
positions (a total of 240 permanent positions) and 47.%% reported to have increased the number of seasonal
workers (a total of 119), both as a direct consequence of the implemented investment.

Institutional Strengthening of MAFWM and Public Extension and Advisory services. At the institutional
level, MIDAS strengthened MAFWM’s capacity through (i) the development and dissemination of the
country’s first CGAP, (ii) the establishment of the Proto-Paying Agency that at project closure executed all
(national/IPARD-compatible and IPARD) agricultural and rural development funds, and (iii) the piloting of EU-
compatible direct payments implementation, which was adopted as policy measures by MAFWM at project
closure. Regarding the latter, the respective PDO indicator on “measures for direct payments implemented
and paid” exceeded its target of US$500,000 by implementing US$653,742. Further examples of MIDAS’
support to institutional strengthening are the support to central and regional extension and advisory services
by providing trainings in new topics (such as agro-environmental measures or direct payment support), study
tours to learn from other countries’ agricultural sector experience in moving forward in the EU accession
process, and equipment to adhere to EU-IPARD standards. It also contributed to the development of the
country’s first CGAP and modern information systems, such as the Land Parcel Information System.

Overall, the ICR provides evidence that this project support on the farm and on the institutional level led to
improved outcomes in investment and service delivery of the government for rural development: Specifically,
MIDAS supported the generation of the Rural Development Plan for Montenegro[3], which was submitted to
(and accepted by) the EU. As a result at project closure, IPARD-compatible rural development measures
(Measure 101, 103 and 302) had been fully integrated in MAFWM support programs – initially through MIDAS
in MAFWM’s national support programs, and building on this practical experience starting 2013 through the
first IPARD and since 2014 through the second IPARD program in Montenegro for Measures 101 and 103.
This corresponds to the achievement of PDO 1 on “EU IPARD compatible rural development measures fully
integrated in MAFWM support programs.”

Summary. Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the evidence in the ICR (paras 32 and 33) points to
the success of the project in improving the delivery of government assistance for sustainable agriculture and
rural development in a manner consistent with the EU's pre-accession requirements, despite some
shortcomings in the demonstration of (continued) uptake of improved practices. Hence, the efficacy of this
outcome for Objective 1 is rated Substantial.



                                                                                                 Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)




[1] “On-the-spot control is made before signing the Grant agreement, before making the payment and during
the five-year period after making the final payment for. In addition to regular controls, on-the-spot controls
may be made also at any time of the investment duration with or without announcement of the Directorate for
Payments (DP) [i.e. Proto-Paying Agency]. […] Orders for all on spot controls (prior project approval, prior
payment approval and ex post controls) have to be issued by Directorate for Payments relevant department
of DP. On-the-spot controls are made by DP staff or independent audits hired by MARD or the international
audit of the IPARD like 2.3 grant project (hereinafter referred to as: the controllers).” (MIDAS Grant
Operations Manual cited by TTL).

[2] The assessment involved face-to-face interviews in June 2019 with agricultural producers/processors,
specifically 59 successful project-supported IPARD-compatible grant applicants, 26 unsuccessful grant
applicants, as well as 97 farmers who did not apply for these grants/general public.

[3] The IPARD program for each pre-accession country is based around different measures set at European
level. IPARD measures focus on different aspects of agriculture and rural development and each country
presents their program of IPARD measures to the European Commission for approval. When approved, these
IPARD measures are managed by countries’ national institutions and IPARD agencies. The following IPARD
measures are operational as of May 2020 in Montenegro: Measure 101: "Investments in physical assets of
agricultural holdings" and Measure 103: "Investments in physical assets concerning processing and
marketing of agricultural and fishery products.”



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Objective 2: Increase the experience of Montenegrin authorities in administering rural development grants in
accordance with EU-IPARD core rules.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The project support under Component 1 was expected to be most effective if
complemented by institutional strengthening in line with EU requirements. A further critical assumption was
that the best way for Montenegrin authorities to gain experience with EU IPARD was to take a “learning by
doing” approach, in which MIDAS funds management and administration simulated the “real” IPARD support,
like a pilot. The ToC behind Objective 2 was that the establishment of critical and required agencies and (IT)
system in Montenegro was necessary to increase GoM’s capacity to effectively and efficiently manage and
administer IPARD(-compatible) rural development funds. Without these institutional foundations, the GoM
would not be able to authentically gain the experience of implementing IPARD-compatible measures, and to
adjust its systems and processes in light of bottlenecks in the process. The outputs and outcomes supporting
Objective 2 of MIDAS are described in the following:

Outputs (based on ICR Annex 1)


                                                                                                Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)




      MAFWM Directorate for Payments approved by the World Bank to execute fourth and fifth calls for
         grant proposals in line with grants operational manual
        Agricultural Census implemented in June 2010 and results disseminated through five books
        Final IPARD I program and draft IPARD II programs submitted to the European Commission in 2014
        Farm register software and hardware system in place with access to central population, business, and
         real estate registries, and electronic registration of farms ongoing through regional extension service
         centers
        IT system pilot tested with first round of direct payments, full Land Parcel Information System (LPIS) in
         use to verify direct payment applications, and Geospatial Aid application pilot tested for the second
         round of direct payments
        Final IPARD Program II adopted by EU on July 20, 2015 and the GoM on September 10, 2015;
         Accreditation package submitted to EU on August

Outcomes (based on paras 34 and 35 and Annex 1)

Establishment of Key Agencies. MIDAS supported the GoM in developing the institutional capacity and
systems required by the EU to plan, program, disburse and monitor rural development grant funds provided
by IPARD (once approved by the EU). Specifically, the project helped to establish the Directorate for Rural
Development in MAFWM to take on the planning, programming and organizing function (in EU terms
“Managing Authority”) as well as the Directorate for Payments (in EU terms “Paying Agency”), in line with EU
capacity and equipment requirements for these agencies. The project built capacity of these agencies by, for
example, supporting the development of grant operational manuals and sector analyses, including specific
GEF-supported research on natural resources, agricultural land legislation, extension service organizational
structure, fishery sector, and forestry management. The implementation of MIDAS allowed both these sector
agencies as well as agricultural producers to practice the necessary processes with several grant calls for
IPARD-compatible funds before MAFWM/the Directorate for Rural Development received the EU’s
accreditation to manage the actual IPARD Measures 101 and 103 in October 2017. Consequently, the first
full IPARD calls for these measures were launched in 2018. Given the “learning by doing” approach of the
previously implemented MIDAS IPARD-compatible grant calls simulating IPARD procedures and guidelines,
the interest in and absorption of these actual full IPARD grants was high: 389 applications for Measure 101
and 45 for Measure 103 for a total investment amount of EUR55 million. This demonstrated the improved
capacity of the Montenegrin sector authorities to program and administer EU-IPARD measures.

Development of Improved Agricultural Information Systems. The project also supported the
programming and establishment of and training in various information systems, required by EU guidelines.
Specifically, MIDAS supported the development of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) indicators and targets for
each rural development measure of the IPARD Program and the installation of a related M&E system to track
the use of rural development funds and provide regular progress reporting to the monitoring committee
established by the project, which is responsible for reviewing M&E reports and guiding future strategy
development processes. In addition, the ICR reports that MIDAS supported the collection and dissemination
of the 2010 Agricultural Census (the first after 50 years), which also informed the establishment of key
components of an Integrated Administration and Control System (IACS) in line with EU requirements.
Specifically, the project financed the development of an electronic Farm Register with and integrated Animal
Identification and Registration System, a Land Parcel Identification System (LPIS) IT system, as well as the
development of cadaster maps of vineyards, and olive and/or fruit orchards. These systems are all necessary
conditions for further EU accreditations. Given the above, the PDO indicator related to Objective 2 “MAFWM


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



capacity to disburse and track the use of rural development funds and to evaluate their impact in line with EU
IPARD requirements” was achieved.

Summary. Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the ICR provides evidence (para 34 and 35) that the
project activities contributed to the Montenegrin authorities gaining experience in administering rural
development grants in accordance with EU-IPARD core rules. Hence, the efficacy of this outcome for
Objective 2 is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Objective 3: Support a selected number of agricultural holdings and food establishments in upgrading towards
EU standards

Rationale
Theory of Change. The PAD highlighted the importance of investments to upgrade agricultural producers
and food establishments to meet the increasing important of food safety standards and satisfy EU cross-
compliance requirements on food safety (PAD, para 5). The ToC behind Objective 3 was that such
investments would increase the competitiveness of the Montenegrin agriculture sector. Moreover,
strengthening other critical elements of the food safety system -such as sanitary and phytosanitary services at
border inspection posts, or upgrading national reference laboratories-were assumed critical to comply with
(EU/international) food safety standards and promote agricultural exports. The outputs and outcomes
supporting Objective 3 of MIDAS are described in the following:

Outputs (based on ICR Annex 1)

      224 (target 120) agro-processors compliant with EU food safety/hygiene regulations (verified by
         inspection)
      98 (target: 80) grant applications for food establishments approved, of which 67 (target: 65) grants
         successfully completed. The ICR explains lower than targeted completion because of difficulties of
         some grant recipients experienced in obtaining building permits and financing to cover their own
         contributions to investments (ICR, page 74)
        Border Inspection Post in the seaport of Bar constructed, furnished, equipped, and in operation
        Marine Biology Institute in Kotor designated a National Reference Library (NRL) to implement
         monitoring of water for needs of mariculture; facilities refurbished and laboratory equipment provided;
         and accredited for micro-biological testing of sea water
        Veterinary Diagnostic Lab equipped and 16 methods accredited under ISO 17025 covering over 75%
         of tests in food safety and animal health
        Preliminary classification and annual control plans for food establishments completed according to EU
         food safety standards
        Veterinary Directorate staff and inspectors training on EU Food Safety requirements has been
         conducted

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)




      Legal framework on safe disposal of animal by-products (ABP) improvements completed


Outcomes (based on paras 36 and 37 and Annex 1)

Modernization of the Food Safety System. The project supported the GoM in its efforts to improve its food
safety systems in accordance with EU guidelines. The related PDO indicator was defined as “critical elements
of the food safety system upgraded in EU compliant manner.” By project closure, it had established several
key components necessary to enhance Montenegro’s capacity to meet increasingly important food safety
criteria (e.g. by the EU). Specifically, MIDAS had (i) developed the first EU compliant veterinary and phyto-
sanitary border controls at the border inspection posts at the Port of Bar, enabling it to serve as Montenegro’s
EU point of entry; (ii) upgraded the facilities and laboratory equipment of the Marine Biology Institute to a
National Reference Laboratory (NRL) for monitoring sea water and aquaculture product quality according to
international standards and in line with the 2009 Law on Marine Fisheries and Mariculture, in addition to the
accreditation of microbiological testing of sea water methods; (iii) modernized the laboratory equipment and
capacity of the Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory, which was reaffirmed as NRL and received ISO
accreditation for sixteen analysis methods that cover over 75 percent of the laboratory’s routine monitoring
tests in food safety and animal health; and (iv) developed a legal and regulatory framework and trained
veterinary inspectors on the safe management of animal by-products (ABP) and trained Veterinary
Directorate staff and inspectors in procedures and checklists for official controls of ABP. According to the ICR,
these investments were strategic for the modernization, safety, and increased export competitiveness of the
Montenegrin food and food processing industry. They are also important for the further accession process to
the EU, as increased food system capacity and upgrading of specific agencies are required (for example, the
EU regulation 2017/625, Article 100 requires member states to designate National Reference Laboratories
(NRL) for each European Union Reference Laboratory).

Upgrading, Classification and Inspection of Food Establishments. By project completion, MIDAS had
promoted food safety awareness and verified the compliance with EU food safety/hygiene regulations of 224
food establishments, i.e. small and medium agro-processors (compared to the target of 120, and the 2015
baseline of 18). According to the IEG interview with the Bank task team, compliance verification was done
through inspections of these food establishments. 98 of those 224 establishments had obtained grant
financing (funded by the 2015 AF EU grant) to upgrade their facilities to EU food safety/hygiene standards,
while the others financed the upgrades by themselves of with other sources. While this PDO indicator linked
to Objective 3 describes the provision of EU compliant modernization for food establishments, it is an output
indicator which does not provide additional information on the details of compliance and monitoring
procedures – which had to be clarified by the Bank team

The grant investments in food establishments were complemented by institutional strengthening of the
Veterinary Directorate through the development of the classification procedures of food establishments
applied in a preliminary project-supported classification, as well as the development of multi-year control
plans, inspection manuals, checklists, and sampling plans according to EU standards/ISO 17020. The project
trained the Veterinary Directory staff and inspectors in the details of these plans and manuals to support their
smooth implementation. Moreover, the ICR highlights the project’s efforts in supporting the alignment of
national food safety laws and regulations with the EU acquis through the development and adoption (in
September 2015) of a new food safety law. However, these plans and regulations are still to be tested and it
is too early to assess the effectiveness of the supported measures in terms of increased food safety.



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 24
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



                            Summary. Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the ICR (para 36 and 37) describes achievements in
                            the project support to a selected number of agricultural holdings and food establishments in upgrading
                            towards EU standards. However, much of the ICR evidence is based on output measures and it falls short of
                            providing robust evidence of a (continued) application of supported systems by producers and their
                            adherence to guidelines resulting in improvements in Montenegrin food safety. Hence, the efficacy of this
                            outcome for Objective 3 is rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of Objective 1 - to improve delivery of government assistance for sustainable agriculture
                            and rural development in a manner consistent with the EU's pre-accession requirements - is rated Substantial
                            as a result of positive impacts reported by the ICR, despite some shortcomings in the demonstration of
                            continued adoption of improved and agro-environmental practices. The achievement of Objective 2 - to
                            increase the experience of Montenegrin authorities in administering rural development grants in accordance
                            with EU-IPARD[1] core rules - is rated Substantial due to meeting or exceeding indicators and targets. The
                            achievement of Objective 3 - to support a selected number of agricultural holdings and food establishments in
                            upgrading towards EU standards - is rated modest as a result of insufficient outcome evidence, despite
                            meeting all indicator targets (but mostly output-oriented). Based on this evidence and that all targeted project
                            outcomes were either fully achieved or exceeded at project completion, the overall efficacy of this project’s
                            achievements is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Ex-ante Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA). At appraisal, an economic and financial analysis (EFA) was
   prepared separately for the different sub-components: On the one hand, Sub-Components 1.1, 1.2, 2.1 and 2.2
   were assessed together, as they related to the strengthening of MAFWM’s rural development program and
   IPARD establishment of EU IPARD compatible institutions. Quantifiable benefits of the ex-ante EFA for this
   group of Sub-Components included that the project would accelerate Montenegro’s eligibility to access EU
   IPARD funds in the range of EUR 2.6 to EUR 6.7 million per year, and in total access to an additional EUR 8.5
   million. The cost-benefit analysis for this group of Sub-Components (representing 88% of total project cost)
   estimated an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for these components of 19% (over the period 2009 to
   2016). No details on the specific assumptions used for this estimation of the EIRR are provided in the PAD other
   than that the estimate was conservative. The analysis for these Sub-Components assumed that (i) Montenegro

                                                                                                                              Page 14 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



would obtain EU candidate status in 2010; (ii) the average annual allocation of EU IPARD funds would be EUR
4.6 million; and (iii) the annual absorption of EU IPARD funds by Montenegro would be in accordance with the
experience from previous accession countries (PAD, page 76).

On the other hand, the EFA of Sub-Component 2.3 - related to the modernization of Montenegro’s food safety
systems and infrastructure - applied a cost-efficiency analysis (PAD, page 78, para 11) to estimate of reduced
prevalence and related lower cost of potential slaughter and compensation of key animal diseases of
commercial and/or public health significance, such as bovine and ovine/caprine brucellosis, enzootic bovine
leucosis, bovine tuberculosis and other zoonoses and zoonotic agents (such as salmonella). The resulting
financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of Sub-Component 2.3 (representing 8.6% of total project costs) was
estimated at 12%. For this IRR, the PAD states that the estimate was conservative. No sensitivity analysis is
reported in the PAD. The analysis for Sub-Component 2.3 assumed a reduction in prevalence and related costs
of key animal diseases and other zoonotic agents, based on actual cases and costs in Montenegro in 2006 and
2007 (PAD, page 77 paras 8 and 9).

Ex-post Economic and Financial Analysis. At completion, an EFA was carried out considering all rounds of
financing for the project (original IBRD loan and GEF grant, AF of EU grant, AF of IBRD loan). It focused on the
analysis of grant-financed investments and improved advisory services provided under Component 1 (and
partially linked to the institutional strengthening of Component 2). No separate EFA was conducted for the
activities supported under Sub-Component 2.3. Specifically, the financial analysis was based on eight illustrative
models[1] to demonstrate the financial viability of potential investments. The ICR does not provide details on the
proportion of total grant investments that these models captured, but states that they are “representative in
terms of agricultural sub-sectors and different rounds of project financing” (ICR, page 62, para 16). The FIRR
varied across models from 13% (milk production manure disposal) to 54% (honey). The economic analysis was
prepared based on the same eight illustrative models and estimated an EIRR of 24.1% and ENPV of US$12.4
million. The economic analysis assumed that at least 80% of the investments would achieve the estimated
returns, i.e. an 80% success rate was applied to the models.

Contrary to the PAD, the ICR EFA includes the results of a sensitivity analysis. It shows that changes in benefits
and costs and for various lags in the realization of benefits have no significant impact on the EIRR. For example,
at a 20% decline in benefits/increase in costs, the EIRR remains above the assumed discount rate of 12%.
Similarly, a one-year delay in project benefits only reduces the ERR to 20.3%.

Administrative Efficiency. The project closing date was extended five times due to the provision of AF and
restructurings, totaling up to 5 years and 3 months. The ICR states this extension to have been critical for the
achievement of the PDO and mobilization of AF (ICR, page 64 para 21). It further states that there were no cost
overruns. However, the proportionate cost of Component 3 for Project Management was 8.5% at project closure
compared to the estimated 3.6% at appraisal (ICR Annex 3 page 59). Furthermore, MIDAS experienced delays
in executing some project activities due to difficulties in finding qualified consultants (ICR, para 61 and 76).

Given the solid internal rates of return and robust results from the sensitivity analysis, the project's efficiency is
rated Substantial despite some shortcomings in the economic analysis and administrative efficiency.

[1] These models were for the production of cherry, poultry, grape, milk (heifers), honey, mushroom, fish and
milk (manure disposal).


Efficiency Rating

                                                                                                         Page 15 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                  88.00
Appraisal                                                19.40
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                  50.00
ICR Estimate                                             24.10
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives is rated High, as MIDAS objectives were relevant to both the former and current
national priorities and Bank sector strategies. The achievement of the revised tri-part PDO to “(i) improve
delivery of government assistance for sustainable agriculture and rural development in a manner consistent with
the EU's pre-accession requirements, (ii) increase the experience of Montenegrin authorities in administering
rural development grants in accordance with EU-IPARD core rules, and (iii) to support a selected number of
agricultural holdings and food establishments in upgrading towards EU standards” is rated Substantial, given
that all targeted project outcomes were either fully achieved or exceeded at project completion and the ICR
provided adequate evidence. Efficiency is rated Substantial, given the project’s sound economic rate of return
and robust results of the sensitivity analysis. This project had minor shortcomings in the achievement of its
objectives, efficiency and relevance and its overall outcome is therefore rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional Sustainability. Montenegro has made continued progress towards of EU accession: it opened
negotiations with the EU on Chapter 11 (Agriculture and Rural Development) in December 2016 and for
Chapter 12 (Food Safety) and Chapter 13 (Fisheries) in June 2016 (ICR, para 52). As a result of this
progress and the related continuation (and expected increase) of IPARD funding requires the sustained
functioning of the agencies established (Paying Agency and Managing Authority), the maintenance of the
institutional systems supported by the project (e.g. the IACS and M&E System), as well as producers’
compliance with EU/IPARD regulations.

Financial Sustainability. At the time of project closure and this Review, the follow-on Montenegro Second
Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) of EUR30 million (US$34.89
million equivalent) is active, building on the experience of MIDAS and continuing the support to MAFWM in

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



meeting the closing benchmarks of Chapter 11 and 12 (and adding support for Chapter 13) (PAD MIDAS2
(P164424, para 14). This is expected to sustain and scale up the outcomes from MIDAS and to provide
continued financial support to the agencies established under MIDAS. Moreover, MIDAS provided matching
grants for investments in rural development measures, in particular related to IPARD Measure 101
(Investments in physical assets of agricultural holdings) and Measure 103 (Investments in physical assets
concerning processing and marketing of agricultural and fishery products). Both these measures have
become operational, so that IPARD funding is available for these measures after the termination of the
MIDAS project.

Challenges to the Development Outcome. However, two main challenges to sustaining the development
objective in the longer term are (i) maintaining the adoption of improved practices -in particular agro-
environmental- among beneficiary farmers and agro-processors and ensuring scale-up for widespread
improvements in food production (ii) the implementation of the food safety measures supported by MIDAS
which generated to plans, manuals, and regulations but had not put them into practice by project closure.
Both of these challenges can be expected to be (at least partially) addressed through the ongoing follow-on
project, given its objective of improved agricultural competitiveness and a dedicated component on food
safety, veterinary and phytosanitary services. Also, the increased demand in Montenegro and the region for
safe food and quality standards can be expected to incentivize farmers and agro-food processes to (continue
to) apply improved technologies and practices supported by the project.

The ICR (paras 82-84) discussed further issues that could impact the risk to the development outcome: (i)
the need for further strengthen and diversify technical components of Montenegro’s Agricultural Knowledge
and Innovation System (AKIS) to ensure that agricultural producers and MSMES are effectively supported
and sufficiently prepared to adapt to emerging issues like climate change, digital transformation, and
changing market demand (ICR, para 82); (ii) the importance of “the right policy mix” to advance the agri-food
system transformation in Montenegro, such as an increased shift toward de-coupled (i.e. area based)
payments and direct payments to encourage private investments and reduce the distortionary effects of
coupled payments (ICR, para 83); and (iii) the need for evidence-based policy decision-making in
Montenegro’s agri-food sector, related to the further development of sector M&E systems to assess the
development impacts of ongoing policy reforms and guide future sector strategies (ICR, para 84).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (para 78) the World Bank Task Team designed MIDAS and its objectives in
  alignment with the World Bank’s strategic involvement in Montenegro and the GoM’s agricultural sector
  priorities at the time of project preparation and appraisal. The project was prepared under the uncertainty
  when pre-accession negotiations with the EU would start (Montenegro had applied for EU membership in
  December 2008 but pre-accession negotiations started in December 2010 when MIDAS was already
  effective for 1.5 years) and hence was considerate of the careful formulation of the PDO and RF
  indicators. At appraisal, the institutional capacity of MAFWM and other sector agencies was assessed as
  weak and the World Bank team put emphasis on strengthening this capacity to (i) ensure ownership by
  the GoM and (ii) prepare national agencies for pre-accession and accession requirements of the EU. The
  team was proactive in collaborating with the EU Delegation and other donors – demonstrated by secured
  grant financing from GEF and later the EU that complemented the IBRD loan. The ICR highlights the

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



  preparation team’s innovation in adopting a “learning by doing” approach to simulate IPARD funding
  procedures and requirements with MIDAS project funds (“IPARD compatible”) under Component 1 to
  pilot the process and thereby gain practical experience and prepare farmers and sector institutions for the
  later expected “real” IPARD funds and related systems, processes, and tools (ICR, para 79).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project was implemented largely according to its design, and actually widened its focus both in terms
 of activities (e.g. expanded PDO; including eligibility of agro-processors, etc.), funding (i.e. the project had
 two AFs with a EU grant and a IBRD loan) and duration (i.e. total closing date extension of five years and 3
 months). MIDAS was restructured five times (plus two AFs) to respond to client needs and expanding
 activities to more IPARD-compatible investments, but also due to delays related in particular to capacity
 constraints in hiring adequate local expertise on various topics (e.g. the agro-environmental measures,
 ABP, border inspection posts, etc.).

 Supervision missions took place on a regular basis with adequate expertise in staffing and included site
 visits and interactions with various project stakeholders. Regular public awareness campaigns and
 beneficiary surveys were carried out. In addition, especially at early implementation the World Bank Task
 Team provided technical advice to the Project Management Unit (PMU) when needed and brought
 expertise on specific issues requested by the GoM, especially with the EU Delegation. Task Team
 leadership changed five times during the implementation, but the ICR highlights that the continuous
 involvement and regional presence of the co-TTL (as well as the safeguards specialists) ensured continuity
 and a responsiveness to the client implementing agencies (ICR, para 80). At completion, the project fully
 achieved or exceeded all targets in the RF.

 In the last couple of years of project implementation, preparation for the follow-on operation (Montenegro
 Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424); EUR30 million
 (US$34.89 million equivalent) was conducted by the same core World Bank Task Team and PMT of
 MIDAS, building on the experience of MIDAS and preserving the institutional memory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization



                                                                                                     Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



a. M&E Design
 A Theory of Change (ToC) was not (required to be) prepared at appraisal, but the ICR presents an ex-post
 ToC with a logical rationale. MIDAS interventions broadly focused at two levels: (i) at the agricultural
 producer/agro-processing level, the modernization of production and adoption of improved (including agro-
 environmental) practices supported through matching grants simulating IPARD processes and
 requirements was expected to increase agricultural productivity, familiarize producers with the procedures
 and guidelines of IPARD funds, and for the case of agro-processors in particular also to upgrade to EU and
 food safety standards; and (ii) at the institutional level, the project built the administrative capacity
 (including the creation of agencies and IT systems) of Montenegro to comply with EU pre-accession
 requirements which would allow the country to manage IPARD funds, strengthen the technical capacity of a
 support services in extension and advisory, and modernize various aspects of the country’s food safety
 system in accordance with EU requirements. The project activities at both levels were designed and
 implemented in a complementary manner, as they shared the same higher-level objectives of increased
 agricultural competitiveness, stronger capacity to manage agricultural policy and funding (national and EU
 IPARD), improved food safety, and natural resource management. The Theory of Change did not change
 with the restructurings/Additional Financing and expansion of the PDO.

 The PDO at appraisal was to be measured by three PDO-level indicators: (i) EU IPARD compatible rural
 development measures fully integrated in MAFWM support programs; (ii) MAFWM capacity to disburse and
 track the use of rural development funds and to evaluate their impact in line with EU IPARD requirements;
 and (iii) food safety system upgraded in an EU compliant manner. During implementation they were
 complemented by two additional PDO-level indicators (discussed under M&E implementation). These were
 complemented by two outcome indicators related to the GEO: (i) agri-environment measures integrated
 into MAFWM’ s rural development program and (ii) improved capacity of extension and advisory services to
 introduce agri-environment measures. While the above PDO indicator formulation was quite broad, the
 PAD Annex 3 (PAD, pages 37 and 38) provided more details on the steps that would need to be taken to
 achieve the respective PDO/GEO indicator targets. With that, the stated indicators were linked to the
 respective parts of the PDO and were measurable. A shortcoming of the RF was that only few of the PDO
 and intermediary results indicators had a baseline and that it lacked intermediate indicators to assess the
 impacts of the strengthening of public extension and advisory services and food safety of food
 establishments, in particular a measurement to verify the compliance of beneficiaries with the supported
 activities, such as CGAP, improved practices, and food safety measures.

 The overall responsibility of M&E activities was with the Project Management Team, specifically the M&E
 specialist responsible for planning and coordinating M&E activities. The PAD described only the collection
 of baseline survey data in year one, but did not refer to a planned endline survey data collection or an
 impact assessment.



b. M&E Implementation
  During project implementation the RF design was adjusted to better align with the revised tri-part PDO
  and activities supported by the AF, adding the two PDO indicators of “Measures of direct payment
  implemented and paid” and “Number of agro-processors compliant toward EU food safety/hygiene
  regulations”. While these indicators were more measurable in quantitative terms, a key shortcoming was
  that they were output-oriented and, as mentioned under Efficacy, the ICR did not provide sufficient
  complementary evidence to demonstrate the effectiveness of these measures (e.g. how compliance was
  verified/monitored), but some clarifications were provided during the IEG interview with the Bank task

                                                                                                 Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



  team. Some intermediary results indicators were also modified as part of project restructurings and
  expanded project scope supported by Additional Financings (see ICR Annex 1B for details). These
  changes were appropriate to provide clarifications on definitions, adjustment to targets given
  implementation progress, and inclusion of more targeted measures to specific activities supported by the
  project. As mentioned before, the ToC was not affected.

  A shortcoming of M&E implementation was the lack of proper baseline collection. The ICR does not
  provide adequate information on baselines and follow-up survey data collection. However, it does
  mention regular beneficiary questionnaires used after each grant call and beneficiary surveys (including a
  control group) applied after the first and fourth rural development grant call (ICR, para 67). The ICR
  misses the opportunity to present the results of these surveys (apart from the beneficiary satisfaction rate
  indicator in the RF) and whether and how they provided complementary evidence on the impact of project
  activities. It merely mentions that “the results of these surveys were used to make necessary adjustments
  to improve the process for grants’ calls” (ICR, para 67). The IEG interview with the Bank task teams
  clarified that the purpose of these surveys was to identify bottlenecks in the grant call process, not to
  assess impact of the investments. The ICR only refers to the EU-financed socio-economic impact
  assessment of the 2015 AF EU grant-financing activities (ICR, page 32 footnote), but the Bank team
  provided IEG with a copy of the assessment, whose key findings are summarized in the Efficacy Section
  of this review. For the MIDAS project overall, no impact assessment was conducted at project closure.
  Despite these shortcomings, overall the RF provided a sufficient basis for the presentation of evidence on
  the impact of most of MIDAS activities and achievements towards the PDO.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR describes that M&E outputs were used to adapt project implementation, in particular in relation
  to the process of the grant calls of Component 1 (ICR, paras 67 and 68).

  Overall, M&E Quality is rated Substantial. This rating reflects the generally adequate M&E design and
  implementation despite some shortcomings, and limited utilization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified as Environmental Category B, as it was not
   expected to lead to any significant negative environmental changes. It triggered the environmental
   operational safeguard policies of Environmental Assessment (EA) (OP 4.10), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04),
   Pest Management (4.09), Forests (OP 4.36) and Projects in International Waterways [1] (OP 7.50). The
   PAD stated that during project preparation an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared and
   found to be satisfactory by the Bank and that the Environmental Assessment (EA) Report was disclosed
   through the World Bank Infoshop in October 2008 and made publicly available in the country and on the
   MAFWM website (PAD, para 59). None of the various project restructurings led to changes in the

                                                                                                   Page 20 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



Environmental Category or Safeguard Policies, but the project adapted environmental screening procedures
for the EMF/Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) of the 2015 Restructuring and the
Additional Grant Financing (ICR, para 71).

The ICR reports that the project adopted mitigation measures outlined in an Environmental Management
Plan (EMP) for each activity to minimize negative environmental impacts at key stages of activities (design,
bidding, construction, and implementation) (ICR, paras 70 and 71). Specifically, for the farm-level (and later
agro-processing) investments financed through the matching grants under Component 1, the project
incorporated eligibility and screening criteria in the Operational Manual and the Grants Operational Manual,
developed guidelines for the preparation of subproject-specific EAs or EMPs and specific practices and
standards to be adopted based on their assessed environmental impact. It is assumed that the introduction
of improved technologies and agro-environmental practices through the subprojects reduced pollution levels
generated by farms and agro-processors. The ICR does not report in detail on environmental performance
of the supported beneficiaries, but the RF describes that 278 agricultural households adopted agro-
environmental measures (compared to target of 200) and that 224 agro-processors were compliant toward
EU food safety/hygiene regulations at project closure (compared to target of 120). Moreover, for the
activities under Component 2, separate EMPs were prepared for the Marine Biology Institute, the Border
Inspection Post in Bar, and the Proto-Paying Agency. The ICR highlights that the project built technical and
administrative capacity to better monitor and manage environmental compliance, such as through the
development of a legal and regulatory framework for animal by-products. However, an actual reduction was
not (intended to be) monitored or measured.

The ICR reports that the part-time Safeguards Specialist of the PMT submitted timely and adequate
monitoring reports (although the ICR does not provide details on the monitoring activities) and provided
training to the grant applicants on safeguards matters (ICR para 72). The World Bank Safeguards Specialist
reviewed the implementation of the EMP/ESMF and provided guidance on safeguards matters. According to
the ICR, no significant adverse environmental issues or impacts were encountered during project
implementation and environmental safeguard performance was consistently rated as satisfactory. The IEG
interview with the Bank task team confirmed that there were no compliance issues with environmental
safeguards.

Social Safeguards. The project triggered the social operational safeguard policies of Physical Cultural
Resources (OP 4.11) and the Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) (PAD, para 55). In response, the
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared, but only related to the possibility that land may need
to be required for the construction of a building for the proto-Paying Agency under Component 2. The
criteria for investments supported under Component 1 excluded financing of proposals that may result
in displacement of any third party formally or informally occupying or using the land and grant applicants
had applicant to provide written consent from the owner to use the land – and according to the ICR, this was
diligently monitored by the Safeguards Specialist of the PMT. The ICR also reports that the project led to no
land acquisitions with the decision to use existing facilities instead of constructing a new one for the Proto-
Paying Agency (ICR, para 73). Overall, no social or impacts were reported and no major complaints or
grievances on environmental or social management were filed during project implementation. The IEG
interview with the Bank task team confirmed that there were no compliance issues with social safeguards.

[1] The ICR notes that MIDAS “received an exception to the notification requirements of OP 7.50 at project
appraisal and notified riparians (namely the International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River




                                                                                                Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



   – and the Mediterranean Action Plan – Barcelona Convention) as part of the December 2015 Restructuring
   and Additional Grant Financing.”




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. Fiduciary management of MIDAS was done through consultant services by the
   Technical Services Unit (TSU) in the Ministry of Finance. TSU was functioning before MIDAS and the
   services were performed on a pro rata basis with other World Bank-financed projects in Montenegro. The
   TSU prepared quarterly unaudited financial reports and annual audited financial statements on time and in
   adequate manner (ICR, para 77). The ICR does not provide details on FM supervision missions, but
   throughout project implementation FM was rated as satisfactory and financial audits were unqualified
   (which was confirmed in the IEG interview with the Bank task team).

   Procurement. Procurement was also performed by the TSU, which had extensive experience in World
   Bank procurement procedures from other projects and whose capacity was considered adequate.
   Nevertheless, the risk of procurement delays was rated high at appraisal and in fact MIDAS experienced
   delays in the first two years of implementation due to TSU’s staff capacity constraints. Overall,
   procurement was largely adequate and there were no major complaints during bidding processes (ICR,
   para 76 and confirmed in the IEG interview with the Bank team).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR reported that the project has reduced barriers of doing business for agricultural producers and
   agri-food micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs). In particular, the ICR mentioned that due to
   MIDAS procedures for issuing building permits on agricultural land in line with spatial plans were improved.
   Another example is that “flexibility” and “derogation” rules - as provided for in the EU framework- were
   developed under the new Food Safety Law approved in 2015, which reduced compliance costs in relation
   to the EU Hygiene package for smaller producers and agri-food MSMEs (ICR, paras 37 and 54).



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial


                                                                                                  Page 22 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are drawn from the ICR with some adjustments in language:

A prioritized and phased approach of measures allows for successful implementation of
complex policy changes. The piloting and incremental approach adopted by MIDAS for
implementing rural development grants in line with EU IPARD procedures helped stakeholders to
strengthen their capacities, identify and address bottlenecks in implementation, and gain practical
experience before expanding to more complex further measures. The considerable absorption rate
of IPARD funds towards the end of the project demonstrated the success of this gradual approach.

Coordination of complementary strengths provide the basis for effective collaboration and
the creation of synergies during project implementation. The case of MIDAS demonstrates that
a strategic collaboration and continuous communication between national and donor agencies can
generate synergies in the design and supervision of investments. MIDAS’ sector investments and
institutional strengthening activities were complemented by EU technical assistance, with the joint
goal of moving the country closer to EU accession. This collaborative environment also allowed for
testing innovative approaches, such as over-contracting in MIDAS which was adopted in the IPARD
program in Montenegro (ICR, para 89).

Structural sector weaknesses are not overcome by successful pilot projects and will usually
need to be addressed separately to make best use of the pilot results. While MIDAS
successfully prepared its beneficiary agricultural producers and MSMEs for IPARD support, this
process also highlighted the larger underlying structural issue of limited access to rural finance to
scale up producers’ capacity to pre/co-finance sector investments (like IPARD). Addressing such
issues requires separate targeted action.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  MIDAS is a prototype of similar agriculture sector interventions in the Western Balkans with EU membership
  aspirations.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and comprehensive. The logic of the project is explained well in the ex-post Theory of
Change and it provides the reader with a good technical understanding and rationale of the project activities.

                                                                                                   Page 23 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INSTIT DEV & AGR STRENGTH (P107473)



For a reader unfamiliar to the EU accession process, however, more details on the process could have been
provided in footnotes or an annex.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                               Page 24 of 24
