     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF Donsin Transport Infrastructure Proj (P120960)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0021994

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P120960                                      BF Donsin Transport Infrastructure Proj

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Burkina Faso                                 Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52510                                    30-Jun-2018                                        80,887,030.24

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 16-May-2013                                  30-Apr-2019

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             85,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              85,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                          80,887,030.24                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Peter Nigel Freeman          Kavita Mathur                 Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) in the Financing Agreement (page 4) and the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD, page 4) was "to improve road access to the Donsin area to facilitate its development as a
   transport hub for greater Ouagadougou."



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF Donsin Transport Infrastructure Proj (P120960)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component A – Upgrading and construction of road infrastructure to connect Ouagadougou to the
   Donsin area (appraisal estimate US$ 78.3 million; actual cost US$ 69.3 million). The project financed the
   following activities (note sub-component estimates are appraisal estimates):

         Upgrading of NR3 from Ouagadougou to Loumbila, 17.5 km. (US$ 38.0 million);

         Construction of a new 24.3 km two-lane paved link road, with two additional paved lanes for two-
          wheeled vehicles, from the Loumbila NR3 junction to the Nionogo NR22 junction. This was intended
          to form a link road connecting NR3 and NR22 while at the same time connecting the Donsin area to
          Ouagadougou (US$ 33.0 million);

         Rehabilitation/spot improvement of about 40 km of unpaved rural roads in the Donsin area (US$ 3.0
          million);

         Consulting services to supervise the road infrastructure works (US$ 3.3 million); and

         Implementation of the Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), Environmental and
          Social Management Plan (ESMP) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the planned road
          infrastructure works (US$ 1.00 million).

   Component B – Technical Assistance to the Donsin Airport Project Management Entity (Maitrise
   d'Ouvrage de l'Aeroport de Donsin - MOAD) and for project management (appraisal estimate US$ 6.7
   million; actual cost US$ 6.1 million). The component supported the following activities:

         Consulting services to assist MOAD develop and put in place a public private partnership (PPP)
          framework to operate the existing and future Ouagadougou-Donsin international airports (US$ 1.2
          million);

         Technical assistance to strengthen MOAD capacity to manage the project (US$1.08 million);

         Technical studies (US$ 0.58 million);

         Acquisition of goods and equipment (about US$ 1.80 million);

         Training and capacity building in project management (about US$ 0.50 million);

         Operating costs (about US $1.25 million); and

         Technical and financial audits (US$ 0.29 million).



                                                                                                  Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF Donsin Transport Infrastructure Proj (P120960)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The total project cost was estimated at appraisal at US$ 85 million. At closure the amount
   disbursed was US$ 80.88 million and US$ 4.12 million was cancelled. Because of the impact of the
   exchange rate deterioration between the CFA franc and the US$, the actual equivalent was US$ 75.49
   million as indicated in section (d) above.

   Financing: The project was financed by a Credit to the value of US$ 85 million (IDA-52510).

   Borrower Contribution: There was no Borrower contribution.

   Dates: The project was originally intended to close on June 30, 2018. It was extended by 10 months to April
   30, 2019 in order to complete the civil works. This was necessary as the initial contractor failed to complete
   the works and left the country. A new contract was agreed with a different contractor to finish the works. At
   the same time, the extension allowed the client to continue the dialogue with a private operator for the
   airport concession.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Development Context:

Burkina Faso is a landlocked country in West Africa, which at appraisal had a predominantly rural
population of 16.5 million. It ranked at appraisal 183rd out of 187 countries covered by the United Nations
Development Program Human Development Index and had a poverty rate of 46%. Its main exports are
cotton and gold and it is highly vulnerable to weather conditions and commodity price fluctuations.
A deterioration in the regional security situation in 2016 had negative repercussions on Burkina Faso,
threatening peace and long-term stability. The World Bank Group 2017 Systematic Country Diagnosis
suggested that top priorities were improving natural resource management, promoting skills development
and reducing the gender bias against women.

Transport Context:

Over the previous two decades, Burkina Faso invested significantly in its transport infrastructure network.
The Government of Burkina Faso’s (GOBF) Transport Sector Development Strategy (TSDS), 2011-2025,
was developed after extensive consultations with stakeholders and development partners and focused on
the long-term development of road transport infrastructure to improve both inter and intra-regional
connectivity. The total road network of Burkina Faso at appraisal was about 61,000 km, of which 3,100 km
were paved. Burkina Faso had one of the lowest road densities in West Africa and a Rural Access Index
(RAI) of only about 25 percent compared to the average RAI for Sub-Saharan of 34 percent. Since the
creation of a Road Fund in 2007, 70 percent of available funds have been used to maintain the classified
road network.

The main air transport development priority for the 2011-2016 Priority Investment Program drawn from the
TSDS, was the decommissioning of the existing airport at Ouagadougou and the development of a new

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BF Donsin Transport Infrastructure Proj (P120960)



               airport near Donsin to replace the current one, which though close to the city was inconsistent with the
               recommended standards of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). GOBF identified a site
               approximately 35 km north of Ouagadougou in the Donsin area to build the new airport, which would handle
               the long-term air transport needs for the whole country and which had advantages in terms of
               environmental aspects, safety. and urban decentralization. To develop the proposed airport at Donsin,
               GOBF planned to create a public-private company. The main purpose of this company was to operate the
               existing Ouagadougou airport until the new airport at Donsin became fully operational; to fund part of the
               investments required to construct the new airport; and operate the new airport at Donsin (Evaluation of the
               Proposed Ouagadougou-Donsin Airport Development, Mott MacDonald for World Bank Group, 2010).

               The project as appraised was aligned with the objectives of the 2010-2012 Country Partnership Strategy
               (CPS). Specifically, the project supported two strategic themes - to minimize economic vulnerability and
               promote growth through economic transformation, accelerated diversification and increased exports; as well
               as improved access to regional and international markets. When the project closed, it was aligned to the
               Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period 2018-2013, in which objective 1.3 “improve
               connectivity for better access to markets” was strengthened given that urban mobility and linkages with
               rural hinterlands were improved. The increased connectivity was also intended to benefit the rural
               population of this area in their daily movements and the project included provision of some socio-economic
               infrastructure such as school rehabilitation, provision of solar panels and water supply equipment.

               The overall project was designed to support the development of the Donsin area through improved road
               infrastructure and selection of a private operator for the existing and future Ouagadougou international
               airport. The road infrastructure to support the proposed project was selected not only to connect the new
               airport to the capital city Ouagadougou, but also to connect villages in the Donsin area and to maximize
               benefits to people living in the northern part of Ouagadougou, north-eastern and northwestern Burkina Faso
               as well as neighboring Niger by establishing a transport hub. Thus, the relevance of objectives is rated
               substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve road access to the Donsin area to facilitate its development as a transport hub for greater
                             Ouagadougou

                             Rationale
                             The Theory of Change for the project was to improve road access to the Donsin area together with technical
                             assistance to select a private operator for the existing and future Ouagadougou international airport to
                             facilitate the development of a transport hub for greater Ouagadougou. This is underlined by the PAD (page

                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF Donsin Transport Infrastructure Proj (P120960)



4), which states that the PDO was to be achieved by (a) improving road infrastructure to better connect
Ouagadougou to the Donsin area; and (b) providing the MOAD (Donsin Airport Project Management Entity)
with technical assistance to select a private operator for the existing and future Ouagadougou international
airport. The inclusion of “selection of a private operator” as a PDO indicator implies that this was an integral
part of facilitating the development of a transport hub for Ouagadougou.

Outputs

The outputs in respect of road access to the Donsin areas were as follows:

      Non-rural roads constructed in the project impact area: Baseline 0.0 km; target 24.3 km; actual 24.3
       km. Target achieved.

      Non-rural roads rehabilitated: Baseline 0.0km; target 17.5 km; actual 17.2 km. Target nearly
       achieved.

      Unpaved rural roads rehabilitated/spot improvements in the project impact area: Baseline 0.0 km;
       target 40.0 km; actual 42.5 km. Target exceeded.

      Average daily traffic increase on the new link road connecting NR3 to NR22: Baseline 400; target 530;
       actual 641. Target exceeded - the traffic on the new section increased more than expected.

      Average daily traffic increase on the NR3: Baseline 2,375; target 3,560, actual 4,383. Target
       exceeded - the traffic increased more than expected.

Outputs with respect to Technical Assistance to MOAD and for project management were:

      Consulting services were undertaken to supervise the road infrastructure works, and implement the
       ESIA, ESMP and RAP.

      Legal and financial documents were completed for selection of a private partner to operate the
       existing and future Ouagadougou-Donsin international airports.

      Planned technical studies were completed.

Outcomes

Indicators relating to access to the Donsin area were as follows:

      Travel time between the village of Loumbila and the Kossodo traffic circle in Ouagadougou. Baseline
       23 minutes; target 14 minutes; actual 15 minutes. Target nearly achieved.

      Travel time between the village of Donsin and the Kossodo traffic circle in Ouagadougou. Baseline 50
       minutes; target 25 minutes; actual 25 minutes. Target achieved.




                                                                                                    Page 5 of 13
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               BF Donsin Transport Infrastructure Proj (P120960)




                                  Share of the rural population with access to an all-season road. Baseline 22.3%; target 33.3%; actual
                                     34.3%. Target achieved

                            Selection of private operator

                            At project completion, validation of the negotiation for the selection of a private partner to exploit the current
                            and future Ouagadougou international airport had not been achieved. No agreement for the selection of a
                            concessionaire had been signed and discussions with potential investors were still ongoing. (ICR para
                            31). An update from the TTL (via email dated February 3) confirms that the status remains broadly the same.

                            While outcomes relating to road access to the Donsin area have been substantially achieved, there is little
                            overall movement towards facilitating the development of a transport hub for greater Ouagadougou. Several
                            months beyond project completion, there is no tangible evidence of progress in the selection of a private
                            operator for developing the existing and future Ouagadougou international airport. Taking all these aspects
                            into consideration, efficacy for the PDO is rated modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As stated above, while road access to Donsin area was improved, there is no tangible evidence of progress in
                            the selection of a private operator for developing the existing and future Ouagadougou international airport,
                            and therefore low overall progress towards facilitating the development of a transport hub for greater
                            Ouagadougou. Overall objective, efficacy is rated modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement


   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency:

   The ex-ante economic analysis for the RN3 improvement was conducted by the MOAD as part of the technical
   feasibility studies. This analysis showed an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 14.3% based mostly on
   traffic forecasting and construction cost estimates using the HDM4-economic model.

   Even with a higher investment cost of 10% and the new airport construction delayed, the ex post EIRR of the
   project was estimated at 15.3%, compared to 14.3% at appraisal. This result was significant because the
   economic analysis was robust even without a new airport in place or even if the construction was delayed for

                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF Donsin Transport Infrastructure Proj (P120960)



many years. However, the question of whether this would have been the highest road improvement priority in
the absence of the new airport is moot.

Operational and administrative efficiency.

A 10 month extension of project duration was necessary to complete the civil works as the initial contractor
failed to complete the works and abandoned the construction site with 96 percent of the works completed.
Project management according to the ICR (page 13) was in general inefficient, with poor oversight of
contract execution and advancement, with significant delays in addressing contract amendments, including
those concerning extensions. The delays in relation to contract management issues led to the expiration of the
execution guarantee and inability of the initial contractor to renew it. This failure, in addition to poor performance
of the contractor and final abandonment of the works site led to the contract cancellation and the appointment of
another contractor to complete the works.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        92.00
 Appraisal                                                   14.30
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        92.00
 ICR Estimate                                                15.30
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of project objectives is rated substantial. Regarding the overall objective, while road access to the
Donsin area was improved, there has been little tangible progress towards selecting a private operator for
developing the existing and future Ouagadougou international airport, and therefore low overall progress
towards facilitating the development of a transport hub for greater Ouagadougou. Efficiency was modest due to
delays from the poor performance of the initial contractor for roads construction and rehabilitation. Overall, the
project development outcome is rated moderately unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                         Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF Donsin Transport Infrastructure Proj (P120960)




The main risk relates to concluding a concession agreement with a private operator for the Ougadougou and
Donsin airports. This is particularly important because if the new airport is not built any time soon it is highly
probable that it will lose some of its political appeal.

The other risk relates to the adequate maintenance of the roads constructed through project financing. For
this, the newly constructed main road should be transferred from MOAD to the Ministry of Infrastructure in
order to be classified and maintained during its life-cycle. The transfer process has been initiated by MOAD
taking into account that the contractor gave a one-year guarantee following project completion. The transfer
arrangement was expected to be finalized by March 2020. The Bank team informed MOAD of the priority of
this transfer in order to ensure the road was maintained adequately.

The project preparation anticipated the need for routine maintenance for rural and non-rural roads,
suggesting the use of a multi-annual contract for road maintenance. However, at the closure of the project,
there was no formal agreement regarding such maintenance in place for these roads.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Technical design and economic appraisal were prepared in a satisfactory manner. The fiduciary and
  safeguards instruments were also addressed although not satisfactorily detailed in the ICR.
  Risks identified and assessed during project preparation, included (a) the limited experience of MOAD in
  implementing a World Bank-funded project; (b) delays and possible cost overruns of civil works; (c)
  delays or failure in the airport concession process; (d) complexity in coordinating several development
  partners supporting GOBF in transforming the Donsin area; and (e) delays or inadequate implementation
  of social and environmental mitigation measures. Mitigation measures were prepared and included in the
  legal covenants. It was not clear that MOAD was the best choice as the implementing agency, since
  the PIU was staffed based on its experience and responsibility for the proposed new airport project
  rather than a roads project.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project team conducted regular missions during project implementation to supervise the project
 activities and raised issues regarding potential sources of delays and problems, in particular the
 construction company involved in the rehabilitation of the RN3. Experienced TTLs supervised
 the project and the project team remained relatively unchanged for most of the project duration.


                                                                                                        Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF Donsin Transport Infrastructure Proj (P120960)



 The project implementation suffered from client's poor contract management performance and the road
 works were delayed, with the main contractor for the road construction and rehabilitation underperforming.
 This situation required a project extension of 10 months because of the failure of the contractor, which
 created a considerable risk for project completion. The project team clarified that during supervision,
 significant effort was deployed by the Bank team to overcome this issue. The Bank provided guidance and
 the contract was cancelled and a new contractor was rapidly recruited to complete the works.

 At mid-term review (December 2016), the implementation progress was marginally satisfactory, and some
 activities were behind schedule. After the mid-term review, the implementation progress of the most
 important activities (rehabilitation of RN3 and construction of the new road) regressed substantially and the
 Bank's ISR#10 pointed out different options including contract termination, (although this was
 only implemented by MOAD as a last resort in November 2018).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The indicator "selection of a private operator for the new airport)" was inadequate to measure the
 development of the Donsin area as a transport hub and was more related to the higher-level objective of
 the Government (i.e. construction of a new airport at Donsin) through improving government capacity to
 deal with PPPs. The selection of a private sector operator was, moreover, ambiguous as this vague
 wording did not define the condition accurately. It could have meant a loose agreement or the signing of a
 concession agreement for the new airport.

 Although not indicated in the PAD, two PDO indicators related to Component A (decreased travel time and
 the share of the rural population with access to an all-season road) and both contributed to measuring
 improved access to the Donsin area.



b. M&E Implementation
  Data collection for component A indicators was relatively easy to carry out, and was implemented in
  a timely manner. During project implementation, the definition of indicators (in French) was clarified to
  allow for a better understanding and collection of results.



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF Donsin Transport Infrastructure Proj (P120960)



  The M&E framework could have been utilized in a more extensive way, focusing on the achievement of
  component A, and should have guided the implementing agency in its decision making (e.g. termination
  of contractor's contract for instance).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was category A, triggering three safeguard policies: OP/BP 4.01 (environmental
   assessment), OP/BP 4.11 (physical cultural resources) and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary resettlement). ESIA,
   ESMP and RAP documents were prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed publicly. Mitigation
   measures were implemented and regularly reported by the project implementation unit. According to the
   ICR (page 17) for Component A the final review approved the dismantling of the construction sites
   (management of oils, solid waste and other pollutants) and the transfer of responsibility to the country's
   Environmental Agency.

   According to the appraisal report there were 20 tombs and two sacred tree patches to be relocated under
   physical cultural resources. The ICR does not give specific details about this, but the TTL confirmed the
   matter was addressed. The recruitment of an NGO to assist in the implementation of environmental and
   social safeguards (sanitation, infrastructure management, conflict management, etc.) and monitoring/control
   of the implementation of measures by the National Bureau of Environmental Assessments (BUNEE) was
   carried out and performed its intended services appropriately, including training in environmental monitoring
   of projects and development programs for the benefit of MOAD and the BUNEE.

   In terms of social safeguards, the project’s civil works involved land acquisition, involuntary resettlement,
   an influx of workers from outside the area, and other social risks. The RAP for the connector roads and rural
   roads under the project was completed, and Project Affected Persons were resettled and compensated
   accordingly. However, the process of delivering property titles has not been fully achieved and the Bank
   team was continuing to monitor the situation after project closure. Overall, about 942 households living in
   the future airport vicinity and 20 others in the right of way of the access roads were compensated. All the
   claims and complaints were handled, and the Bank is not aware of any outstanding complaints at the time
   of project closing, (except for the entitlement process).

   The resettlement and compensation claims of people impacted by the proposed airport were
   all completed except for the property entitlement process that is still underway. Since the future airport is not
   financed under this project, the Bank advised the Government to implement a separate RAP for its
   construction. A side impact was the rise in land prices in the vicinity of the proposed new airport area.
   MOAD informed the ICR mission that all complaints have been cleared, including those linked to land for
   agriculture for project affected persons. According to the appraisal report, there were 61 hectares of
   farmland involved and 327 mobile street vendor kiosks with potential claims to be addressed but details
   were not provided in the ICR. However, there was a statement to the effect that the implementation




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF Donsin Transport Infrastructure Proj (P120960)



   of safeguards was considered to have been satisfactorily handled and the TTL confirmed that the street
   vendors did receive compensation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Due to an apparent oversight, this section appears not to have been completed in the ICR. There is no
   discussion of the financial management arrangements such as how they were supervised, the quality of
   financial monitoring reports, the delivery and auditing of financial statements. Similarly, the quality of the
   procurement activities has not been addressed, although under efficiency there is mention of the low
   efficiency of procurement and contract management. Under lessons, there is a statement to the effect that
   better due diligence of the procurement cycle could have helped avoid this situation.

   The TTL acknowledged that these matters should have been addressed in the ICR. The financial
   management was rated satisfactory throughout project implementation. All the financial management
   reports were produced on time and were validated without reservation by the external auditors.

   Project procurement was rated moderately satisfactory for the duration of the project. Slow procurement
   initially was due to a lack of management capacity. Some procurement training did take place and
   additional specialists were hired to strengthen the procurement department. A "double review" of bid
   evaluations and approvals was identified as unnecessary. The Ministry of Finance issued a directive that
   any procurement document reviewed by the Bank did not need to be further reviewed by the client.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The improved connectivity and accessibility of the project area as well as the prospect of a new airport
   development has led to an increase in local land values.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                     Relevance of project objectives
                                                                                     is rated substantial. Regarding
                                                                                     the overall objective, while road
                                 Moderately              Moderately                  access to the Donsin area was
Outcome
                                 Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory              improved, there has been little
                                                                                     tangible progress towards
                                                                                     selecting a private operator for
                                                                                     developing the existing and

                                                                                                        Page 11 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF Donsin Transport Infrastructure Proj (P120960)



                                                                                   future Ouagadougou
                                                                                   international airport, and
                                                                                   therefore low overall progress
                                                                                   towards facilitating the
                                                                                   development of a transport hub
                                                                                   for greater Ouagadougou.
                                                                                   Efficiency was modest due to
                                                                                   delays from the poor
                                                                                   performance of the initial
                                                                                   contractor for roads construction
                                                                                   and rehabilitation. Overall,
                                                                                   outcome is rated moderately
                                                                                   unsatisfactory.
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                         Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                  Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons and a recommendation were adapted from the ICR:

A better formulation of the PDO would have allowed a more realistic assessment of what the
project was expected to achieve vis-a-vis the government’s vision (the new international
airport outside Ouagadougou). The Bank recognized the risks of the airport development being
delayed or cancelled and helped formulate a PDO that emphasized the road connectivity and
accessibility as a standalone project that could be justified on its merits. The technical assistance
provided support to the Government to improve its capacity regarding PPPs.

Strong due diligence to identify potential risks and close supervision of the procurement
cycle are essential to avoid contract management challenges and project delays. This lesson
is consistent with many similar cases experienced by IEG.

It is recommended that the Government of Burkina Faso transfers the new road from MOAD
(the Donsin Airport Project Management Entity) to the Ministry of Infrastructure as soon as
possible to ensure it receives appropriate life cycle maintenance. In the event that the
construction of the new airport is delayed or cancelled, this road should still be able to function
effectively. The Bank has experienced in the past many similar situations in Sub-Saharan Africa
where, after rehabilitating or constructing new roads, the maintenance has been neglected and the
infrastructure deteriorated quickly.



13. Assessment Recommended?



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BF Donsin Transport Infrastructure Proj (P120960)



  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was fairly concise but still exceeded the recommended length of 15 pages. It was unnecessary to
divide the objectives into two. For review purposes it would also have been helpful to have included more
details on the physical cultural resources addressed and the actions taken regarding the compensation of the
roadside vendors. A more serious omission was the section on fiduciary issues. Due to an apparent oversight,
this section appears not to have been completed in the ICR. There was no discussion of the financial
management arrangements such as how they were supervised, compliance with financial covenants, the
quality of financial monitoring reports or the delivery and auditing of financial statements. Similarly, the quality of
the procurement activities had not been addressed, and the extent to which Bank procurement guidelines were
followed, given that there were some problems in this area.

This missing information was, however, provided by the TTL and hence the final rating for the quality of the ICR
was upgraded to substantial. Under the section on lessons and recommendations there was some good
material. However, unfortunately the ICR text was written in the form of findings rather than lessons or
recommendations.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                        Page 13 of 13
