     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GPE Guinea (P148127)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022103

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P148127                                   GPE Guinea

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Guinea                                    Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-19337,TF-A0171                        01-Jul-2018                                          38,650,509.53

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Jul-2015                              31-Aug-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          38,800,000.00                                   38,800,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           38,800,000.00                                   38,650,509.53

 Actual                                       38,650,509.53                                   38,650,509.53




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof      Judyth L. Twigg             Joy Behrens                    IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) for the Pooled-Fund for Basic Education as set out in the Grant
   Agreement (p. 6) and the Project Appraisal Document (p. 8) was to (i) improve access and learning in basic
   education and literacy of under-served populations; (ii) strengthen MEN-A's capacity in evidence-based
   management; and (iii) support the implementation of the education sector's short-term Ebola strategic
   response plan.



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GPE Guinea (P148127)




   “Underserved populations” were defined as populations in remote rural areas and overcrowded urban
   areas. MEN-A is the Ministry of Pre-University Education and Literacy.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components:



   Component 1: Equity and access in education (estimated cost at appraisal US$24.90 million; actual cost
   US$24.55 million). The component aimed at improving coverage and equity in access to basic education
   and at improving the hygienic conditions in primary schools. It emphasized equity by focusing on improving
   access to basic education for marginalized populations (primarily female and rural children, and out-of-
   school children), and by implementing a literacy campaign with a special focus on women. To mitigate the
   ongoing and any future Ebola epidemic through the school system and to promote a healthier teaching and
   learning environment, this component was also to support the MEN-A in its efforts to rehabilitate/construct
   latrines and water points and to complete the distribution of hand washing kits.



   Component 2: Quality of teaching and learning conditions (estimated cost at appraisal US$21.70
   million; actual cost US$20.63 million). The component aimed at improving the quality of teaching and
   learning environments in the primary and lower secondary subsectors, with contingent effects on the
   improvement of learning outcomes throughout the basic education cycle. This was to contribute to improved
   retention, smoothing of the transition from primary to lower secondary education, and the improvement of
   completion rates.



   Component 3: Strengthened management and governance in education (estimated cost at appraisal
   US$5.20; actual cost US$6.69 million). The component was to support interventions to enhance
   governance and management in the education sector by building monitoring and evaluation (M&E) capacity
   to enable evidence-based policy design, strategy and planning; piloting programs to improve human
   resource management; and undertaking analytic work to prepare the roll-out of future reforms. The
   component was also to support institutional capacity building for the effective management of the pooled
   fund, coordination of the government’s education plan, and strengthening of the MEN-A’s fiduciary and
   technical capacity.




                                                                                                 Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GPE Guinea (P148127)




   The PDO remained unchanged throughout project implementation. A key indicator was added during a
   project restructuring on February 15, 2018 to measure improved enrollment capacity (access). At the same
   time, enrollment was retained as a key indicator for access. The addition was made to introduce an
   indicator over which the project had direct influence.



   The above was the second restructuring. A first restructuring was undertaken on March 17, 2016 when the
   number of latrines and water points to be constructed was reduced and the savings reallocated to hand-
   washing kits and other hygienic items, due to implementation delays and the limited time that the trust fund
   resources allocated to this activity were available.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. At appraisal, the total cost of the project was estimated at US$51.80 million. Actual project
   costs at completion were US$51.87 million (the difference is made up of exchange rate changes).



   Project financing. The following grant funding supported the project: US$37.80 million from the Global
   Partnership for Education; US$12 million equivalent from the French Development Agency; US$1 million
   from the United Nations Children’s Fund; and US$1 million from the Ebola Recovery and Reconstruction
   Trust Fund. No Recipient contribution was planned or made.



   Dates. The project was approved on July 10, 2015 and became effective on October 19, 2015, with an
   original closing date of July 1, 2018. The February 2018 restructuring extended the closing date to August
   31, 2019 to allow project completion. The project closed at that date.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project’s objectives responded to the education challenges Guinea was facing, it supported
government policy as reflected in education planning at the time, and in a subsequent ten-year education
policy introduced in 2019. It was also relevant to the Bank’s country strategy.



The project was introduced into a low-performing education system further weakened by an Ebola crisis
that broke out in 2014 and that severely affected school attendance. Systemic weaknesses contributing to
low performance – coverage, relevance efficiency, quality – were recognized in the government’s education

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GPE Guinea (P148127)



               sector plan for 2015-2017, on which this project partly drew. The Ebola crisis required an immediate
               response to deal with the additional educational demands imposed by the crisis, notably addressing the
               loss in attendance of some two million children, and requirements for a healthy and clean school
               environment. Aligned with the needs of the government, the project objectives were in line with the Bank’s
               goals to end extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity; and the Country Partnership Strategy for
               FY2014 to FY2017 which included human resource development as one of its main pillars. These goals
               remain relevant in the new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2018 to 2023.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve access to basic education among under-served populations

                             Rationale
                             This objective was to be achieved by classroom construction and raised community awareness, as reflected
                             in increases in school enrollments and improved latrines and water points in new primary and lower
                             secondary schools



                             Outputs



                             Classroom construction met set targets: 402 new primary classrooms and 180 new lower secondary
                             classrooms were constructed and equipped, and each one staffed with a teacher. 69 percent of primary and
                             60 percent of lower secondary classrooms were constructed in rural, more underserved areas.



                             Conditions of water points and latrines improved with targets partly achieved: 565 stand-alone water points
                             and 233 latrines were constructed, in the former case exceeding the original target of 466, and in the latter
                             case falling short of the original target of 284 latrines.




                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GPE Guinea (P148127)



To increase the demand for schooling, awareness campaigns estimated to have reached some 12,000
people were conducted in more underserved areas, with a focus on girls.



Outcomes



Enrollment capacity as a result of new classrooms at the primary level increased to 17,330, exceeding the
target of 17,150. The gross enrollment rate at the primary level increased from a baseline of 83.7 percent in
2015 to 91 percent, slightly above the target of 90.6 percent.



Enrollment capacity as a result of new lower secondary schools met the target of 11,520. The ICR does not
report on changes in enrollment rates at this level.



Summary: Outcomes indicate improvements in access to education and a more sanitary environment along
the lines envisaged, as well as the effects of better access and awareness on enrollment rates at the primary
level.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve literacy among under-served populations

Rationale
This objective was to be achieved by upgrading and reactivating non-formal education centers (NAFA
centers) and through functional literacy campaigns.



Outputs



226 NAFA centers were renewed, exceeding the target of 121 centers, with renewal including renovation and
equipping of centers, as well as training of teachers and deploying them once trained.




                                                                                                  Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GPE Guinea (P148127)




A literacy campaign, conducted by non-governmental organizations, included developing a procedural
manual, and opening 1,992 literacy centers and 583 centers for post-literacy support.



Outcomes



As a result of the renewal effort, participation in the NAFA centers increased from a baseline of zero to 13,000
by end-project. Enrollment in the literacy campaign rose from a baseline of zero to 97,000 (70 percent
women). Approximately 22 percent of the latter also participated in the post-literacy program.



Summary: While participation in literacy and post-literacy programs was considerable and might be an
indication of the success of the programs, there nevertheless is no information on outcomes as expressed in
the objective, i.e. actual achievement in terms of enhanced literacy among beneficiaries.




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve learning in basic education among under-served populations

Rationale
This objective was to be achieved by improving the quality of the teaching and the learning environment in
primary and lower secondary education.



Outputs



The number of teaching and learning materials produced and distributed at pre-school, and at primary and
lower secondary levels, reached 9 million in 2019, far exceeding the end target of 3.5 million.




                                                                                                  Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GPE Guinea (P148127)



The number of teachers at the primary and lower secondary levels trained (primarily in French, mathematics,
and pedagogy) reached 17,430, exceeding the overall target of 10,100. The training successfully
experimented with part-time teacher training colleges and part-time on-the-job training, which has been
maintained as a favored teacher training model.



Decentralization grants were distributed to a total of 7,700 schools and local education authorities to promote
active engagement in school development by schools and communities. An assessment looked at 7,000
schools within the communities that received grants, indicating that 61 percent performed well on specific
criteria of access, quality and management.



School and teacher inspectors were reintroduced within the general education inspection as pedagogic
supervisors. Over the project period, some 14,500 school-level inspections were undertaken, involving
classroom observations and feedback to teachers.




Outcomes



Based on early grade reading assessments undertaken over the 2016-2019 period, outcomes varied over
time from a baseline of 6.64 words per minute in 2014 to 42.7 words per minute in 2017 (far exceeding the
end target of 22 words per minute), and then dropping to 16.1 words per minute for 2019. According to the
ICR (p. 19), the decline in 2019 may have been largely due to an extended teacher strike.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Strengthen MEN-A's capacity in evidence-based management

Rationale
This objective was to be achieved by capacity building; provision of equipment for planning, data collection,
and analysis; and development of the education management information system (MIS) and standardized
student learning assessment data.




                                                                                                  Page 7 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GPE Guinea (P148127)



Outputs



Tools for statistical analysis of education MIS data were designed and disseminated to be used by central
and decentralized levels of government; and associated capacity building was provided to planners,
managers, and other relevant personnel.



New human resource (HR) management processes and computerized management tools were introduced,
aimed at improving the efficiency of HR processes and computerized management.



Renewed school mapping was achieved, including the mapping of schools and the educational environment
(water points, health centers, markets, etc.), building on existing data bases.



Databases of the main public education agencies were harmonized and linked, with all schools being coded
and teachers being coded and linked to their respective schools. On the other hand, teacher databases for
MEN-A, the Civil Service Ministry, and the Ministry of Finance have not yet been harmonized.



Outcomes



As a result of the above outputs, five analytical reports were produced, on the following subjects:

      the process for facilitating transition from primary to lower secondary education, technical/vocational
         programs, and the job market – actions that require teacher, materials and adjustments to curricula;
         recommendations have been included in the government's new 10-year sector plan for 2019-2028;
        a strategy to boost private schools, including a draft law on private schools and the re-establishment
         of a department responsible for private schools; the draft law is currently pending in the national
         assembly, as are decisions on the staffing of the new department;
        the development of the national education system, underpinning the design of the new education
         sector plan;
        preschool development, informing the design of a new Bank project; and
        a holistic policy on the teaching profession, including areas such as deployment and professional
         development. Here, the next steps are to develop an implementation plan, being supported by
         UNESCO.




                                                                                                      Page 8 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GPE Guinea (P148127)



                            Staff affectation (the share of staff deployed according to standard procedures) was increased from a
                            baseline of 91 percent to 95 percent, equal to the target.



                            Summary: In most cases, the analytical reports have been followed up on, moving MEN-A towards the
                            application of evidence-based policy making in education. The main exception is in the area of private school
                            legislation.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 5
                            Objective
                            Support the implementation of the education sector's short-term Ebola strategic response plan

                            Rationale
                            This objective was to be achieved by the construction of latrines and water points to improve sanitation (short-
                            and long-term response), and by the distribution of handwashing kits (short-term response).



                            As indicated under Objective 1, 233 latrines and 565 water points were constructed. Handwashing consisted
                            of soap, mild chlorine solutions, 4,700 50-litre water faucets, 3.2 million 220-litre water drums, and 66,400
                            litres of disinfectants for schools.



                            Summary: The intervention addressed a direct need that responded to the crisis situation at the school level,
                            through sanitary interventions, as well as by supporting access through the project's learning and literacy
                            programs.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy was rated substantial for the first objective based on improved access to schools and better
                            sanitation in schools, and modest for the second objective in the absence of sufficient evidence of improved


                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GPE Guinea (P148127)



  literacy. For the three other objectives, efficacy was assessed to be substantial with only moderate
  shortcomings. Overall efficacy is therefore rated substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis covering all components was performed at appraisal and for the ICR. Both analyses use the
same assumptions, albeit in the case of the ICR the analysis was updated with the latest data. The
assumptions are judged reasonable: a working life of 40 years, wages adjusted for different levels of education,
the effects of unemployment, etc. At appraisal, the project was expected to yield an Internal Rate of Return
(IERR) of 27 percent. The ICR calculated that the project yielded an overall IERR of 28 percent (21 percent for
access and 29 percent for quality).



Other factors also suggested substantial implementation efficiency. The cost of activities was mostly kept under
budget, and a substantial decrease in unit costs of construction/rehabilitation of latrines and water points in
primary schools partly balanced out cost overruns in classroom construction and equipping, and in costs related
to better quality in the teaching and learning environment. Efficiency was dampened by capacity constraints in
the coordinating team due to limited procurement experience and (in some cases) contract re-bidding; by a
change in leadership as a new minister and secretary general for MEN-A were appointed; and by teacher strikes
in 2018 that impacted primary and lower secondary schools as well as NAFA centers.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GPE Guinea (P148127)



6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives was rated high, as the objectives aligned with government priorities and World Bank
strategy at project preparation and closing. Achievement of the literacy objective was rated modest due to lack
of data on literacy outcomes, and substantial for the four other objectives based on achievement of recorded
outputs and outcomes. Efficiency was rated substantial. These rating are indicative of only minor overall
shortcomings, and therefore Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

While the project was brought to satisfactory closure as indicated by the Outcome rating, risks to the
development outcome still appear substantial. The government was fully behind the project and is
committed to continuing education reform as indicated by its new ten-year plan. Likewise, institutional
arrangements are in place to further support the results of the project, as indicated by the numerous
analytical reports that in most instances are being used to move primary and lower secondary reform
forward.

Risk is to be found in the political and arena. Guinea has experienced long periods of instability and weak
governance, although elections and democratic institutions (an elected president and an elected assembly)
have brought a sense of stability. Still, the ICR (pp. 2 and 34) points to a fragile environment where weak
governance undermines the legitimacy of the state, and rapid urbanization is creating social unrest.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically relevant in addressing weaknesses in the education system and in
  responding to the educational impact of the Ebola crisis. It was aligned with the government’s interim and
  long-term education plans, and with the international community’s strategy for the addressing the Ebola
  crisis. In general terms, it included the Bank’s twin goals of poverty alleviation and boosting shared
  prosperity, and CPF objectives for human resource development. Project design drew on the experience
  under earlier, Education for All Fasttrack projects in Guinea (P111470, P050046, T097485). These
  projects began the process of expanding access to and quality of education with interventions that then
  were incorporated into the design of the current project. The results framework was straightforward,
  though in some instances it could have been more rigorous in defining outcomes from increased access
  to services. Financial arrangements – the pooling of donor funds under Bank supervision – turned out to
  work well, although the agreed-on project period of three years would turn out to be too short and




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GPE Guinea (P148127)



  resulted in an extension of the closing date. The risk assessment – substantial – was balanced
  considering the potential political volatility that continued to influence implementation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Semi-annual joint review missions focusing on the project were undertaken jointly with the donors,
 complemented by annual reviews of progress on the government’s overall education plan. Collaboration
 with government counterparts, drawing on in-country Bank staff, was close and facilitated resolution
 of field-level implementation issues. Particular attention was paid to financial management, procurement,
 and safeguards, including efforts to develop MEN-A capacity in those areas.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO was clearly defined, and the results framework captured relevant outputs: implementation results,
 and selectively, results that measured program performance (changes in capacity, uptake and institutional
 development). Monitoring drew on regular MEN-A capacity, as routine monitoring using the education MIS
 was able to provide the data necessary to support the project. There was not, however, an outcome
 indicator to measure achievement of the objective to improve literacy among under-served populations.



b. M&E Implementation
  Outcome and output indicators were tracked regularly and included adjustments to targets during the
  restructurings. For instance, the output targets for latrines and waterpoints were adjusted downwards and
  savings shifted towards increasing the number of handwashing kits and other hygienic items that were
  more likely to reduce the spread of Ebola; and the focus on "additional enrollment" shifted to "enrollment
  capacity," an indicator that was more under the control of the project. A number of studies were
  undertaken on areas key to further reform, and information flows between agencies in the education
  system were strengthened.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GPE Guinea (P148127)



c. M&E Utilization
  Data was used to inform on project progress and map the teacher database, including to determine
  retirement and recruitment needs. Data was also used to monitor the results of efforts at learning
  improvement, and to inform communities and parents of results.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated as Category B (partial assessment), and OP/BP 4.01 “Environment Assessment” was
   triggered due to the construction of classrooms, water points, and latrines. An Environmental Social
   Management Framework and a Resettlement Policy Framework were prepared. As the project was
   processed under paragraph 12 of OP 10.00, the deadline for disclosure of social and environmental
   safeguards instruments was deferred to six months after project effectiveness. Safeguards were monitored
   consistently during project implementation and were consistently rated moderately satisfactory and
   satisfactory in Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) (ICR, p. 32). The project construction
   sites were screened by the project safeguards specialist prior to the launch of construction. In 2019, the
   project also developed and finalized a grievance redress mechanism, distributed to the public, and training
   was provided to communities/beneficiaries on the tool.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management (FM). The FM performance rating remained satisfactory and moderately
   satisfactory throughout the life of the project. During the project period, there was a strong financial
   management team in place, and the Project Coordination Unit submitted unaudited interim financial reports
   of an acceptable quality on a regular basis. The auditors’ opinions were unqualified (clean). At the time of
   the ICR, the final audit report was in the process of being submitted (ICR, p. 32). The government’s
   integrated financial management information system was used for the project, and it is the standard
   system used in West African Francophone countries.



   Procurement. Procurement was consistently rated satisfactory in the project ISRs. During the project,
   World Bank procurement staff provided training to the implementing units to ensure compliance with
   procurement guidelines. Procurement plans were updated during Bank supervision missions to
   accommodate adjustments in construction delays. There were also prior and post reviews of
   contracts. There were non-performing contracts related to the construction of classrooms that were
   canceled and re-bid in accordance with Bank procurement guidelines.




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GPE Guinea (P148127)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted in the ICR.



d. Other
   None noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 34-36) included several insightful lessons, including:



Awareness raising and capacity building of local communities, including school
management committee members, can be key features in promoting inclusive and
responsive institutions for service delivery. The introduction of awareness campaigns as well as
basic management training gave communities a stronger voice in monitoring and supporting school
activities.



Good institutional capacity can be key to smooth implementation, results, and sustainability
of interventions. Improved project capacity was key to sustainable project interventions. However,
going forward will require additional support to build on the project's achievements, inter alia,
decentralized management and strong systems for planning, monitoring and evaluation.



Pooled funds and a multi-sectoral approach provide a workable platform to tackle a crisis like
Ebola. Under the project, members of the donor community combined their education sector
resources in a pooled fund to support national efforts to get children back into school after the crisis.
The pooled fund ensured donor cooperation and a more rapid achievement of project goals than

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GPE Guinea (P148127)



might otherwise have been the case, in particular in providing coordinated and timely support for
hygiene improvements in schools in the short term (hand-washing) and the longer term (latrines and
water points).



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

While the ICR was long at 36 pages, it provided a thorough discussion of the choices made under the project. A
somewhat more structured, selective and less narrative discussion of efficacy – while informative in its current
form – would have facilitated the analysis, especially with regard to the strengthening of MEN-A where the
presentation left the reader unsure about the actual results. Still, the ICR provided the necessary evidence to
allow the project to be thoroughly assessed.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 15
