        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        IRAQ 2nd Expenditure Rationalization DPF(P161167)



                                                                                   Report Number : ICRR0021927

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                                 Operation Name
 P161167                                      IRAQ 2nd Expenditure Rationalization DPF

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Iraq                                         Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-86880                                   31-Dec-2017                                    1,443,820,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Dec-2016                                  31-Dec-2017

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           1,443,820,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            1,443,820,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        1,443,820,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Jorge Garcia-Garcia           Clay Wescott                 Malathi S. Jayawickrama       IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The program document defines the operation’s Program Development Objectives (PDOs) as to “Improve (1)
   expenditure rationalization; (2) energy efficiency; and (3) the transparency and governance of state-owned
   enterprises.” (PD PDPF, p. 1, p. 21)




b. Pillars/Policy Areas

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRAQ 2nd Expenditure Rationalization DPF(P161167)



   The operation was structured around three pillars: I. Improve expenditure rationalization; II. Improve energy
   efficiency; and III. Improve the transparency and governance of state-owned enterprises. Pillar I covered
   reforms aimed at controlling payroll expenditures and improving (a) the selection of public investment
   projects, (b) the management of public debt, (c) the coverage and efficiency of social insurance, and (d) the
   targeting of safety net programs; six prior actions underpinned the reforms in this pillar. Pillar II covered
   policies aimed at reducing gas flaring, improving efficiency of electricity generation, and reducing electricity
   subsidies. Two prior actions underpinned reforms in the pillar; the three indicative triggers supported a
   second operation that did not materialize. Pillar III covered policies aimed at improving the transparency and
   governance of state owned enterprises; one prior action underpinned this pillar.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   The operation built on the structural reforms initiated as part of the US$1.2 billion development policy
   operation approved in December 2015 (P155962) with the same title. This operation was approved on
   December 20, 2016 and became effective December 31, 2017 and closed as planned on December 31,
   2017. This operation for US$1,443.82 million was part of a programmatic DPF series of two in which
   the second did not materialize mainly because the government weakened some reforms, slowed
   down the pace of others and was able to close its financing gap with the surge in oil prices.
   The operation was covered by a guarantee of US$443.82 million from Canada and the United Kingdom as
   part of the overall international support package for Iraq. The guarantee from Canada enabled a portion of
   the loan equal to US$72 million and the one from the United Kingdom enabled a portion of the loan equal to
   US$371.82 million.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  In mid-2010, a sharp fall in world oil prices and a war waged by the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) hit
  Iraq’s economic and social fabric. The fall in oil prices deteriorated public finances as the government lost
  fiscal revenues equivalent to 19 percent of GDP. The ISIS insurgency displaced over three million Iraqis
  bringing to the fore the problems of service delivery. Addressing the fiscal situation and improving service
  delivery required containing expenditures, increasing revenue, improving the efficiency of state enterprises
  and the electricity sector and targeting social protection programs to the poorest and most vulnerable. These
  actions would also respond to citizen demands for better governance, more transparency and less corruption.
  Containing expenditure required reducing a large amount of waste in the civil service, gas production, public
  investment, state owned enterprises and the pension and social safety net systems. The Iraq Systematic
  Country Diagnostic of FY17 identified public service delivery and the management of the oil wealth among the
  most pressing problems facing the authorities. The program supported goals of the government’s strategy,
  such as inclusive growth, efficient service delivery and social protection and was aligned with the Country
  Partnership Strategy (FY13-16) pillars of improving governance, supporting economic diversification and
  improving social inclusion and reducing poverty. These objectives continue to be relevant.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRAQ 2nd Expenditure Rationalization DPF(P161167)




  Rating
  High

b. Relevance of Design
  The program document explains well the problems and circumstances that motivated its objectives and
  interventions. The problems were clear and substantial. The results chain is clear and convincing for pillar 2
  –improved energy efficiency– and for most of pillar 1 –improve expenditure rationalization– but not
  convincing for pillar 3 –improve transparency and governance of SOEs. The results chain for pillar 2 –
  energy– is coherent and the prior actions pertinent to achieving the expected results and the objective. The
  results chain for pillar 1 ­expenditure­ is coherent for prior actions on wage bill, public investment
  management reform and social safety nets, but publishing debt data is preliminary step towards better debt
  management. Having a draft law on pension reform is also an initial step towards reforming the pension
  system, requiring significant efforts thereafter. The results chain for pillar 3 ­governance of state–owned
  enterprises– is not convincing because publishing financial results does not credibly contribute to the
  achievement of the objective.

  The program supported actions and pursued reforms that made it a high risk high reward program. Most
  SORT risk categories were rated high, with key risks identified in the PAD and the Bank pursued appropriate
  actions to mitigate most of them. The risk that oil prices would surge was not considered, nor was the risk
  that the surge could undermine support for the reform program (e.g., electricity tariffs).

  Macroeconomic framework. Iraq faced a double shock in 2014-2015, from the Islamic State of Iraq and
  Syria (ISIS) attacks and the sharp drop in world oil prices. The shocks resulted in a decline in non-oil GDP of
  3.9 and 14.4 percent in 2014 and 2015 respectively with overall GDP growth of 0.7 and 2.5 percent. In July
  14, 2016, the IMF announced that Iraq had entered into a three-year Stand-By Arrangement with the IMF
  (US$5.34billion) “focused on implementing economic and financial policies to help the country cope with
  lower oil prices and ensure debt sustainability” (IMF News July 14, 2016).. This financing followed the single
  tranche US$1.2 billion disbursement in July 2015 under the Rapid Financing Instrument. The Stand-By
  Arrangement envisaged fiscal consolidation, mostly through retrenchment of inefficient capital expenditure
  while protecting social spending, designing and implementing revenue and expenditure reforms to contain
  the non-oil primary balance deficit and achieve debt sustainability. The program also sought to strengthen
  public financial management and preserve financial sector stability by strengthening the Central Bank’s legal
  framework and restructuring state-owned banks.. The World Bank program document noted that the “DPF
  series will be implemented during a period when Iraq and the IMF have an ongoing three-year Stand-By
  Arrangement (SBA) in place” (par. 13, an arrangement that reduced the potential risk for the loan of
  macroeconomic mismanagement.



  Rating


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            IRAQ 2nd Expenditure Rationalization DPF(P161167)



       Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     Improve Expenditure Rationalization

    Rationale
    The World Bank’s 2014 Iraq Public Spending Review found a severe administrative bloat in public sector pay
    and numbers, low execution rates of the capital budget, high spending on security and administration and
    neglect of vital sectors. The operation supported: (a) electronic payment and biometric identification of civil
    servants to control payment of salaries to ghost workers; (b) approval of investment projects consistent with
    the government’s priorities; (c) transparent debt management; (d) reforms to the pension system; and (e)
    better targeting of the social safety net.
    The program document defined a single result indicator for the series of two operations (the one under
    review and the one that did not go forward). There was no intermediate indicator for this operation and a
    second one for the two operations.. To assess efficacy for this operation the review uses the single indicator
    for the program as defined in the policy matrix of this loan.
    Wage bill reform. The wage bill was the largest and fastest growing item in the central government budget.
    To control its size the operation supported two prior actions that required three measures: (a) transitioning to
    electronic payment of all civil servants’ compensation (inclusive of benefits and allowances) by FY2020 ; (b)
    issue a decision (No. 313, dated November 2, 2016) mandating to install by FY 2018 biometric identification
    systems to verify civil servants’ daily attendance and (c) implementing two electronic payment in ministries,
    departments and agencies for at least 30 percent of civil servants including all with biometric identification..
    The target of over 30 percent for two pilot ministries was exceeded; by September 30, 2017, 52 percent of
    civil servant in the pilot ministries were paid electronically. The system was subsequently rolled out across
    the civil service, reaching 21 percent of all civil servants by mid-2019.
    Public investment management reform. Shortcomings in the public investment process prevented
    prioritizing what is important and led to selecting bad projects, poor execution rates and poor control of funds
    released. To reduce these problems the program supported a prior action by which the Minister of Planning
    submitted to the Council of Ministers the list of investment projects consistent with the government’s
    priorities and in line with its Public Investment Management Framework of 2015. The expected result was to
    conduct a feasibility study with cost-benefit analysis for at least 20 percent of the projects whose capital
    exceeded ID100,000 billion (about US$85 million). The result was achieved; by March 2019, 27 percent of
    the projects had gone through a feasibility study, although due to the sharp oil price decline, the overall
    number of projects was much smaller than envisioned (3 out of 11).
    Public debt management. Historically, the government ran fiscal surpluses and did not develop its capacity
    to manage debt. The situation changed recently. As its financing needs grew, its debt grew rapidly between
    2014 and 2016, from 33 to 64 percent of GDP. Initial steps to improve debt management are to increase the
    transparency of information, improve accountability and reduce the debt’s risk profile. To this end, as a prior
    action the Ministry of Finance started publishing quarterly Public Debt Bulletins, with data on the external

                                                                                                        Page 4 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            IRAQ 2nd Expenditure Rationalization DPF(P161167)



    debt of the central government. The expected result was to raise the share of domestic public debt in total
    public debt above 35 percent in 2018. The share reached 37.8 percent in May 2, 2019. To achieve this,
    there was a coordinated effort with parallel support from JICA and IMF, including training and technical
    assistance on debt management, and an IFRIS audit on non-financial SOE debt.
    Pension Reform. Iraq spends about 4 percent of GDP on pensions, above the OECD average of 1.8
    percent. The system is unequal and fragmented, provides generous benefits to some but with large gaps in
    coverage. The costs cannot be sustained. To restore the system’s financial viability a prior action supported
    the Council of Ministers submitting to the Council of Representatives the draft Integrated Social Insurance
    Law that would help address these issues, including integrating the public and private pension schemes. The
    expected result was to increase from 13 to 28 years the period it takes the expected actuarial deficit to
    materialize. The actual result is less than 13 years. The result was not achieved.
    Social safety nets. Iraq’s social safety net system is expensive per dollar of assistance provided (e.g.,
    US$6 per dollar of food distributed), excludes many eligible people and includes many ineligible people. To
    enhance the system’s efficiency the program supported a Council of Ministers decision to exclude non-
    eligible beneficiaries from the system based on a targeting method approved in the social protection law
    which uses clear criteria to select participants. The results were to reduce the inclusion error and increase
    the coverage ratio of the poor. The inclusion error fell from 82.5 percent in 2015 to 72.3 percent in 2018, far
    above the 20 percent target. The coverage ratio of the poor increased from 10 to 13 percent between 2015
    and 2018, far below the 50 percent target. The results were partially achieved..

    The ICR team confirmed the explanation stated in the ICR that the two sets of numbers for the inclusion
    error the ICR reports come from different methods used to calculate them. The first number, calculated at the
    end of 2015, defined the 43 percent baseline for the program after applying a proxy means test formula to
    the database of the social protection system’s existing beneficiaries. By 2018 all beneficiaries in this
    database were below the poverty line, generating an inclusion error of zero, therefore exceeding the target of
    20 percent in the program. The second set of data resulted from the SWIFT Survey (Survey of Well-being
    via Instant and Frequent Tracking) carried out in late 2017 and early 2018. The survey was administered to
    all but 14 districts which were inaccessible because of the security situation, as stated in the ICR. This data
    source generated an inclusion error of 82.5 percent for the baseline and 72.3 percent for the end-of-the
    program. The ICR used information from both methods and concluded that, while there was progress in
    targeting of social assistance programs and the program targets were achieved, the achievement of the
    objective was modest.

    Overall, there was progress in reducing the wage bill and on public investment management. There was
    some progress on social safety nets while the sustainability of pensions deteriorated.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL




                                                                                                       Page 5 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            IRAQ 2nd Expenditure Rationalization DPF(P161167)




    Objective 2
    Objective
     Improve Energy Efficiency

    Rationale
    Iraq wastes gas through flaring, uses more expensive gas, oil and crude oil to generate electricity and
    collects about 20 percent of the cost of the electricity generated. To raise the system’s efficiency the
    program supported actions to reduce these problems.
    Gas flaring. Iraq flared about 60 percent of the gas produced, an economic loss of about US$2.5 billion per
    year. To reduce this loss it was necessary to capture, process and transport the associated natural gas. To
    be able to do this the government had to pay arrears incurred with its large suppliers of gas and to project
    the investment requirements to expand the capacity to process the gas flared. The Council of Ministers
    approved and submitted to the Council of Representatives a draft budget including Iraqi dinar (ID) 1.4 trillion
    to cover payments from the Ministry of Oil to the natural gas processors for (a) processed/dry gas, LPG and
    condensate deliveries and (b) projected investment requirements for processing capacity expansion. The
    program supported this action (prior action #7). The expected result was to reduce the amount of gas flared,
    expand the capacity to absorb that gas and process it and allocate the gas captured to generating electricity.
    The processing capacity expanded from 671 million of standard cubic feet (MMSCF) to 1,058 MMSCF, a
    substantial increase but below the target of 1,300 MMSCF. The gas allocated to produce power increased
    from 571 to 883 MMSCF, a substantial increase, but still below the expected level of 1,200 MMSCF.
    Gas-to-power strategy. To realize the benefits of less glass flaring, Iraq had to capture, process,
    commercialize and allocate the gas for power generation. The gas used represented about 50 percent of the
    capacity to generate power with gas. The expansion was to be supported by the second operation, whose
    indicative trigger was to include sufficient funds in the 2018 draft budget law to finance a five-year
    investment program and financing plan to increase natural gas allocations for power generation. The
    expected result was to increase the share of gas used in the power generation mix from 42 to 70 percent
    between 2015 and 2018; the share increased to 63 percent.
    Electricity Subsidies. Low operational efficiency, high electricity losses and obsolete network equipment
    contribute to half of the total power generated not being billed. On top of this, cost recovery is low and the
    amount collected is less than one third of the electricity generated. The program supported the Ministry of
    Electricity’s policy directive to reduce losses which the Council of Ministers approved. The expected result
    was to improve revenue collection as a percentage of generation from 30 to 50 between 2015 and 2018. The
    result was not achieved, as that percentage fell to 21 percent in 2018.

    The program achieved in a substantial manner its objectives of reducing gas flaring and allocate more gas to
    generate electricity but did not achieve the objective of reducing electricity subsidies.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL




                                                                                                       Page 6 of 13
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               IRAQ 2nd Expenditure Rationalization DPF(P161167)




    Objective 3
    Objective
     Improve Transparency and Governance of State Owned Enterprises

    Rationale
    State-owned enterprises (176) operate in many sectors, are opaque, unaccountable and carry out quasi-
    fiscal activities that generate large risks. Their privileged status chokes private sector growth and the
    country’s transition to a market economy. The enterprises employed over 550,000 persons of which 30-50
    percent are estimated to be excess labor. Reforming them was imperative for efficiency gains and economic
    growth.
    Transparency and governance of SOEs. To improve SOEs transparency and governance the Council of
    Ministers’ Secretariat published on its website a report detailing the financial results of the largest nine (9)
    non-financial SOEs based on FY2015 closed financial statements including taxes, dividends,
    subsidies/transfers, loans (principal and interest), and loan guarantees. That was a prior action. The
    expected result (firms complying with standards of disclosure for corporate governance) was to exceed 15
    percent in the International Standards of Accounting and Reporting Benchmark of Corporate Governance
    Disclosures by 2018. The actual result was 3.8 percent and the expected result was not achieved.

    The government completed two triggers for the second loan (DF3): (a) the Council of Ministers approves an
    SOE Charter of Good Governance, to improve Iraq's SOE corporate governance framework; and (b) the
    Central Bank of Iraq issues regulations directing state-owned banks to reduce their total lending exposure to
    non-financial SOEs per a time bound action plan.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  The program advanced in the objective of improving energy efficiency and fell short in the objectives of
  improving expenditure rationalization and improving transparency and governance of state-owned enterprises.
  Notable improvements were the reduction of gas flaring, using more gas to generate electricity, using biometric
  identification for civil servants, putting in place an electronic payment system for the civil servants payroll,
  adopting a system of cost-benefit analysis to decide on large public investments using, and reducing the
  exposure of the state-owned banks to non-financial SOEs in their total lending. The Ministry of Finance started
  publishing information about the public debt; while the result was achieved, it cannot be attributed to these
  actions. The program made progress in reducing the inclusion error in social safety net programs, and did not
  produce results on pension, electricity subsidies and transparency and governance.



                                                                                                         Page 7 of 13
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        IRAQ 2nd Expenditure Rationalization DPF(P161167)



The program objectives had substantial relevance while its design had modest relevance. Its efficacy was
substantial.


a.     Outcome Rating
       Moderately Satisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

The government executed important reforms to its investment and payroll management system and took
significant actions to reduce gas flaring, generate electricity with the captured gas, improve the targeting of the
safety net programs, and to reduce the exposure of state-owned banks to SOE’s debt. These reforms may be
sustained, as the electronic payments of wages has been set up, the infrastructure to capture gas and generate
energy with it has been built. To realize and maintain these benefits, though, more work needs to be done. On
the other hand, more effort may be needed to maintain the gains already made and make further progress. For
example, to control a rising wage bill, expenditure controls are needed to reduce payroll fraud and increase the
transparency of government pay and employment practices. A centralized human resources management
system is also needed. In other areas the government acted slowly (e.g., state-owned enterprises), adopted
policies that go against the objectives of the program (e.g., electricity), or did not push for the legal changes
required to change the status quo (e.g., pension). Moreover, better oil prices reduce financing gaps and the
need for external support, weakening the urgency to reform and, possibly, creating pressures to backtrack on
past reforms. The reluctance to complete reforms indicates the political difficulties of doing it and the high risk to
the sustainability of the reforms.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
       High

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     The program design addressed major problems that required prompt solutions: to close the large fiscal
     deficit caused by the fall in oil prices and to eliminate the substantial waste in energy and overall
     government expenditure. Plunging oil prices made more evident the nature and depth of the problems and
     the urgency for change. The macroeconomic framework was adequate, and its likelihood of
     implementation and success was enhanced by the government’s Stand-By Agreement with the IMF. The
     Bank took a gamble with a high risk program. The results framework had some shortcomings in the results
     chain, in part because some the prior actions dealt with necessary steps, but they were insufficient to
     produce significant change (e.g., draft law for social insurance).




                                                                                                        Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRAQ 2nd Expenditure Rationalization DPF(P161167)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The Bank supported the technical needs of the implementing agencies but their fragmentation required
  major efforts to monitor and adjust the program as the circumstances changed, especially the
  government’s commitment to reform. The Bank did not monitor closely the indicators for the program,
  which were not ready when the Bank began to prepare the ICR.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  The government worked with the Bank to design a bold program where most of its elements could help
  solve deep, entrenched problems. Government commitment to the program, which was initially strong,
  weakened over time as the main triggers of the crisis –war with ISIS and low oil prices– eased. Although
  the government completed all the prior actions and executed several triggers for the second operation
  but faltered on its commitment to follow through with reforms, especially on pension and electricity tariffs
  that led the Bank to cancel the second loan. Backsliding on electricity tariff reforms was due to
  consumers protesting the rise in tariffs without a corresponding improvement in service. Changes within
  the Ministry of Finance (the Bank’s counterpart) confused its staff, obliging the Bank to rely on the Prime
  Minister’s Office as its main counterpart.



  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  Most implementing agencies did not follow through during supervision, in particular, on gathering and
  providing adequate information to monitor and assess program performance.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRAQ 2nd Expenditure Rationalization DPF(P161167)




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  In the first and second objectives most of the M&E indicators were relevant to inform about the achievement
  of objectives, even if the meaning of the objective on improving expenditure rationalization was unclear and
  the indicators measured outputs (e.g., civil servants’ payment and attendance tracked electronically). In the
  expenditure rationalization objective, some prior actions were unlikely to lead to the expected result (e.g.,
  draft social insurance law and financial sustainability of the pension fund). In the objective of improving
  transparency and governance of SOEs the link between publishing their financial statements and better
  governance is, at best, weak if not supported by the political and legal systems that make it possible the
  better governance. Meeting the target does not ensure meeting the objective, also applicable to the debt
  management objective.



b. M&E Implementation
  The program document noted that “data availability and quality to monitor progress is sufficient for reform
  monitoring although some institutions have difficulty in providing some data.” (par. 106) This outlook
  possibly explains why the program lacked a M&E plan, so there was no plan to implement; its absence was
  felt during preparation of the ICR when most of the data on indicators in the results framework were not
  readily available (ICR, par. 49).



c. M&E Utilization
  The Bank and the government collected the information at the ICR preparation stage and did not use it
  during its implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  Reduced CO2 emissions constitute a major benefit along with a healthier environment for relatively poor
  people living in the gas flaring areas. The program document reports that Iraq’s CO2 emissions stood out at
  140 million tons per year and the expected reduction in CO2 emissions would be about 12 million tons per
  year. Since some 60 percent of the flaring was eliminated (actual -387/program-629), CO2 emissions were
  reduced by about 7 million tons per year.



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IRAQ 2nd Expenditure Rationalization DPF(P161167)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
The ICR does not report issues on fiduciary compliance



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory      ---
                               Satisfactory
Risk to Development
                               High                   High                         ---
Outcome
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory      ---
                               Satisfactory
                                                                                   The government and some of
                                                                                   its agencies failed to move
                               Moderately             Moderately
Borrower Performance                                                               ahead with some important
                               Satisfactory           Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   reforms when the fiscal
                                                                                   situation improved
Quality of ICR                                        Modest                       ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

The ICR offers the following lessons.
Policy reforms can be designed and implemented during periods of serious conflict and economic crisis.
Development policy operations help to make this possible by providing critical budget support, giving the
authorities sufficient space to address the problems identified.

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IRAQ 2nd Expenditure Rationalization DPF(P161167)




In electricity, experience with past reforms and failures to improve service delivery narrowed the opportunities
for implementing successful reforms as they emphasized increasing tariffs without simultaneous improvements
in the quality of service. Therefore, in situations like this a strategy of effective communication explaining the
scope and benefits of reform can help reduce the risks of protest against rises in electricity prices.

The program’s experience shows that multisectoral reforms are feasible and implementable in conflict contexts,
despite the higher risk that entails selecting a broad program. Two benefits call for this approach. First, a “more
ambitious” program can draw a larger level of international support for the country. Second, higher risks can
bring more rewards, even if the program does not achieve all its expected results and benefits.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presents a good overview of the initial conditions in the country and examines the achievements and
shortcomings of the program in a clear manner. It presents adequate information for the reader to know the
program and assess its achievements. The report, however, has some shortcomings. First, the ICR
concludes that all PDOs record modest achievements (par. 73) and rates efficacy as substantial (par. 74), a
conclusion inconsistent with the modest achievements in all the PDOs noted in paragraph 73. On this point the
ICR team explained to IEG that the inconsistency is confined to part of paragraph (73) that was not updated as
it should have been. Second, the ICR rates some outcomes based on the triggers for the second operation
(e.g. Pillar 3) but does not rate other outcomes (pension reform and gas-to-power) with the argument that
“Because this approval did not take place, the results indicators on pension reform and gas-to-power strategy,
while reported, are not strictly considered in the efficacy rating” (Par. 55 and the Results framework Analysis
table, p. vi-ix). The ICR team further explained to IEG that pension reform and gas-to-power were not
supported by any DPF2 actions, and thus could not be attributed to the operation. Third, the numbers about
inclusion error in the results framework table and in the text differ (in the table, the numbers are 43 percent for
the baseline and 0 percent for target achieved; in par. 60 the numbers are 82.5 and 72.3 percent).The ICR
team explained that the difference in numbers obeys to using the numbers in the database of existing
beneficiaries for the first set and the numbers from the national survey for the second set.

While not affecting the quality of its content, the report’s length more than doubles the length the guidelines
recommend.

The review rates the quality of the ICR as modest.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 13
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IRAQ 2nd Expenditure Rationalization DPF(P161167)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Modest




                                                                                     Page 13 of 13
