     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022068

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P114859                                    LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Lesotho                                    Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52290,TF-14147                         30-Jun-2017                                           14,728,016.58

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Apr-2013                                30-Jun-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            12,000,000.00                                      4,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             16,000,000.00                                      3,906,234.01

 Actual                                         14,728,016.58                                      3,906,234.01




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Salim J. Habayeb             Joy Behrens                     IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Grant Agreement (p. 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 5), the objectives of
   the original project, titled "Maternal and Newborn Health Performance-Based Financing (PBF) Project," were
   "to improve the utilization and quality of maternal and newborn health services in selected districts in
   Lesotho." Nine of the country's ten districts (excluding only the more well developed capital district, Maseru)
   were to be covered.



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)



   A 2016 restructuring revised the objectives to: "(i) increase utilization and improve the quality of primary health
   services in selected districts in Lesotho with a particular focus on maternal and child health, tuberculosis (TB),
   and HIV; (ii) improve contract management of select public-private partnerships (PPPs); and (iii) in the event
   of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, provide immediate and effective response to said Eligible Crisis or
   Emergency" (Restructuring Paper, p. 2). The project's title was changed to "Health Sector Performance
   Enhancement Project," and its scope was reduced from nine to six districts due to low implementation
   capacity. New PDO-level indicators were added to measure achievement of the added objectives.

   A 2018 restructuring scaled up the project's coverage from six to all ten districts (Restructuring Paper, p. 7),
   as implementation capacity had improved and the government requested institutionalization of the PBF
   approach throughout the entire country. PDO-level indicators were revised to harmonize with the Health
   Management Information System (HMIS) and routine utilization data from the project, replacing indicators that
   were sourced from infrequently conducted household surveys that could provide only estimated data for
   project intervention areas.

   Due to the revisions of project objectives and scope, a split rating will be performed. At the time of the 2016
   restructuring, 20% of Bank financing had been disbursed.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  15-Nov-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The original project had two components, to be implemented in three phases: a one-year pilot in two
   districts; then gradual scale-up in the subsequent two phases to the other seven participating districts. The
   pilot districts, Leribe and Quthing, were chosen in order to provide a range of geographic balance, and were
   also based on district maternal health indicators relative to other districts (one was worse and one better
   than the national average) and the existing capacity of District Health Management Teams (DHMTs) (PAD,
   p. 34). The timing of scale-up was to be determined by each individual district's readiness to do so (PAD, p.
   7). All districts of the country were eventually to be covered, with the exception of the capital district,
   Maseru, where health outcomes were better than the others.

   Component 1: Improving Maternal and Newborn Health (MNH) Service Delivery at Community,
   Primary, and Secondary Levels through PBF (appraisal, US$ 13.7 million; 2016 restructuring, US$ 11.45
   million; 2018 restructuring, US$ 11.64 million; actual US$ 11.64 million) was to complement support
   provided by the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA) to renovate, refurbish, and equip health centers. The

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)



project was to build on these infrastructure improvements with supply-side activities designed to strengthen
the quality and utilization of health services.

The first subcomponent, delivery of MNH services through PBF, was to support the provision of quality
MNH services as well as selected services in the Essential Services Package by providing PBF to village
health workers (VHWs), health centers, and hospitals. The choice of specific services was "carefully
selected with inputs from various departments of the Ministry of Health (MOH)" (PAD, p. 22). PBF was also
to be made to DHMTs based on their supervision of health facilities, using a quality checklist. Overall, the
PBF was intended to stimulate health worker motivation and productivity, and to provide additional cash to
overcome obstacles affecting the quality or continuum of patient care.

The second subcomponent, PBF implementation and supervision support, was to provide technical
assistance and build in-country capacity for PBF through a performance purchasing technical assistance
(PPTA) firm; this firm's role was to diminish as implementing entities and facilities gained greater experience
with PBF implementation. Capacity building was to be provided to the MOH and Christian Health
Association of Lesotho (CHAL, the other main provider of health services in the country) at central and
district levels, and for district and community councils.

At the 2016 restructuring, this component was renamed "Improving Health Service Delivery through PBF."
It was revised to suspend implementation of the VHW PBF program, due to challenges associated with its
organization; adjust the PBF program at the district hospital level to focus more on quality of services, and
to provide individual bonuses to hospital staff; and to revise the quantitative incentive indicators at the
health center level to include additional HIV and TB indicators. Planned scale-up was reduced from nine to
six districts.

At the 2018 restructuring, PBF was to be scaled up to all ten districts.

Component 2: Training of Health Professionals and VHWs and Improving Monitoring and Evaluation
(M&E) Capacity (appraisal, US$ 2.3 million; 2016 restructuring, US$ 3.73 million; 2018 restructuring, no
change; actual US$ 3.73 million). This component was to support an ongoing MOH program for training
doctors, nurse anesthetists, and midwives to achieve an acceptable standard of competency in the delivery
of MNH services, including emergency obstetric and neonatal care. Health center nurses were also to be
trained on drug supply management, and pharmacists on supply chain management and quantification of
health commodities. M&E capacity was to be developed through strengthening of the HMIS in all districts
and building capacity of M&E personnel at the central and district levels. The project was to support health
facility quality of care assessments and a baseline household survey. An impact evaluation of the project
was to be carried out with a separate Bank-executed Health Results Innovation Trust Fund (HRITF).

At the 2016 restructuring, this component was renamed "Capacity Building Support to the Ministry of
Health." Its scope of activities was expanded to provide additional support to strengthen MOH procurement
capacity; better align the MOH's Annual Joint Review with health sector strategic objectives; and improve
the integration into the health system of the Queen 'Mamohato Memorial Hospital (QMMH) network, a
PPP that had replaced the old national referral hospital and established filter clinics in Maseru in 2010-
2011, supported through the International Finance Corporation. The hospital accounts for approximately
30% of the MOH budget.

Also at the 2016 restructuring, two components were added:



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)



   Component 3: Enhance PPP Management Capacity within the Government of Lesotho (2016
   restructuring: US$ 0.82 million; 2018 restructuring, US$ 0.63 million; actual, US$ 0.63 million), to support
   the QMMH network PPP, including PPP management capacity building. Activities were to include the
   provision of technical assistance to strengthen oversight over PPPs. The Ministry of Finance (MOF) was
   added as an implementing agency to be responsible for this component.

   Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response Component, was a no-cost component designed to
   support activities related to mitigating the impact of shocks.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was originally to be financed by a US$ 12 million Specific Investment Loan from the
   International Development Association and a US$ 4 million grant from the HRITF from Norway and the
   United Kingdom. The government was to make a parallel US$ 4 million contribution to cover operating costs
   for the MOH PBF unit, and the costs of scale-up for three districts during the project's third and fourth years.
   Actual total costs were US$ 17.28 million of the planned US$ 20 million, reflecting an actual government
   contribution of US$ 2.55 million and Bank financing of US$ 14.73 million. The project team confirmed that
   the difference between planned and actual Bank financing was due to exchange rate fluctuations.



   The project was restructured twice:

         On November 15, 2016, the project's title, objectives, components, and results framework were
          revised. The closing date was extended by two years, from June 30, 2017 to June 30, 2019.
          Implementation arrangements were revised, and funds were reallocated.
         On May 5, 2018, the project's scope was increased and the results framework adjusted accordingly,
          and funds were again reallocated.



   An Additional Financing (AF) and project extension were discussed but ultimately cancelled. The Country
   Management Unit decided instead to consolidate the portfolio and incorporate activities into a new Nutrition
   and Health System Strengthening Project (2021-2025), under preparation. The project closed on June 30,
   2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At appraisal, Lesotho was off track for meeting Millennium Development Goals to reduce child mortality and
improve maternal health. In 2009, the maternal mortality ratio was high, at 1,155/100,000 live births, and
the under-five mortality rate had improved only slightly in the preceding 20 years, from 89/1,000 live births
in 1990 to 86/1,000 in 2011. Weak health service performance had contributed to poor health outcomes,


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)



               exacerbated by the HIV/AIDS epidemic. In 2012, Lesotho had the third highest adult HIV prevalence rate in
               the world (23%). Partly as a result, life expectancy at birth had declined from 60 years in 1992 to 49 years
               in 2012. The project's objectives were highly relevant to this country context.

               The government's 2012/13 - 2016/17 National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) identified "improve the
               quality of health; reduce maternal and child mortality; combat and prevent the spread of new infections of
               HIV and AIDS; and reduce social vulnerability, especially for children and old people" as one of its six key
               pillars. The project's original objectives were highly relevant to this strategy. Its revised objectives remained
               relevant to NSDP II (2018-2023), which has a strategic key pillar for strengthening human capital, including
               health, education, and skills development.

               The project was aligned with the Bank's Country Assistance Strategy at appraisal (2010-2014) and its
               second area of engagement, human development and service delivery, which explicitly called for reversal of
               negative trends in health and improved access to services. The revised objectives were aligned with the
               Country Partnership Framework (CPF) at closing (2016-2020), specifically its strategic objective on
               "Improving Health Outcomes," through: (i) "introduction of a performance-based approach in primary health
               centers and district hospitals to improve health outcomes, including the HIV/AIDS response"; a specific CPF
               indicator for "improved QMMH contract management" (CPF, p. 33); and an explicit "urgent" goal to integrate
               the QMMH network with the rest of the hospital system (p. 38). The CPF (p. 14) also notes that, given
               Lesotho's variable climate and vulnerability to natural disaster, Crisis Emergency Response Components
               were being restructured into all existing projects.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the utilization of maternal and newborn health services in selected districts in Lesotho / Increase
                             utilization of primary health services in selected districts in Lesotho with a particular focus on maternal and
                             child health

                             Rationale
                             The project's implicit theory of change held that the incentive structures of the PBF program would, facilitated
                             by complementary infrastructure investments through the MCA, increase the availability of health services
                             and their utilization in participating districts.



                             Outputs


                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)



The project supported capacity development at the PBF Unit of the MOH for management of day-to-day
implementation, M&E, and management of PBF activities. It also supported the National Sexual and
Reproductive Health Steering Committee to provide national-level policy guidance and oversight of project
activities. A PPTA organization with PBF implementation experience was contracted and worked on building
local capacity on strategic purchasing within the MOH. (The ICR [p. 30] indicated that the capacity building
work was completed and the firm was phased out, as planned; later comments from the Borrower stated that
implementation of the PPTA capacity building plan had advanced but was not completed when the project
closed.) At the district level, the project supported capacity building for district steering committees that
included DHMTs, district councils, CHAL representatives, and civil society organizations. These committees
supported oversight and supervision of PBF services at the district level.

171 health facilities were operating under PBF contracts at project closure, exceeding the original target of
107 and the revised target of 75. The PBF scheme was rolled out in the following sequence:

      2014: Quthing, Leribe
      July through October 2016: Mafeteng, Mohale's Hoek, Mokhotlong, Thaba-Tseka
      2018: Maseru, Berea, Butha Buthe, Qacha's Nek



Outcomes

The number of children under one year of age who were fully immunized at PBF-enrolled health facilities
increased from 22,834 in 2014 to 35,607 in 2019, exceeding the target of 31,440. This indicator was changed
from percentage to numerical terms at the 2018 restructuring. The ICR (p. 21) noted that this achievement
occurred despite shortages of vaccines. It also noted that, according to data from the Demographic and
Health Survey (DHS 2014) and Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS 2018), the two districts that enrolled
in PBF in 2014 saw significant increases in vaccine coverage, from 60.1% in 2014 to 81.5% in 2018, while
coverage nation-wide remained stagnant, suggesting that the project had an impact.

The number of women and children using basic nutrition services increased from 1,319 in 2016 to 1,808 in
2018, not reaching the target of 2,050. This indicator was added at the 2018 restructuring. The ICR (p. 22)
explained the underperformance as due to reductions in funding for VHWs by a key (unidentified)
development partner. DHS and MICS data, however, indicate progress in one of the two districts that enrolled
in PBF in 2014, Leribe, with the prevalence of underweight, stunting, and wasting decreasing from 8% to 5%,
31.3% to 29.8%, and 3.3% to 1.7%, respectively, against little to no progress at the national level. No
information was provided, however, on Quthing, the other 2014 pilot district.

The number of women using modern contraceptive methods in PBF-enrolled health facilities in target districts
increased from 70,956 in 2014 to 91,658 in 2019, not achieving the target of 117,900. This indicator was
adopted at the 2018 restructuring, to replace an initial indicator that covered only married women and to
change measurement from percentage to numerical terms (to match HMIS reporting). The ICR (p. 21) stated
that the underachievement was due to shortages of family planning commodities due to supply chain
management and budget reduction issues that were not within the control of the supported health facilities.
The ICR offered additional information from the DHS 2014 and MICS 2018 indicating that the prevalence of
married women aged 15-49 using modern contraception increased nationally from 59.8% in 2014 to 64.6% in



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)



2018; the two districts that enrolled in the PBF program in 2014 showed more modest improvement (Quthing,
increase from 63.6% in 2014 to 67% in 2018; Leribe, no change, 63.4% in 2014 and 63.6% in 2018).

The original project had an outcome indicator for percentage of pregnant women delivering in PBF-enrolled
health facilities. The ICR (p. 17) stated that this indicator was dropped because "the percentage of
institutional deliveries improved during project implementation and was relatively high," and therefore a
decision was made to include a more challenging indicator on family planning. However, the ICR presented
additional DHS/MICS data indicating that, nation-wide, coverage of institutional deliveries increased from
76.5% in 2014 to 89.4% in 2018, and deliveries attended by a skilled attendant from 77.9% in 2014 to 86.6%
in 2018. The ICR also provided information specifically on Quthing, one of the two pilot districts that began
PBF in 2014: institutional deliveries increased from 71.9% in 2014 to 87.8% in 2018, and deliveries with a
skilled attendant increased from 72.8% in 2014 to 89.1% in 2018, in both cases a larger improvement than
nation-wide. Similar information for the other pilot district, Leribe, was not provided. Original indicators on
pregnant women in the lowest income quintile delivering at health facilities, women with at least four antenatal
care visits during pregnancy, births attended by skilled health personnel, mothers who received postnatal
care within two days of childbirth, pregnant women receiving antenatal care from a health provider, and
children under five years of age whose height and weight are monitored regularly were dropped because of
lack of data. The ICR provided additional data that the percentage of women nation-wide with a live birth
and at least one antenatal care visit increased from 94.7% in 2014 to 96.4% in 2018; with at least four
antenatal care visits increased from 74.4% in 2014 to 76.6% in 2018; and with their first antenatal care visit in
the first trimester of pregnancy increased from 41.2% in 2014 to 57.1% in 2018. Separate data were not
provided for the two pilot districts that enrolled in PBF in 2014, and therefore the project's specific impact on
these improvements is not clear.

For some indicators, the ICR provided district-level DHS/MICS data for some of the "Phase II" districts that
began PBF in mid- to late 2016. It is not clear how much of the change between 2014 and 2018 on these
indicators took place before versus after the project took effect in these districts, and therefore what specific
impact the project may have had.

Overall, while progress on use of modern contraceptive methods was modest, the data plausibly indicate that
the project had significant impact on immunization coverage, on nutrition services in Leribe, and on maternal
health services in Quthing. Achievement of this objective is therefore rated Substantial.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the quality of maternal and newborn health services in selected districts in Lesotho / Increase quality
of primary health services in selected districts in Lesotho with a particular focus on maternal and child health

Rationale


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)



The theory of change for this objective held that on-the-job clinical training and coaching, as well as the
financial autonomy granted to facilities under the PBF program to expeditiously procure necessary inputs,
would contribute to improved quality of services.



Outputs

Four quality checklists were revised and streamlined, meeting the target. The University of Pretoria worked
with MOH in June 2018 to revise the checklists to put additional emphasis on health workers' clinical skills.

826 health personnel received training focused on clinical services, nearly doubling the target of 465. This
training included a mentoring program at all public hospitals in the country. The focus of training was on
maternal, newborn, and child health issues, as well as handling of complex HIV/AIDS and TB cases.
Coaching and mentoring included case simulations/vignettes, provided by the project to complement regular
trainings.

2266 health personnel received non-clinical health systems-related training, not reaching the target of 6500.
The ICR (p. 24) stated that the shortfall was "due to the delayed adoption of a new VHW policy
which involved significant revisions to their training curriculum, thereby preventing them from benefiting from
planned training activities under the project." Later comments from the Borrower stated that "the shortfall was
due to a lack of a standardized VHW policy that could be adopted across government and partner
implementation activities. The VHW policy was eventually approved in November 2019."

There were 42 District Steering Committee meetings to provide feedback and grievance redress mechanisms
based on assessment to facilities and involving community representatives, exceeding the target of 18
meetings. Government comments on the ICR (p. 73) noted that community participation helped health
centers to address local issues that would otherwise have gone unaddressed, including advocacy for repair of
roads and access to water and electricity.



Outcomes

The average health facility quality of care score in target districts increased from 59.6% in 2015 to 81% in
2019, exceeding the original target of 50% and the revised target of 78%. This score is a composite indicator
covering staff attendance, record-keeping and timeliness of reports, adherence to protocols for child survival,
environmental health, general consultations, reproductive health, essential drugs management, tracer drugs,
maternal health, sexually transmitted infections, HIV, TB, and community-based services. Government
comments on the ICR (p. 73) reported that PBF incentives produced a reduction in health facility staff
absenteeism and facilitate development of business planning at the health facility level to prioritize immediate
needs (for example, hiring of nurses to conduct deliveries and provide other services).

63% of maternal deaths at QMMH from referrals in PBF-enrolled district hospitals were caused directly by a
maternity-related condition, compared with 88% such deaths from referrals in non-PBF-enrolled district
hospitals, indicating better quality handing of these cases in PBF-enrolled hospitals. (The ICR did not provide
the time frame for this data.)


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)



The community-based satisfaction score for PBF-enrolled facilities in the target districts increased from 75%
in 2014 to 78% in 2018, not meeting the target of 89%. The ICR (p. 24) explained that this shortfall likely
arose from shortages in health commodities due to budget and stock management issues at the central level,
and reduction in VHW case management support following reduced funding from a key development partner.

An original indicator on health facilities reporting stock-outs of tracer medicines and medical supplies was
dropped "because it was not considered relevant to the PDO" (ICR, p. 55). Stock-outs are part of the health
facility quality of care score.

Overall, despite the shortfall in achievement of the target for community-based satisfaction with health
facilities, the exceeding of the target for health facility quality of care scores merits a Substantial rating for this
objective.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
There was no original objective in this area.

Rationale
There was no original objective in this area.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Increase utilization of primary health services in selected districts in Lesotho with a particular focus on TB and
HIV (new objective)

Revised Rationale
The theory of change and outputs for the first objective apply here, with PBF incentives to health
facilities having been added for TB and HIV services.



Outcomes

The number of patients started on TB treatment in the target districts declined from 3725 in 2014 to 3428 in
2019, not reaching the target of 4220. The underperformance was consistent across districts, explained in the
ICR (p. 21) as due to decreasing TB incidence in the country and therefore a positive outcome. This indicator

                                                                                                         Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)



was added at the 2018 restructuring, implying that the trend of decreasing TB incidence should have been
apparent at that point and a more appropriate indicator chosen that would reflect level of utilization of services
for those people who have been diagnosed with TB.

The number of people currently on HIV treatment in the target districts increased from 128,037 in 2016 to
213,233 in 2018, surpassing the target of 178,300. This indicator replaced an earlier indicator on prevention
of mother-to-child transmission of HIV at the 2018 restructuring, in order to measure all HIV patients.

Due to lack of data on TB services, but overachievement of targets for HIV services, achievement of this
objective is rated Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
There was no original objective in this area.

Rationale
There was no original objective in this area.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 4 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve the quality of primary health services in selected districts in Lesotho with a particular focus on TB
and HIV (new objective)

Revised Rationale
The project's original indicator for tuberculosis treatment success rate was dropped due to lack of reliable
routine data. The ICR (p. 54) stated that a similar indicator was to be included as part of the results
framework for a Southern Africa TB project.

Due to lack of data, achievement of this objective is rated Negligible.



Revised Rating
Negligible



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)




OBJECTIVE 5
Objective
There was no original objective in this area.

Rationale
There was no original objective in this area.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 5 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve contract management of select public-private partnerships (PPPs) (new objective)

Revised Rationale
The project's implicit theory of change held that training of staff across relevant agencies would improve
contract management skills, leading to better contract management in practice.



Outputs

The project supported PPP training and certification of an unspecified number of officials from MOH, MOF,
and the Ministries of Development Planning and Public Works. It also assisted with development of PPP legal
and regulatory frameworks in the country. Four Terms of Reference for key PPP positions in the government
were drafted and approved, meeting the target of four.



Outcomes

Only one of the four planned MOF Central PPP Unit and MOH PPP Contract Management Office positions
was established and fully staffed, not meeting the target of four. The ICR (p. 25) explained that the shortfall
was due to MOH and MOF delays in approving the positions as well as protracted procurement procedures
(failure to attract viable candidates and political delays in decision processes). Consultants for two of the
remaining three positions were identified in the second quarter of 2019, but they were not hired due to project
closure. Subsequently, these two positions were filled through the Public Sector Modernization Project based
at the MOF.

Due to the shortfall in achieving planned staffing goals for PPP contract management, achievement of this
objective is rated Modest.



Revised Rating

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)



                            Modest


                            OBJECTIVE 6
                            Objective
                            There was no original objective in this area.

                            Rationale
                            There was no original objective in this area.



                            Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


                            OBJECTIVE 6 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            In the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, provide immediate and effective response to said Eligible
                            Crisis or Emergency (new objective)

                            Revised Rationale
                            No such emergency occurred during the project period. However, it should be noted that the ICR does not
                            provide information on project activities that would have prepared for the eventuality of an emergency.



                            Revised Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The Bank was one of many donors supporting Lesotho in the area of MNH, TB, and HIV/AIDS, but the
                            information presented in the ICR was not sufficient to assess relative attribution of achieved outcomes
                            specifically to the Bank's interventions, or to understand how the Bank's interventions contributed to achieved
                            outcomes in a crowded donor environment.

                            Overall efficacy under the original objectives is rated Substantial, based on substantial achievement of the
                            objectives to improve utilization and quality of MNH services.




                                                                                                                              Page 12 of 20
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)




         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Overall efficacy under the revised objectives is also rated Substantial, but with moderate shortcomings related
         to lack of information on quality of TB and HIV services, and modest achievement of the objective to improve
         PPP contract management. In addition, there was no information provided in the ICR on project activities that
         would have prepared the country for an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, should one have occurred.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The economic analysis at appraisal found a net present value (NPV) of US$ 89.8 million and an economic rate
of return (ERR) of 70%, robust to sensitivity analysis undertaken to address uncertainties across several
variables (life expectancy and gross domestic product). The analysis excluded indirect costs and benefits
because of measurement difficulties. Its assumptions, including a 12% discount rate and a ten-year time
horizon, were transparent and reasonable (PAD, p. 94). A fiscal impact analysis showed that the PBF instrument
would bring substantial resources into the sector in the foreseeable future, especially for MNH services,
contributing to sustainability of development outcomes after project closure.

The ICR's analysis (pp. 62-66) found an NPV of US$ 48.4 million and rate of return of 14%. These
findings varied from the PAD's estimates because different assumptions were used (5% and 10% discount
rates, and elimination of double counting of beneficiaries who may have received services across multiple years
of the project), and because some original outcome targets were not met, the original investment was not
completely disbursed, and the project's two restructurings resulted in different scope, targets, and resource
allocations. Sensitivity analysis showed that the results were sensitive to changes in assumptions, but all results
showed that the investment was justified on economic grounds (ICR, p. 28).

The ICR (pp. 28-29) noted some significant operational inefficiencies. The initial pace of implementation was
affected by incomplete financial management (FM) and M&E arrangements, though FM and funds flow capacity
constraints were eventually resolved as the MOH Project Accounting Unit (PAU) took over responsibility for the
project and health facilities opened bank accounts. Commitment to the project in the early phases of
implementation was not universal among government officials, as PBF was a relatively unknown instrument,
particularly at the district and facility levels. Recruitment of the PPTA organization and staffing of the MOH PBF
Unit took a long time, contributing to the slow start of implementation. Other delays resulted from procurement
issues, including inadequate specifications for medical equipment and issues with bid evaluation teams. At the
national level, transitions in MOH leadership contributed to delays in "key decisions that affected the smooth




                                                                                                          Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)



running of the project" (ICR, p. 32). Low capacity and high turnover of senior government officials contributed to
delays in Quthing.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 70.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              14.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's original and revised objectives were highly relevant to country context, government strategy, and
Bank strategy at appraisal and closing. Overall efficacy is rated Substantial under both the original and revised
objectives, reflecting the PBF scheme's contributions to utilization and quality of MNH services and to utilization
of HIV and TB services, but no information on the quality of HIV and TB services, and only modest achievement
of improvements in PPP contract management. Efficiency is rated Modest due to implementation inefficiencies.
On balance, these ratings reflect moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and
achievement, producing an Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR (p. 36), PBF is now a "popular and well accepted approach … whose benefits are
appreciated by stakeholders." After project closure, the MOH continued to implement the PBF scheme by
paying for performance from counterpart funding that had been mobilized for the anticipated AF of the project
(which did not take place). The follow-on Nutrition and Health Systems Strengthening Project (2021-2025,
under preparation) is designed to finance the provision of quality grants and bonus grants to eligible health
facilities, based on lessons learned under this project. The Ministry of Development Planning has expressed
interest in implementing similar approaches in other sectors (ICR, p. 32). Other donors, including UNICEF
and UNFPA, were also mobilized to contribute to PBF efforts. However, there is risk that current levels of
commitment may not be sustained because PBF is not institutionalized in government accounting systems,

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)



and budget items for PBF-like interventions are not clearly defined in government budgets. Government
comments on the ICR (p. 77) note that, with the failure to implement the project's requested AF, the last four
districts had less than one year to roll out PBF. There is also risk that human resources trained under the
project may leave the health sector or the country.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design learned lessons from experience with PBF approaches in other countries, particularly
  Rwanda, Zimbabwe, Cambodia, and Afghanistan (PAD, pp. 11-12; ICR, p. 31): the need to ensure
  transparency and independent verification; the identification of individual health facilities as the
  appropriate recipients of PBF proceeds; the need for clear approval channels for invoices; the importance
  of high-quality training for health workers and supervisors involved in PBF, as well as resources to
  facilitate effective health facility supervision; and the need to measure results through a rigorous impact
  evaluation. At appraisal, Lesotho had some limited prior experience with output-based financing models
  for improved service delivery: the PPP hospital and filter clinics in the capital, with subsidies from the
  Global Partnership for Output-Based Aid; the introduction of performance indicators in service contracts
  with CHAL and LRCS; and small PBF projects supported by the NGO Partners in Health to test their
  feasibility in rural communities. The Bank had supported health sector reform through a two-phase
  Adaptable Program Loan (2000-2005 and 2005-2009), and through an HIV and AIDS Technical
  Assistance Project (2009-2015) to build capacity of government and civil society to respond to the
  epidemic. Important lessons were drawn from this experience as well (PAD, p. 12): the need to avoid
  excessive ambition and to focus on practical institutional arrangements, taking capacity limitations
  explicitly into consideration. Existing systems were used, and plans made for their strengthening, rather
  than creating separate fiduciary and other systems. Project design was also guided by two 2010
  feasibility studies conducted with resources from the HRITF. These studies recommended a focus
  on reducing health sector spending inefficiency by financing services based on performance, and
  addressing human resources shortages by maximizing the productivity and performance of existing
  health care workers through incentive-based compensation schemes.

  Implementation arrangements were well specified at entry (PAD, pp. 13-15), including the continuation of
  a Technical Working Group to provide operational and administrative support for the PBF scheme, a
  detailed Project Implementation Manual, and the establishment of a PBF Unit in the MOH Health
  Planning and Statistics Department to manage day-to-day implementation. Overall implementation risk
  was assessed as High at appraisal (PAD, pp. 19-20), related to the introduction of a new instrument,
  PBF, in a relatively low-capacity setting. Several key aspects of project design -- gradual scale-up,
  and technical assistance and training -- were specifically intended to mitigate this risk. However, some
  key risks, including the project's institutional complexity and lack of initial buy-in for the PBF scheme,
  were not adequately mitigated.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)



  M&E design included a clear set of objectives and plausible results chain connecting project activities to
  intended outcomes. However, the results framework depended on household surveys that were
  conducted only every several years.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were conducted regularly, and a health specialist was based in Lesotho to provide
 regular implementation support. Fiduciary and other subject matter technical specialists were part of
 supervision missions. The Bank proactively and flexibly restructured the project, including its results
 framework, to adjust to evolving implementation capacity and circumstances. Task team leadership
 (TTL) turnover was minimal, with only two TTLs over the project's lifetime.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Health Planning and Statistics Department (HPSD) of the MOH was responsible for project monitoring.
 Indicators, baselines, and targets were clearly defined and were adequate measures of implementation
 progress and achievement of objectives. Data were to be drawn from the MOH's routine HMIS, annual
 health facility quality of care assessments, household surveys, PBF Unit administrative records, and
 monthly supervisory visits. Dependence on household surveys conducted every few years would prove to
 be a shortcoming, resolved through revisions of the results framework at restructuring. Several
 mechanisms were put in place for ex-ante and ex-post verification of data reported by health facilities.
 Identified M&E capacity challenges at appraisal included staff shortages; inadequate data quality
 assessment and verification; lack of an MOH M&E plan/framework; separation of TB, HIV/AIDS,
 immunization, and nutrition data from the HPSD M&E Unit's HMIS; and low use of HMIS data to inform
 decision-making at the facility level. The MCA was providing support for strengthening the HMIS, and the
 United States President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief was building M&E capacity at the central and
 district levels. The project's M&E capacity building efforts under its second component were designed to
 complement the activities of these other donors.




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)



b. M&E Implementation
  At the two restructurings, and as a web-based HMIS was developed that could provide information on
  regularly collected indicators, the results framework was amended to rely less on national surveys that
  took place only at extended intervals. Data for monitoring the indicators in the results framework were
  routinely collected. The project also contributed financially to the collection of MICS data to supplement
  information from the HMIS. The MOH PBF Unit included a staff member with responsibility for M&E, and
  Bank supervision missions included an M&E specialist. According to the ICR (p. 34), the Senior Health
  Specialist based at the Bank country office "took a hands-on approach to capacity building for M&E of the
  PBF Unit on a routine basis." According to the Operations Portal, the planned impact evaluation was
  conducted in 2017, but the ICR did not mention it.

  It was an important shortcoming that, at the 2016 restructuring, outcome indicators were not added to
  measure full achievement of the added objectives. In particular, there was no outcome indicator to
  measure improved quality of TB and HIV services. This lack of data precludes full assessment of project
  efficacy.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 34), data from the M&E system were used consistently to inform project
  management and decision making, "particularly due to the data-intensive nature of PBF." Routine data
  collected by the M&E system determined payments of PBF funds to the implementing entities. "Policy
  making and advocacy at all levels of the project were informed by these results" (ICR, p. 34).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Environmental Assessment category "B" and triggered OP/BP 4.01, Environmental
   Assessment, due to risks associated with handling and disposal of medical waste. The MOH was to
   implement the Consolidated Lesotho National Health Care Waste Management Plan that had been
   prepared and adopted in 2010, and then updated in August 2012 specifically for the project. No major works
   were to be financed by the project, but health centers and hospitals could use the PBF under the first
   component for minor repairs of existing health structures. Quarterly quality assessments were carried out
   for health centers and hospitals to monitor compliance with national regulations and guidelines. Based on
   these assessments, "performance on environment health in health centers located in the initial six districts
   of the project improved between 2014 and 2018" (ICR, p. 34). The ICR did not make a clear statement
   about compliance with Bank safeguard policies, but the project team later confirmed compliance.




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   At appraisal, the Bank conducted an FM Assessment of the MOH and CHAL, concluding that FM
   arrangements met the Bank's minimum requirements. During implementation, independent external audits
   were carried out regularly. There was one reported qualified external audit due to lack of reconciliation of
   accounts; the other audits were unqualified. According to the ICR (p. 32), human resources challenges led
   to weak FM capacity at the country level, contributing to initial slow project implementation. These issues
   were resolved through capacity building during the project period.

   Key identified procurement issues at appraisal included staffing, limited capacity of existing staff, and the
   potential risk of using government or CHAL procurement procedures for Bank-financed activities. Training,
   strengthening of procurement systems, prior review of selected contracts, and preparation of a
   Procurement Manual were implemented to solve these problems. Nevertheless, procurement processes
   experienced delays, particularly during bid evaluation processes.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 37-38) contained several insightful lessons, four of which are summarized here by IEG:



      Piloting and phased implementation of PBF projects is good practice. In this case, the
         experience of the two pilot districts allowed for smoother implementation and scale-up in
         subsequent districts.


                                                                                                     Page 18 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)



       The absence of PBF budget items in MOH and other sector budgets is a risk for
        sustainability of the benefits of PBF-like interventions. In this case, PBF is not yet
        institutionalized in government budget and accounting systems, posing a risk to the project's
        development outcomes.
       Early staffing of key positions is essential for quick start-up. In this case, there were
        delays in getting the project up to speed due to low or no staffing in key areas: the PPTA, the
        MOH PBF Unit, and key FM staff.
       PBF is facilitated by concurrent health system strengthening in human resources and
        drug supply management, as was undertaken by the project.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  To understand what worked and what did not with the rollout of PBF across districts, and with the
  strengthening of the PPP and its relationship to the overall health sector.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was comprehensive and results-oriented. It carefully tracked the evolution of the project's theory of
change and results frameworks through its two complex restructurings. It integrated DHS and MICS data to
supplement information from the project's M&E system in its assessment of outcomes. The assumptions and
methodology governing the efficiency analysis were clearly explained. However, there were moderate
shortcomings. The presentation of project cost figures was inconsistent. Despite the presence of numerous
other donors in the health sector during the project's lifetime, there was no discussion of attribution
issues. The document was lengthy and somewhat repetitive.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
LS-Health Sector Performance Enhancement (P114859)




                                                                                  Page 20 of 20
