     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-PFM Reform Support Project (P143197)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022104

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P143197                                   LS-PFM Reform Support Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Lesotho                                   Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53550                                 03-Jul-2017                                            4,762,821.79

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Feb-2014                               03-Jun-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           5,500,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            5,241,043.31                                                0.00

 Actual                                        4,762,821.79                                                0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Malathi S.                 Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Jayawickrama




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) was to improve the quality and timeliness of public financial
   management (PFM) information in support of the Government’s Public Finance Management Action Plan
   (PFMRAP) to improve budget execution (Project Appraisal Document (PAD), p. 8).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
                                                                                                  Page 1 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-PFM Reform Support Project (P143197)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project supported three components:

   Component 1: Support for improving the stability and reliability of the existing Integrated Financial
   Management Information System (IFMIS) platform (Approval: US$0.752m; Actual: US$0.53m). This
   component aimed to improve the stability, performance and reliability of the existing IFMIS platform and
   support the implementation of the following key activities to address technical and operational challenges,
   and lay a solid foundation for the expansion and modernization of IFMIS platform: (i) improve existing wide-
   area network connectivity; (ii) improve primary and backup IFMIS data centers; (iii) activate the Electronic
   Funds Transfer (EFT) interface with the Central Bank of Lesotho (CBL); and (iv) clean IFMIS databases and
   improving accounting controls.

   Component 2: Support for expansion and modernization of IFMIS platform (Approval: US$3.913m;
   Actual: US$2.94m). This component aimed to upgrade, configure and extend the use of the existing IFMIS
   software to support simplified business architecture from a stable and well-performing technology platform.
   Activities supported were: (i) Information Technology (IT) audit of the IFMIS platform; (ii) PFM business
   process re-engineering; and (iii) expansion and modernization of the IFMIS platform.

   Component 3: Support for change management, training and project implementation (Actual:
   US$0.834m; Actual: US$1.51m). This component sought to facilitate the provision of technical assistance
   (TA) to support change management and capacity building requirements of the Office of the Accountant-
   General, the core IFMIS team, the PFM staff of the selected Line Ministries, the Cabinet, the Public
   Accounts Committee, the CBL, development partners, and other stakeholders. The component supported
   implementation of several adaptive initiatives to ensure sustainable capacity to run the system, stakeholder
   backing/enforcement and sound project implementation including: (i) support for change management &
   training; (ii) support for Project implementation; and (iii) audit of financial activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost and financing. The original IDA commitment was SDR 3.6 million (US$5.5 million equivalent).
   The revised amount was US$5.2 million. The actual disbursed amount was US$4.76 million. At the mid-
   term review, it was realized that the extension of the IFMIS would hamper the achievement of the PDO, as it
   was inadequately prepared. Therefore, the Project’s scope was reduced at a Level 2 restructuring approved
   on June 30, 2017, and the extension of the IFMIS into district councils was excluded. This resulted in net
   savings of around US$1.0 million.

   This provided the room to absorb a foreign exchange loss of about UU$0.6 million, and reallocate funds to
   several training facilities.

   Dates. The operation was approved on February 6, 2014; it became effective on May 24, 2016. The original
   closing date of July 3, 2017. At the Government’s request to ‘go-live’ with the upgraded IFMIS on April 1,


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 11
                                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                        LS-PFM Reform Support Project (P143197)



                                      2018, the project was extended to June 3, 2019, to provide adequate time to complete key activities related
                                      to the upgrade of the existing IFMIS software.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               Inefficiencies in Lesotho’s public financial management (PFM) had been identified as diminishing the
               effectiveness of public spending, especially in the social sector. Since 2000, the Government had not
               had timely and reliable in-year and annual financial information to support budget execution, monitoring and
               oversight (PAD, p. 2). This project was to help provide the government with the necessary information that
               is required to improve the effectiveness of public spending. Most notably, the IFMIS platform had only been
               partially used to support key budget execution functions of the Central Government over several years, as
               technical and adaptive challenges prevented the system from efficiently supporting daily operations and
               timely production of reliable data (ICR, p. 4). Pillar 6 of Lesotho’s National Strategic Development Plan
               (NSDP), 2012-2016 emphasized PFM interventions to improve the quality and timeliness of service delivery
               in an accountable and transparent manner. The Project and the PDO were consistent with Pillar 6 of the
               NSDP. The PDO was also in line with improving capacity to use public resources to meet NDSP targets,
               and also those of Vision 2020.

               The PDO was fully aligned with the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF), 2016-2020, Focus Area
               1 in particular, on improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the public sector. The PDO also
               supported the PFMRAP, under which the government set up a Reform Secretariat and Steering Committee
               at the Ministry of Finance (MOF). The Bank’s projects incorporate this structure in their implementation
               plans.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Objective 1. Improve the quality of PFM information

                             Rationale
                             The IFMIS had been deployed rapidly in 2009 and system implementation had taken place in just 16 months.
                             Despite training of many personnel to support the system, a World Bank assessment had shown several key
                             problems with the system. The theory of change was reasonable: that actions to improve the stability and

                                                                                                                                     Page 3 of 11
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-PFM Reform Support Project (P143197)



reliability of the IFMIS platform, along with training and change management, would reduce downtime, reduce
the use of commercial bank accounts, and capture more revenue transactions. This would in turn improve
PFM quality and timeliness, leading to improved effectiveness of public spending (ICR, p. 9).

The system’s activities needed to be sequenced for daily operations and reporting. Overall, in-year budget
reporting was unreliable. The three PDO indicators: (i) the availability of budget execution reports in IFMIS;
(ii) reconciliation of transactions; and (iii) new TSA bank accounts that are operational and carried forward
into the upgraded IFMIS – all measure improvements in the PDO.

PDO indicator 1: Improved reliability of in-year budget execution reports from IFMIS

Outputs: The project trained 90 percent of IFMIS users, against a target of 80 percent and a baseline of 40
percent; upgraded IFMIS servers and end-user equipment for operating the upgraded IFMIS; completed the
business process review to support configuration of the new version of IFMIS; improved wide-area network
connectivity (uptime) and IFMIS up time; and delivered and implemented the change management training
plan.

In-year budget execution reports were considered unreliable, due to lack of bank account reconciliations and
no month-end closing of the IFMIS. The project’s target was to produce these reports from the upgraded
IFMIS that are reliable.

In-year budget execution reports are now available in the upgraded IFMIS. Reliability of government data is
supported by reconciling the transactions recorded in the new Treasury Single Account (TSA) revenue and
expenditure bank accounts in the upgraded IFMIS with the transaction detail recorded by the CBL. (Although
month-end instructions have been issued to line ministries, the closing procedures in the upgraded IFMIS still
need to be initiated.) (ICR, p. 32-33).

An intermediate outcome indicator measured capture of line ministry revenue transactions in the IFMIS.
The baseline was that non-tax revenues collected by line ministries were not routinely captured in the IFMIS,
and there was ineffective monitoring at Treasury to ensure that this happened. While the IFMIS has been
adjusted to allow this, actual processing of line ministry revenue transactions hasn't yet begun. The project
team told IEG that the vendor’s expert was supposed to work on this module in March-April 2020, but the
work has been delayed by the COVID-19 pandemic.

PDO indicator 2: Stock of expenditure arrears available in IFMIS

Previously, there was no IFMIS data on the stock of expenditure arrears. The target was to make available
the stock of expenditure arrears online in the upgraded IFMIS. The upgraded IFMIS provides reports on
invoices recorded but not yet paid. MoF continues to collect data on all outstanding invoices from Ministries,
Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and these are recorded for payment in the upgraded IFMIS. The stock of
expenditure arrears is now available online in the upgraded IFMIS.

The PDO outcome targets were either met or exceeded, and have contributed to improving the quality of the
PFM information system. In the area of initial operational acceptance of the upgraded IFMIS,
User Acceptance had been inadequate, as only one test cycle was performed before production (see Section
7 on Risks). The MOF was in the process of migration to the IFMIS web-based version until April 2020. (ICR,
p. 17). This indicator has been partially achieved.


                                                                                                  Page 4 of 11
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               LS-PFM Reform Support Project (P143197)



                            PDO indicator 3: New TSA bank balances in the IFMIS

                            Before the project, no new TSA bank balances were available in the IFMIS. The target was to have new TSA
                            bank accounts that are operational and carried forward into the upgraded IFMIS. Actual: New TSA recurrent
                            and development expenditure bank accounts have been opened at the CBL and in the IFMIS. They are being
                            reconciled on a monthly basis.

                            Objective 1 is rated substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 2
                            Objective
                            Objective 2. Improve the timeliness of PFM information

                            Rationale
                            There were long delays in preparing the government's financial statements and presenting them to
                            Parliament. No statements had been submitted for audit within 15 months of the end of the financial year for
                            several years, and there was a three-year backlog in preparing statements -- 2008/09, 2009/10, and 2010/11.
                            Findings and recommendations were often outdated by the time of publication. Hence, MDAs faced little risk
                            of public pressure to take any remedial action. The project focused on reducing annual financial report
                            submission time to within the legal timeframe (August 31 of the following year). The target was: that the
                            FY2018/19 annual financial statements for budgetary central government would be under preparation and
                            contain data from the upgraded IFMIS on all financial assets and financial liabilities (ICR, p. 35). In practice,
                            the Government eradicated the backlog of annual financial statements, and submitted consolidated annual
                            financial statements for 2018/2019 within the legal time-frame to the Office of the Auditor General. The
                            upgraded IFMIS has not yet been configured to control and report on public debt transactions in a timely
                            manner. The revised target (which was achieved) is less ambitious than the original one, although reportedly
                            more appropriate because it was in line with areas supported by the project (see Section 9 below on M&E
                            Design).

                            The outputs mentioned above all contributed to improving the timeliness of PFM information. Objective 2 is
                            rated substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 11
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LS-PFM Reform Support Project (P143197)




  Rationale
  The above measures have improved the quality and timeliness of the PFM information system towards
  strengthening budget execution. The IFMIS was upgraded, and produces in-year budget reports without
  material concerns about data quality; annual financial statements are complete and submitted within the legal
  timeframe to the Office of the Auditor General, with all backlogs removed; online data on expenditure arrears
  are made available in the upgraded IFMIS; and new TSA bank accounts have been opened in the CBL where
  MDA’s accounts are reconciled every month. Both parts of the PDO are rated substantial; hence, overall
  efficacy is rated substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
It is difficult to carry out reliable cost-benefit and financial analyses of PFM capacity building interventions and
overall PFM systems, as the benefits are largely indirect and would be reaped over a longer term. The PAD
expected the project’s economic and financial benefits to be much higher than the investment of US$5.5 million.
The expected benefits from the project include: better PFM governance, implementation and service delivery, as
a result of improved budget credibility and resource allocation; efficient and transparent budget management;
and improved revenue administration capacity to provide services to the poor. The ICR argues that these
benefits could far exceed US$5.5 million (ICR, p. 18).

The ICR adescribes efficiency gains as a result of procurement reforms, in terms of accountability, structural
efficiency and system/process efficiency, and infrastructure improvements (ICR, p. 19).

There are some issues remaining with respect to the functioning of the IFMIS. These include; the new Chart of
Accounts used in the accounting system (Epicor) still to be fully adopted in the budget module of IFMIS, which
limits reporting in a number of areas of the government’s financial statistics; and on accounting and reporting,
although the accounting operations in Epicor are stable, they are constrained by the number of modules that
have not yet been implemented.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable


                                                                                                       Page 6 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-PFM Reform Support Project (P143197)



                                                                                   0
ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO's relevance is high. The quality of PFM information was improved – the IFMIS was upgraded and in-
year budget execution reports are now produced using the upgraded IFMIS. The reliability of these reports is
supported by reconciling transactions in the new revenue and expenditure bank accounts linked to the upgraded
IFMIS. MoF collects data on outstanding invoices and records then in the IFMIS. The timeliness of PFM
information has also improved—the three-year backlog in preparing annual financial statements has been
eliminated and annual financial statements are now submitted within the legal time-frame to the Office of the
Auditor General. Both parts of the PDO were substantially met, and efficiency is rated modest, based on
qualitative evaluation. Hence. the overall rating is moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Development outcomes achieved face the following high risks:

Technical risks - The software and hardware need to be regularly updated so there are no disruptions. The
ICR states that the software vendor is expected to leave Lesotho and the government has until June 2020 to
arrange post-warranty support. Existing and new users need to be trained to maintain the system..
Maintaining linkages between the IFMIS and other systems, such as payroll, and Centralized Budget
Management System (CBMS), are critical. The system also faces cybersecurity risk from the outside. Online
threats have sharply increased since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, with increases in hacking,
phishing attempts, and ransomware attacks. Authorities need to heighten their vigilance against such threats.

Power system risks - Power and network interruptions can also interfere with sustainable use of the
system. The entire system depends on a stable power supply and an efficient back-up system. The ICR
describes many areas that can be affected by interrupted power supply. For example, disruptions in the
running of the server can leave many tasks incomplete and affect overall data processors on the system.
The MoF has acquired technical experts to address these issues and improve available of IFMIS and CBMS.

Financial and economic risks: Vendor contracts need to be managed and budget resources need to be made
available for payments on such contracts to properly run and maintain the IFMIS. Low user acceptance of
the system can also pose a risk.




                                                                                                  Page 7 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-PFM Reform Support Project (P143197)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  A high-level workshop hosted by the Minister of Finance that included several ministers, members of
  Parliament, donors and key staff involved in the project confirmed the support for project implementation,
  although some users are still skeptical. The Bank team identified the risks of undertaking financial
  management reforms in a low capacity environment such as in Lesotho, and addressed these risks
  through extensive implementation support and investment in training. However, the original plan to
  upgrade IFMIS and extend the information technology infrastructure to the MDAs involved several
  complex tasks, including redeployment of sub-accountancy staff to the district councils, extension of wide
  and local area networks to 120+ offices, and profiling functions and system roles of 240+ new users. The
  challenges of achieving these things within the project timeframe were underestimated at appraisal. As a
  result, at the MTR, these activities had to be dropped. The project underwent a second restructuring to
  exclude these activities.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team was also led by an experienced PFM professional. There was only one TTL, based in
 Pretoria, able to provide real-time engagement with the Project Coordination Unit and Treasury
 Management. The ICR viewed this as critical in providing timely and consistent technical and operational
 support (ICR, p. 20). Supervision teams included staff experienced in this type of reform, including experts
 from ADB, UK's Department of International Development and EU technical staff as necessary. The team
 was proactive and flexible in responding to issues that emerged at the MTR and in restructuring the project
 accordingly. Technical and fiduciary staff provided regular support, and supervision missions were
 conducted about every eight months, with nine Implementation Status and Results Reports completed
 during the project.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E indicators were based on the government's PFM reform agenda to improve the government's
 capacity to use public resources. The original project design included several public expenditure and

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-PFM Reform Support Project (P143197)



 financial accountability (PEFA) indicators, where baselines and end targets were PEFA scores. At the mid-
 term review (MTR), the indicators were slightly revised to better align the targeted outcomes with
 project activities, and simplified in terms of the PEFA dimensions, i.e. to de-link it from PEFA methodology,
 and changing the targets from PEFA scores to targets expressed in words. While the ICR (Appendix 1)
 notes that this did not change the ambition of the original targets. IEG questions this assertion. There are
 two recent PEFA assessments where results can be compared. In the case of the indicator on quality and
 timeliness of annual financial statements, for example, there are three dimensions assessed. Two of them,
 completeness of financial statements and timeliness of submission of the financial statements, both
 improved from D (2012) to B (2017) ratings (on a D to A scale where A is the highest score). This is in line
 with the ICR's finding of substantial achievement of the revised target. However, the original target had a
 third dimension, Accounting standards used, which received D ratings in both assessments. Thus the
 revised target reduced the ambition of the target by dropping consideration of accounting standards. The
 ambition was also reduced on some of the other targets. The reason for the changes in targets is
 reportedly to better align them with work supported by the project, but this is at a cost of reduced ambition.



b. M&E Implementation
  As stated above, the results framework was modified during implementation to provide more clarity in
  measuring achievements supported by the project. However, tracking progress by the PFM Reform
  Secretariat remained uncoordinated, and only limited details were provided in progress reports. The
  formats were improved during implementation. The ICR states that the Bank team had to often request
  data for Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) reporting purposes (ICR, p.26), as the data
  were not available in progress reports.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data was primarily used for administrative tasks such as to link bank accounts to the Government
  Bank Account Portal at CBL, and to enable monitoring of opening and closing of accounts that the
  government operated. The Portal allowed the Treasury to monitor cash resources available in different
  accounts (ICR, p. 27). M&E was also used to address connectivity issues in linking district users through
  fiber connections and the local area network. Overall, the extent to which M&E was used and analyzed
  was an issue, as the M&E officer had no access to the IFMIS and related data.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project did not involve impacts related to environmental or social risks. Most activities financed
   consultant services, goods, training and workshops.




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-PFM Reform Support Project (P143197)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project complied with all fiduciary covenants during implementation. FM performance was rated
   moderately satisfactory due to some delays in submitting quarterly unaudited Interim Reports (IFRs) and
   the annual audit reports. This, however, did not weaken project performance (ICR, p. 21).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The project complied with all fiduciary covenants during implementation. FM performance was rated
   moderately satisfactory due to some delays in submitting quarterly unaudited Interim Reports (IFRs) and
   the annual audit reports. This, however, did not weaken project performance (ICR, p. 21).

   The payroll system was reconfigured even though it was not part of project design. This helped the Chart
   of Accounts to improve efficiencies in payroll and pensions processing (ICR, p 21).



d. Other
   Although the project did not target women, women received support through employment and training. The
   Treasury Department recruited and trained more women than men (ICR, p. 20).



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

These lessons are selected from the ICR (p. 30-31):

- For effective implementation of a project such a PFMRSP, the following factors are important:
project scope and activities need to be consistent with country and the government's implementation
team's capacity; for efficient functioning of IFMIS activities, there needs to be M&E of each IFMIS




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 11
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LS-PFM Reform Support Project (P143197)



activity and its milestones; and a Reform Steering Committee needs to better understand project
implementation risks.

- End-user capacity building to improve understanding of core accounting principles is an important
aspect of sustainability. Building capacity in contract (vendor) management is also important.

- PFM reform is not just a one-time project. It is a continuous process, where budget resources must
to earmarked for maintaining systems and capacities as they evolve.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is of good quality, and provides a clear discussion of the main aspects, although on the longer
side. The discussion of the changes during implementation and the revision of indicators were particularly
good. A shortcoming is that the ICR states that the level of ambition of revised PDO indicators after the first
restructuring was unchanged. This does not seem correct, as some of the dimensions assessed under the
original targets linked to PEFA indicators were dropped.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 11
