     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0022045

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P109961                                     NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Azerbaijan                                  Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-75180,IBRD-83810,IDA-43970             28-Feb-2013                                           407,841,459.96

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 27-May-2008                                 30-Jun-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            260,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Revised Commitment                             410,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Actual                                         407,841,459.96                                                  0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan           Peter Nigel Freeman          Ramachandra Jammi                 IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) Loan Agreement (LA, p.6)
   and the International Development Association (IDA) Financing Agreement (FA, p.6), both of which were
   dated February 5, 2008, the original objective of the project was “to improve the availability, quality, reliability
   and sustainability of water supply and sanitation services of the Borrower/Recipient” where the “Borrower” and
   the “Recipient” were defined as the Republic of Azerbaijan in the LA and FA, respectively. There were some
   wording differences in the project objective defined in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p.4) without any
   material impact on the substance of the objective: “to improve the availability, quality, reliability and

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



   sustainability of water supply and sanitation (WSS) services in selected regional (rayon) centers in
   Azerbaijan.”

   At the second restructuring in January 2012, the project objective was revised: “to provide quality and reliable
   water supply and sanitation services in selected regional (rayon) centers in Azerbaijan” (Restructuring Paper,
   Report No: 59627-AZ, p.1)

   When additional financing was approved in December 2014, the project objective was revised again to read
   as follows: “to improve the quality and reliability of water supply and expand water supply and sanitation
   services in selected regional (rayon) centers in Azerbaijan” (LA for Additional Financing, p.6).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  18-Nov-2011

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project consisted of three components including investment activities, technical assistance support for
   institutional capacity building, and support for project management. AzerSu, the state water and sewerage
   utility, and the State Amelioration and Water Management Agency (SAWMA), the water and sewerage utility
   serving Nakhichevan—an autonomous republic in Azerbaijan—were the original project implementing
   agencies.

   A. Rayon Investment. (Appraisal cost: US392.0 million; cost estimated at Additional Financing: US$612.1
   million; actual cost: US$534.8 million)
   This component consisted of investment activities for the rehabilitation and extension of water supply and
   sewerage systems, and the construction of facilities for water, wastewater and sludge treatment in 16
   rayons in AzerSu’s service area and 5 rayons in SAWMA’s service area.

   B. Institutional Modernization. (Appraisal cost: US15.8 million; cost estimated at Additional Financing:
   US$22.5 million actual cost: US$20.6 million)
   The activities under this component would provide technical assistance support for capacity building and
   modernization of AzerSu and SAWMA through: (a) the provision of training for management, financial
   management, customer service, procurement, preventive maintenance and other subjects pertinent to
   effective and efficient management of the utilities; (b) development of performance monitoring, preventive
   maintenance and leak detection and repair; and (c) design and technical support for construction
   management, including procurement support and contract supervision for the investments.



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



  C. Project Management. (Appraisal cost: US$1.6 million; cost estimated at Additional Financing: US$8.4
  million actual cost: US$3.6 million)
  This component would support AzerSu and SAWMA in strengthening their management capacity to monitor
  and administer the implementation of the project, including an audit by AzerSu.

  Revised Components
  The project was restructured six times (see next section for details). At the first restructuring in October
  2009, the project implementation responsibilities of AzerSu were transferred to Azerbaijan Amelioration and
  Water Management Open Joint Stock Company (AAWMC) of Azerbaijan. AzerSu had a US$2.0 billion
  portfolio to implement in the following five years; therefore, it did not have the capacity to implement this
  project, too.

  In the second restructuring in January 2012, SAWMA was removed as an implementing agency due to a
  misprocurement, and the project activities to be implemented in Nakhichevan by SAWMA were cancelled.
  Furthermore, the number of rayons under AAWMC’s responsibility decreased from 16 to 8; detailed
  feasibility and safeguards studies showed that the financing requirement for the implementation of the
  activities in 16 rayons was much higher than the amount estimated at appraisal. Since the disbursement
  rate at the time of the restructuring was very low, rather than processing an additional financing, it was
  agreed to downsize the project scope from 21 rayons to 8 to match the original financing amount. However,
  an additional financing in the amount of US$150 million was processed about three years later in December
  2014, to finance additional works under existing civil work contracts, such as the connection of additional
  houses to the network, installation of additional metering, increasing water and wastewater treatment plant
  capacity due to design change, and implementation of additional institutional modernization activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$410.0 million including US$0.6 million
  as front-end fee. At the time of the Additional Financing in December 2014, the estimated project cost was
  revised to US$644.0 million including US$1.0 million as front-end fee. The project team informed IEG that in
  June 2019, the project closed with a total cost of US$641.0 million.

  Financing: At appraisal, the IBRD loan and the IDA credit were estimated at US$230.0 million and
  US$30.0 million, respectively. A second IBRD loan of US$150.0 million was processed in December 2014,
  increasing the total IBRD loan amount to US$380.0 million. The project disbursed all IBRD loans and IDA
  credit short of US$ 3 million due to the depreciation of the US dollar against the SDR, which was the
  currency used in the IDA credit agreement. At project closing, all project funds were accounted for.

  Borrower contribution: At appraisal, the contribution of the Government of Azerbaijan (GoA) was
  estimated at US$150.0 million. At Additional Financing in December 2014, the borrower committed an
  additional US$84.0 million. At project closing, the GoA’s actual contribution was US$234.0 million equaling
  the total committed amount.

  Restructurings: There were six project restructurings and one Additional Financing approval.

        First Restructuring (October 16, 2009): AzerSu was expected to implement both NWSSP and
         SNWSSP. This meant, the utility had a US$2.0 billion portfolio to implement in the following five
         years and did not have the capacity to implement this project. Therefore, the Azerbaijan

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 26
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



      Amelioration and Water Management Open Joint Stock Company (AAWMC) was designated as the
      project implementing agency instead of AzerSu. Two new indicators were introduced: (i) Number of
      new piped household water connections; and (ii) Number of rehabilitated piped household water
      connections.
     Second Restructuring (January 27, 2012): This was the first of the two major restructurings—the
      fourth restructuring was the other one. The project’s scope decreased from 21 rayons to 8. The main
      reasons were (i) the underestimation of investment costs at appraisal due to limited records of
      market costs in the water sector and the absence of detailed feasibility and environmental studies;
      and (ii) the cancellation of activities in Nakhichevan because of a misprocurement—irregularities in
      the tendering process—by the project implementing agency, SAWMA, which also resulted in the
      removal of SAWMA as one of the two project implementing agencies. The indicators related to the
      cancelled activities under SAWMA were dropped. The project objective was revised at this
      restructuring (see section 2.a Objectives above). All the original indicators were deleted. Two new
      outcome indicators were introduced to the results framework: (i) People in the project area receiving
      improved water supply and sanitation services resulting from the project; and (ii) Pollution load
      measured in persons equivalent eliminated through adequate wastewater treatment. Five new
      intermediate outcome indicators were added: (i) Water network rehabilitated; (ii) Sewerage network
      rehabilitated; (iii) New reservoir capacity provided; (iv) Rayons with monitoring system in place; and
      (v) Rayons equipped and with trained personnel for operation and maintenance.
     Third Restructuring (February 26, 2013): The project closing date was extended by 22 months
      from February 28, 2013 to December 31, 2014 to enable the implementing agency to complete on-
      going investment activities. The two main reasons for project closing date extension were delayed
      project effectiveness and design changes: (i) Project effectiveness was delayed for more than one
      year after project approval because of the bidders’ request for the extension of the proposal
      submission deadline for the selection of a Construction Management Firm, prolonged negotiations
      with the winning firm due to the complexity of the assignment, and delays in the approval of the
      Operations Manual, all of which were conditions for effectiveness; and (ii) The civil works were
      stopped because of changes in wastewater treatment plants’ designs.
     Fourth Restructuring and Additional Financing (December 22, 2014): An additional financing of
      US$150 million was processed to finance additional works under the existing civil work contracts.
      The project objective was revised for a second time (see section 2.a Objectives above). One original
      outcome indicator was re-instated, i.e., percentage of drinking water samples in the project area
      meeting Azeri water quality standards, and another one with revision, i.e., percentage of population
      in project areas that on average receive 24 hours of water supply. Two new intermediate outcome
      indicators were introduced to measure the new household connections to water supply and
      sewerage networks. The targets of the indicators introduced in the second restructuring were
      increased in accordance with the increased scope of work. Lastly, the project closing date was
      extended by three years from December 31, 2014 to December 31, 2017 to allow time for the
      completion of the on-going and additional activities.
     Fifth Restructuring (June 9, 2017): The closing date of the Additional Financing Loan Agreement,
      was extended by one year from December 31, 2017 to December 31, 2018 to finalize the contracts
      that were expected to be delayed beyond the then current project closing date due to insufficient
      allocation of counterpart funding in 2017 and technical delays in the construction of wastewater
      treatment plants in several rayons. The substantial reduction in the public investment program for
      2017 was the main reason for insufficient counterpart funding. The closing date extension did not
      apply to the original IBRD loan and the IDA credit agreements, which were disbursed and closed on
      December 31, 2017.


                                                                                               Page 4 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



         Sixth Restructuring (November 27, 2018): The project closing date was extended by six months
          from December 31, 2018 to June 30, 2019 to complete the construction of two wastewater treatment
          plants implemented under the Additional Financing and to ensure the compensation of remaining
          Project Affected People (three percent of the total) under the OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement
          safeguard policy.

   Dates: The project was approved on May 27, 2008 and became effective on July 13, 2009. The closing
   date of the original loan and the credit agreements was February 23, 2013, which was extended by a total
   of 46 months in the third and fourth restructurings; these two agreements closed on December 31, 2017.
   The closing date of the Additional Financing, which was approved on December 22, 2014, was also
   December 31, 2017, but it was extended by a total of 18 months in the fifth and sixth restructurings. The
   Additional Financing closed on June 30, 2019. Overall, the original project closing date of February 31,
   2013 was extended by a total of 76 months (six years and four months) and the project closed on June 30,
   2019. The total time from approval to closure was 11 years and one month. The reasons for closing date
   extensions have been outlined above under related project restructurings.

   Disbursement Percentages: The following disbursement percentages will be used in deriving the weights
   to be applied to the assessment of original and revised objectives in Outcome rating. The disbursed
   amounts are taken from the “Restructuring and/or Additional Financing” table on page 3 of the ICR.

   Table 1

   Project Objective Period                     Disbursed Amount             Disbursement Percentage
   Original Period                               US$40.53 million                    9.94 %
   First Revision Period after January 2012      US$171.36 million                  42.02 %
   Second Revision Period after June 2014        US$195.95 million                  48.04 %
   Total                                         US$407.84 million                 100.00 %

3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Azerbaijan inherited an extensive water supply system built during the Soviet era. However, the condition of
the water system gradually deteriorated due to lack of investment and deferred maintenance, resulting in
substantial decrease in the quality and reliability of the water supply service. Furthermore, as of early
2000s, only 55 percent of the population had access to an improved sewerage network, and the network
needed rehabilitation and additional investments in wastewater treatment.

Since 2010, the Government of Azerbaijan (GoA) has improved water supply and sanitation services in the
country by implementing projects in partnership with the World Bank, other multinational development
banks and donors. According to the World Health Organization and United Nations Children’s Education
Fund Joint Monitoring Program (2017), 91 percent of the population has access to an improved water
source—98 percent in urban areas and 83 percent in rural area—and 95 percent of the population has
access to an improved sanitation facility—100 percent urban households and 89 percent in rural
households. However, only 72 percent of the population is considered to have met the Sustainable
Development Goal (SDG) of having access to safe water that is defined as water accessible on premises,
available when needed, and free from contamination. Similarly, 73 percent of the urban households are

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



considered to have met the SDG of having access to an improved sanitation facility that is not shared with
another household and connected to proper waste treatment (data on sanitation in rural areas were not
available). Therefore, the GoA continued investing in water supply and sanitation infrastructure to provide
safe, reliable and quality services to the population under the State Programs on Socio-economic
Development of Regions, the third of which was implemented between 2014 and 2018. The project
supported the third State Program’s objective to provide households in all rayons with reliable water and
sanitation services to enhance the health and living conditions of the population. A new National Water
Strategy is under preparation and it is expected to have the same objective to expand access to safe water
supply and sanitation services to every household in Azerbaijan. Overall, the original project objectives
were highly relevant to the country context and they were aligned with the country’s development priorities,
but the revised objectives were less ambitious due to the decreased scope of the project.

At project closing, the original project objectives were also highly aligned with the Bank strategy as defined
in the Country Partnership Framework FY16-FY20 (CPF). Under the first focus area of "Public Sector
Management and Service Delivery", Objective 1.3. is defined as "to contribute to improved access to water,
sanitation and communal services.” Having been built on the constraints and priorities identified in the
Systematic Country Diagnostic submitted to the Bank’s Board in 2015, the Bank strategy aims to support
investments in “water and sanitation as part of the public health infrastructure as well as in connectivity as a
way to influence people’s demand for health and education services” (CPF, p.26). Since access to
improved water and sanitation services directly impacts the welfare of women, the project objective was
also aligned with gender, one of the crosscutting themes of the CPF. The other crosscutting theme of
governance was supported by the technical assistance activities of the project in supporting the
modernization of the water sector utilities.

The Bank had already become an important partner in the water supply sector In Azerbaijan before the
approval of this project. However, the cooperation was limited to the Baku area because of the country’s
weak fiscal situation at the time and the limited amount of Bank resources it could access from IDA since
the country had been classified as a blend borrower of IBRD and IDA since 1992 (PAD, p.3). Such
limitations prevented the country from implementing more ambitious projects until the mid-2000s when
Azerbaijan’s fiscal situation started to improve with the increases in oil revenues; this provided the country
with the opportunity to address long neglected infrastructure issues outside of the Baku area, including the
water supply and sanitation infrastructure. Given the Bank’s prior experience in Azerbaijan and the
country’s improved fiscal situation, the original project objective was adequately challenging. However, the
project designs were over ambitious given the insufficient institutional and technical capacity of the project
implementation entities of AzerSu and SAWMA, which resulted in several project restructurings.
Furthermore, the project objectives were inconsistently re-stated, and there was confusion in the substance
and timing of the revisions as they were being made.

Despite the revisions of the project objectives, this review assesses the project's performance based on the
four objectives of availability, quality, reliability, and sustainability on the grounds that as a matter of
principle, well-functioning water supply and sanitation service systems need to maintain those four
development outcomes through to project closing and beyond. In other words, just because of the
weaknesses in project development objective formulation, it would not be appropriate to artificially stop
assessing sustainability at the end of the original objective period, and sanitation service quality and
reliability at the end of the first revision period. Rather, this review’s assessment will hold the project
accountable and adhere to the higher bar of assessing the project's performance vis-à-vis these four
development outcomes that should continue to be achieved beyond project closing.



                                                                                                      Page 6 of 26
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the availability, quality, reliability and sustainability of water supply.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The original project objective included the four development outcomes of service availability, quality, reliability
                             and sustainability, which should be maintained by any well-functioning water supply and sanitation service
                             system through to project closing and beyond. However, the project design was ambitious in terms of
                             geographical coverage; the project was to be implemented in 21 rayon centers and villages located in close
                             proximity of the urban centers. The project inputs, i.e., the IBRD loan and IDA funds together with the
                             Borrower’s contribution, were high but not realistically determined to implement project activities in all original
                             21 rayons. Planned project outputs were water production, treatment, transmission and distribution
                             infrastructure, as well as wastewater collection and treatment systems newly built or rehabilitated, and the
                             expansion of sewerage network coverage, sewage and septic sludge treatment and disposal. These outputs
                             would be expected to produce the following intermediate outcomes: (i) improved water resources and water
                             network efficiency; (ii) fewer mechanical and electrical failures; (iii) expanded coverage; (iv) provision of
                             appropriate tools for operation and maintenance (O&M); and (v) increased wastewater treatment. Eventually,
                             these would lead to improvement in the availability, quality and reliability of water supply and sanitation
                             services. The causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were credible and robust.

                             Additionally, the project was expected to improve the sustainability of the water supply and sanitation services
                             through improved operational efficiency, which was to be achieved by capacity building and institutional
                             development activities, such as training in management, financial management, customer service,
                             procurement, and preventive maintenance, and provision of support in developing performance monitoring,
                             and leak detection and repair. The increase in the number of metered customers was expected to improve
                             the collection rate that would contribute to the financial viability of the utilities in the rayons. Coupled with the
                             increased availability of O&M tools and equipment, the technical assistance support and improved collection
                             rate would be expected to improve the sustainability of the water supply and sanitation services. However, the
                             theory of change did not address the issue of private household connections to both water and sanitation
                             networks. This was an important shortcoming: At project closing, 80 percent of the population was connected
                             to piped supply, whereas the connection rate to wastewater collection was only 40 percent (ICR, p.20).

                             At the second restructuring in January 2012, the project objective was further revised, and the sustainability
                             objective was dropped, while availability was included in the “provision” of quality and reliable services. These


                                                                                                                                   Page 7 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



changes did not have a material impact on the theory of change, while the decrease in the number of rayons
from 21 to 8 resulted in a more realistic project scope matching the project inputs,

The project objective was revised again at the fourth restructuring in December 2014 and it was divided into
two parts: (i) improvement of quality and reliability of water supply services; and (ii) the expansion of both
water supply and sanitation services. However, this change did not have a material impact on the theory of
change.

Overall, a broadly sound causal link could be established from project inputs and outputs to expected
outcomes, and the achievement of project objectives could be attributed directly to the project's interventions,
but the theory of change had a major shortcoming in failing to address the private household connections.



Outputs

Investments. The project originally targeted 21 rayons, but it was later dropped to eight to adjust the project
scope to available project funds (see Revised Components in section 2d. above). In all eight rayons, water
supply facilities were completed and transferred to AzerSu for operation. Project activities resulted in the
following outputs:

      Water network rehabilitated: 1,224.2 kilometers (km) against the original target of 900 km set at the
       second restructuring and the revised target of 1,048 km at the Additional Financing.
      Reservoir capacity added: 35,100 cubic meters against the original target of 31,000 cubic meters set
       at the second restructuring and the revised target of 52,000 cubic meters at the Additional Financing.

Technical Assistance. Under the Institutional Modernization component, the project provided training on
operation and maintenance to 140 personnel in eight rayons as planned at the Additional Financing. The ICR
did not provide information about what other technical assistance activities were supported by the project,
other than the establishment of Havsan Training and Innovation Center under AzerSu.

Outcomes

Availability. As a result of the project outputs, the number of new piped household water connections
increased by 46,344 in eight rayons. This indicator was added as a core indicator in the first restructuring in
October 2009 before the project started disbursing loans, and the target set for 21 rayons was 22,000
households. At the Additional Financing in December 2014, the target was increased to 41,577 but only in
eight rayons. Furthermore, the project outputs resulted in an increase in the number of people receiving
improved water supply by 324,292. This indicator was introduced in the second restructuring and the target
was 212,000 people including access to sanitation services, which was later increased to 323,000 people at
the time of Additional Financing only for water supply. The original outcome indicator for 21 rayons was
“people in project area with access to improved water sources” and the target was 496,000 people. The
project’s achievement in increasing availability of water was much lower than the target set at appraisal.

The project was substantially successful in increasing the availability of water through new household
connections to piped water, but its achievement was modest in increasing the number of people with access
to improved water supply. Considering also that the project’s impact was geographically on a smaller area


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



than planned at appraisal, the project’s achievement of the development outcome of availability of water
supply is rated Modest.

Quality. As a result of the project activities, water reservoir capacity increased and new water treatment
facilities were built. These resulted in an increase in the water quality, which was regularly tested at the
laboratories built under the project. The original outcome indicator was “percentage of drinking water samples
in the project area meeting Azeri water quality standards” with a target of 100 percent starting from a baseline
of zero percent. This indicator was deleted at the second restructuring but reintroduced again at the
Additional Financing with a target of 98 percent. The measurements made at project closing showed that 98
percent of the samples met the Azeri water quality standards. Although the project was highly successful in
achieving the target, due to the geographically limited impact of the project, i.e., eight rayons rather than 21,
the achievement of the development outcome of quality of water supply is rated Modest.

Reliability. The rehabilitation of the water supply network and the capacity increase in water treatment
resulted in a significant improvement in the reliability of water supply service. The original goal of the project
was to increase the daily water supply service hours to 24, from a baseline of average three hours of service.
This indicator was deleted at the second restructuring, but a better indicator was introduced at Additional
Financing that read as “percentage of population in project areas that on average receives 24 hours of water
supply” with a target of 98 percent. When project closed, 98 percent of the population in the project area had
access to water 24 hours a day. However, since the project’s impact was restricted to eight rayons rather than
21 rayons originally planned, the achievement of the development outcome of reliability of water supply is
also rated Modest.

Sustainability. The project’s intervention was expected to result in an increase in the collection rate from a
baseline of 55 percent to 80 percent, hence, in a decrease in the average financial working ratio (cash
operating expenditures divided by collected revenues) of the original 21 rayon water utilities from a baseline
of 1.75 to 1.01. In the meantime, AzerSu’s core operational deficit would be eliminated. The ICR (pp.17)
states that the financial position of the project participating utilities and AzerSu improved after the approval of
an increase in water and wastewater treatment tariffs by the Tariff Council of the Republic of Azerbaijan in
2016. Although this resulted in positive earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization for the
utilities, this achievement could not be attributed to the project’s intervention since it was a result of a decision
taken by the Tariff Council. There is no information in the ICR regarding the outputs of the project that were
expected to increase the collection rate and the operation and maintenance capacity that would improve the
technical and financial sustainability of the water supply. However, the ICR notes that the average working
ratio in the eight rayons where the project was implemented after the second restructuring decreased to the
target set appraisal, but half of the rayons maintained very high working ratios and in two of them the trend
showed that the ratio might worsen in the future (ICR, p.18).

The achievement regarding sustainability of water supply is rated Negligible due to the following reasons: (i)
lack of information on expected project outputs and outcomes leading to an improvement in sustainability; (ii)
project implementation in a geographically smaller area; and (iii) attribution of the improvement in the utilities’
financial position to the decision taken by the Tariff Council, not to the project’s intervention.



Rating
Modest


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)




OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To provide quality and reliable water supply.

Revised Rationale
Outputs

Please see the outputs under Objective 1 above.

Outcomes

For the first revised objective regarding water supply the outcome indicators were as follows:

    1. Number of people in project areas receiving improved water supply. The ICR (p.12) defined
       “improved water supply” as “24-hour continuous service that complies with quality standards”.
       According to this definition, 324,292 people were receiving improved water supply at project closing.
       The target was 212,000 people, which was increased to 323,000 at the Additional Financing.
    2. Number of new piped household water connections. As a result of the project activities, 46,344
       households gained access to piped water in eight rayons. The target set at first restructuring was
       22,000 households in 21 rayons. The target was increased to 41,566 households at Additional
       Financing to capture the achievement of the increased project scope.

Availability. The formulation of this development outcome was problematic. Although it was deleted in the
second restructuring, availability was still indirectly a part of the project objective, because of the provision of
water supply. The outcomes measured by the two outcome indicators show that the project was successful in
increasing water supply availability during the first revision period. Therefore, achievement of the
development outcome of availability is rated High.

Quality and Reliability. The first indicator above was introduced in this restructuring to capture these two
development outcomes. The project was successful in providing 24-hour continuous water service that
complies with quality standards to more than the targeted number of households. This achievement of these
development outcomes is directly attributable to the project outputs and it is rated High.

Sustainability. Sustainability was deleted from the project development objective formulation and was not re-
stated in the following restructurings. However, as explained in section 2.a Objectives, water supply should
remain sustainable in its operational, financial, environmental and social aspects through to project closing
and beyond. Therefore, its assessment cannot arbitrarily stop just because it was deleted from the project
formulation. So, due to the reasons explained in the assessment of original Objective 1, the achievement of
the development outcome of water supply sustainability is rated Negligible. In other words, there is no
evidence to show that the outputs achieved by the implementation of project activities led to an improvement
in the financial and technical aspects of the utility, so that water supply could be sustained at the same quality
and in a reliable way beyond project closing.

The achievement of this objective is rated Substantial, but barely so, due to the negligible achievement in
sustainability.



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)




Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
to improve the quality and reliability of water supply and to expand water supply

Revised Rationale
Please see the assessment under Objective 1, Revision 1 above. The increase in the project scope due to
Additional financing did not have any material impact in the assessment of the revised project objectives.
Therefore, the overall achievement of the development outcomes in the second revision period is rated
Substantial, but barely so.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the availability, quality, reliability and sustainability of sanitation services.

Rationale
Outputs

Investments: The project originally targeted 21 rayons, but it was later dropped to eight to adjust the project
scope to available project funds (see Revised Components in section d. Components above). In all eight
rayons, sanitation facilities were completed and transferred to AzerSu for operation. The project financed the
construction of 983.7 km of sewerage network in eight rayons. There was no indicator defined to measure this
output. In the second restructuring, the target was set at 750 km, and, at the time of the Additional Financing,
it was increased to 923 km. Although this indicator is formulated as “sewerage network rehabilitated,” the
project team stated that all the sewerage network built under the project was new. There was no indicator in
the results framework related to the wastewater treatment facilities.

Technical Assistance: In addition to the outputs achieved through investment activities, the project financed
training, under Institutional Modernization component, on operation and maintenance to 140 personnel in
eight rayons as planned at the Additional Financing, including the operation of wastewater treatment plants.
The ICR did not provide information about what other technical assistance activities were supported by the
project, other than the establishment of Havsan Training and Innovation Center under AzerSu.

Outcomes

Availability. As appraised, the project was expected to increase the number of people connected to a
functional network by 439,000 people in 21 rayons. The project outputs, including those financed by
Additional Financing, achieved 43,386 new household connections (216,930 people assuming five people per

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



household) in eight rayons. The indicator added to the results framework at the second restructuring, i.e.,
people in project area receiving improved water supply and sanitation services resulting from the project, had
a target of 212,000 people, but this indicator was revised at the Additional Financing and the target was set at
323,000 for only improved water supply. Therefore, this indicator did not measure the number of people
receiving sanitation services. Due to low achievement, the achievement of the project outcome of availability
of sanitation services is rated Modest.

Quality. The project as appraised did not provide a definition for “the quality of sanitation services”, nor did
the results framework have any indicator or targets. At the second restructuring in January 2012, , a new
indicator was added to the results framework: “pollution load measured in persons equivalent eliminated
through adequate wastewater treatment,” where adequate treatment was defined as “conformity with the
European Union Wastewater Treatment Directive for secondary treatment” (ICR, p.12). The target was set as
230,000 persons, which was raised to 285,000 at the time of Additional Financing; the achievement was
248,850 persons. This outcome would be achieved through the construction of wastewater treatment plants:
increased wastewater treatment capacity would be expected to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the
nature, resulting in an improvement in the quality of sanitation services.

On the other hand, the original project design had a target of 439,000 people connected to functional
sewerage network. The project team stated that the sewerage networks constructed were all connected to a
wastewater treatment plant in eight rayons. Therefore, the outcome of pollution treated at 248,850 persons
equivalent, which was achieved by both original project funds and additional financing, is much lower than the
impact the project would have had if it had been implemented in the original 21 rayons. Furthermore, when
project closed, the percentage of the population connected to wastewater collection was only 40 percent—
project’s theory of change did not address the issue of household connection to both water supply and
sewage networks. Overall, the efficacy of the achievement of the original project objective to improve the
quality of sanitation services is rated Modest.

Reliability. There was no indicator define at project appraisal measuring the reliability of sanitation services
including both the sewerage network and wastewater treatment plants. This shortcoming in the results
framework continued through to project closing. The length of the sewage network constructed, which is an
output indicator, cannot be used as evidence for the reliability of sanitation services. Due to insufficient
evidence, the achievement of this development outcome is rated Negligible.

Sustainability. Please refer to the discussion under original Objective 1 for a discussion of the financial
sustainability of water and sanitation services. The technical sustainability of the sanitation services mostly
depends on the reliable operation of the wastewater treatment plants. The ICR (p.30) notes that if continuous
training programs are not implemented as staff rotates, limited institutional capacity may adversely affect the
sustainable operation of wastewater treatment plants.

Overall, the achievement of the development outcome of sustainability of sanitation service is rated
Negligible due to the following reasons: i) lack of information on expected project outputs and outcomes
leading to an improvement in sustainability; (ii) project implementation in a geographically smaller area; and
(iii) attribution of the improvement in the utilities’ financial position to the decision taken by the Tariff Council,
not to the project’s intervention.



Rating

                                                                                                        Page 12 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To provide quality and reliable sanitation services.

Revised Rationale
Outputs

Please see the outputs under Objective 2 above.

Outcomes

For the first revised objective regarding sanitation services, there were two outcome indicators:

    1. Pollution load measured in persons equivalent eliminated through adequate wastewater
       treatment. At project closing, the achievement was 248,850 persons equivalent. The target set at first
       revision was 230,000 persons equivalent and it was increased to 285,000 persons at Additional
       Financing. Since this was a result of the project activities financed by both the original funds and the
       Additional Financing, the achievement should be compared to the target set at the Additional
       Financing.
    2. New household sewer connections constructed under the project. This indicator was added at
       the Additional Financing. The target was 42,795 connections. The achievement was 43,386.

Availability. As was the case in water supply, the formulation of this development outcome was problematic.
Although it was deleted in the second restructuring, availability was still indirectly a part of the project
objective, because of the provision of sanitation services. The outcomes measured by the two outcome
indicators show that the project was substantially successful in increasing sanitation services availability
during the first revision period. Therefore, achievement of the development outcome of availability is rated
Substantial.

Quality. The first indicator above was introduced in this revision to capture the development outcome of
quality of sanitation services. The target was increased at Additional Financing, and the achievement of this
development outcome should be assessed according to the higher target, since it covers project activities
financed under the original loan and Additional Financing. The project was successful in providing 24-hour
continuous water service that complies with quality standards to more than the targeted number of
households. Since the lower amount of wastewater was treated than the target, the achievement of this
development outcome is rated Substantial.

Reliability. Due to insufficient evidence, the achievement of the development outcome of reliability of
sanitations services is rated Negligible.

Sustainability. Sustainability was deleted from the project development objective formulation and was not re-
stated in the following restructurings. However, as explained in section 2.a Objectives, and similar to water
supply, sanitation services should remain sustainable in its operational, financial, environmental and social
aspects through to project closing and beyond. Therefore, its assessment cannot be arbitrarily stopped just
because it was deleted from the project formulation. So, due to the reasons explained in the assessment of

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 26
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



                            original Objective 2, the achievement of the development outcome of sustainability of sanitation services is
                            rated Negligible. In other words, there is no evidence to show that the outputs achieved by the
                            implementation of project activities led to an improvement in the financial and technical aspects of the utility,
                            so that sanitation services could be sustained at the same quality and in a reliable way beyond project
                            closing.



                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 2
                            Revised Objective
                            To expand sanitation services.

                            Revised Rationale
                            Please see the assessment under Objective 2, Revision 1 above. The increase in the project scope due to
                            Additional Financing did not have any material impact in the assessment of the revised project objectives.
                            Therefore, the overall achievement of the development outcomes in the second revision period is rated
                            Modest.



                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy of the Achievement of the Original Objectives

                            The project achieved success in improving the three (out of four) development outcomes of availability,
                            quality and reliability in water supply, and two (out of four) development outcomes of availability and quality in
                            sanitation services had lower impact because of the decrease in the project area from 21 rayons to eight.
                            Therefore, the achievement of these development outcomes is rated Modest. Due to lack evidence for the
                            development outcome of reliability, and low achievement and absence of attribution for the development
                            outcome of sustainability, their achievement is rated Negligible.

                            Overall, the efficacy of the achievement of the original project objective is rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Low achievement


                                                                                                                                Page 14 of 26
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Efficacy of the Achievement of the First Revised Objectives

         According to the targets set at the first revision of the project objective, the project was highly successful in
         providing quality and reliable water supply. The project was also highly successful in increasing availability of
         water supply. Therefore, the achievement of these three development outcomes is rated High. On the other
         hand, the project was substantial successful in the provision of quality sanitations services due to falling short
         of achieving the target set for number of people benefitting from these. According to the targets set at
         Additional Financing, the project was also substantially successful in increasing availability of sanitation
         services. As was the case in the assessment of the original Objective 1, due to lack evidence for the
         development outcome of reliability, and low achievement and absence of attribution for the development
         outcome of sustainability, their achievement is rated Negligible

         Overall, the efficacy of the achievement of the first revised project objective is rated Substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR2_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
         Efficacy of the Achievement of the Second Revised Objectives

         Efficacy of the achievement of the second revised objectives follows the same argument under the first
         revised objectives. Therefore, overall efficacy rating is Substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

At appraisal, a “with and without project” economic analysis was conducted for water supply investments in the
original 21 rayons. Due to significant data accuracy and methodology issues, the economic benefits from
improved sanitation services were not included in the economics analysis. The quantifiable benefits were
identified as: (i) resource savings (e.g., energy and materials savings) from improved operational efficiency; (ii)
increased water sales due to reduction of illegal consumption and leakages; and (iii) improved collections (PAD,
p.54). Other economic benefits, such as benefits from improved health, quality of life and environment, were not
included in the economic analysis since they could not be quantified due to lack of data. Therefore, the

                                                                                                                 Page 15 of 26
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



methodology used at appraisal partially captured the economic benefits of the project’s outcomes. Furthermore,
as noted in the PAD (p.54), lack of accurate and reliable operational, technical and financial data used in the
calculations made “the economic analysis speculative to some degree”. With all these caveats, the analysis
resulted in an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 13.0 percent and a Net Present Value of about
US$14.5 million at a discount rate of 10 percent for a 30-year period.

At the Additional Financing, an economic analysis was conducted for the costs and benefits associated with the
investments financed under the Additional Financing (Project Paper, Report No: 86398-AZ, p.15). The
quantifiable benefits were defined as follows: (i) improved energy efficiency; (ii) welfare gains at household level
associated with reduced cost of service delivery (i.e. shift from tinkered water consumption to piped services);
(iii) reduced coping cost due to better water quality and sufficient and reliable supply; and (iv) reduced discharge
of pollutants due to increased wastewater treatment. Since the economic analysis included benefits stemming
from sewage infrastructure investments, it was methodologically more comprehensive than the economic
analysis at appraisal. The calculations for the Additional Financing resulted in an EIRR of 7 percent and an NPV
of US$22.4 million at a discount rate of 5.5 percent—the social discount rate defined by the European Union for
Azerbaijan—for a 20-year period.

At project closing, a more comprehensive economic analysis was conducted covering eight rayons, where the
project was implemented, based on the JASPERS Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA), 2008—an internationally
recognized CBA methodology tailored to water and wastewater sector (ICR, p.52). The benefits used in the
analysis were as follows: (i) health benefits due to the availability of tap water; (ii) environmental benefits due to
prevention of the pollution of water bodies; (iii) cost savings for households due to access to piped water; and
(iv) cost savings from sewerage disposal due to access to sewage network with wastewater treatment. Since
these benefits are quantified at the household level, connection rate stands out as an important factor in the
analysis. Therefore, it was assumed that there would be a gradual increase in the number of households
connected to the networks reaching 100 percent at the end of the 30-year analysis period. The calculations
resulted in an EIRR of 10.04 percent and an NPV of about US$4.0 million at a 10 percent discount rate

The fundamental differences in the assumptions used in the economic analyses at appraisal and project closing,
and the decrease in the project area from 21 rayons to eight rayons make a comparison of the ex-ante and ex-
post EIIR and NPV difficult. Yet, the reasons for the low ex-post EIRR rate, which shows that the project was
barely viable despite a wider range of benefits included in the analysis, can be listed as (i) the increase in the
project cost due to the design change required by the European Union standards; (ii) the decrease in the
number of households affected by project outcomes; and (iii) low household connection rate, especially to the
sewage network.

Financial Analysis

A financial analysis of the project’s impact on the financial situation of the AzerSu and the rayon utilities was
conducted at appraisal, and it showed a strongly negative NPV in financial terms—the PAD did not report what
the NPV was (PAD, p.11). This result was mostly because of the water usage and wastewater treatment tariffs
set below the full cost recovery level. In Azerbaijan, the Tariff Council sets the tariffs. The other reason for a
negative NPV was the low collection rate.

At appraisal in 2009, an average working ratio for all original 21 rayons was also estimated and it was expected
that this baseline ratio would drop from 1.75 to 0.79 at project closing and 0.63 in 2039. At project closing, the
financial situation of the utilities improved due to a tariff increase in 2016, and the ICR (p.58) reports that “the
project working ratio in 2018 [was] already below 1.0”, although the average of the working ratios of the eight


                                                                                                        Page 16 of 26
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



rayons given in Table 5.3 of the ICR (p.54) is 1.37. Furthermore, there were substantial differences in the
working ratios of the rayons: in Jalilabad the working ratio was estimated at 2.78 whereas it was 0.49 in Ismaili.

Overall, it is not possible to evaluate the efficiency of the project based on the findings of the financial analysis
since it heavily depends on tariffs set by the Tariff Council, which might not always prioritize the financial viability
of the utilities, but the social benefits of the water and wastewater treatment services to the public; hence, the
tariffs may be set to remain below the full cost recovery level.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

At appraisal, feasibility studies were not completed. The completion of these studies, after project’s approval,
required several years delaying procurement. Furthermore, the feasibility studies showed that the project cost
was significantly underestimated at appraisal, as a result of which the project area had to be decreased from 21
rayons to eight. Due to the shortage in counterpart funds, payments to contractors could not be processed on
time starting from 2016; according to the provisions of the tax law, payments to contractors could not be
processed before the payment of the value added tax, which was to be covered by the counterpart funds. The
change of design standards for wastewater treatment plants resulted in a suspension of the construction works
between 2011 and 2014, which necessitated project closing date extensions. These project design and
implementation issues resulted in a reduction in project’s efficiency.



Due to lower economic benefits, serious questions about sustainability and major issues in operational and
administrative efficiency, the overall efficiency of the project is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         100.00
 Appraisal                                                    13.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         100.00
 ICR Estimate                                                 10.04
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The original project objectives were highly relevant to country context in Azerbaijan and highly aligned with the
Bank’s country strategy. Although the original objectives were adequate and challenging, the formulation of the
revised objectives was confusing. Therefore, the relevance of objectives is rated Substantial. The project was

                                                                                                         Page 17 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



successful in increasing availability, quality and reliability of the water supply. It was also successful in
increasing the access to the sewage network in areas where no sewage network existed before. The quality of
the wastewater treatment was substantial. However, there was no evidence to assess the reliability of these
sanitation services. The sustainability of water supply and sanitation services is rated Negligible due to low
achievement. The efficacy of the achievement of the original objectives is rated Modest, whereas that of the first
and second revised objectives is rated Substantial. The efficiency is rated Modest, due to lower benefits and
significant shortcomings in operational and administrative efficiency. Since the project scope was changed, a
split rating is applied (see Table 2 below). The overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory with serious
questions about the technical and financial sustainability of water supply and sanitation services.

Table 2

　                                      Original objectives     First Revision       Second Revision
Relevance of Objectives                                          Substantial
Efficacy                                   Modest                Substantial             Substantial
Efficiency                                                          Modest
                                         Moderately               Moderately            Moderately
Outcome Rating
                                        Unsatisfactory           Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value (a)                       3                       4                     4
Amount Disbursed (US$ million)              40.53                   171.36                195.95
Disbursement (%) (b)                        9.94%                   42.02%                48.04%
Weight Value (a)x(b)                        0.2982                   1.6808                1.9216
Total weights                                                  3.9006 (rounds up to 4)
Overall Outcome Rating                                       Moderately Satisfactory (4)
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The weak financial situation of AzerSu and the rayon utilities stands out as a substantial risk to the
sustainability of the development outcomes. Tariffs for water supply and wastewater services remain
below the cost recovery level. Therefore, AzerSu and the rayon utilities remain heavily dependent on
subsidies from the government. The government’s commitment to the subsidization program has so far
supported AzerSu and rayon utilities in avoiding operating losses, negative cash flows from operations, and
working capital deficit. Should there be a weakening in government’s commitment to the subsidization
program and the tariffs remain below the cost recovery level, AzerSu and rayon utilities could not operate
and maintain the new assets adequately.

Limited technical capacity of AzerSu staff to operate wastewater assets is another substantial risk.
Under the technical assistance component, AzerSu staffs were trained in how to operate the wastewater
treatment facilities and systems like supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA). However, if
continuous training programs are not implemented, the technical capacity could weaken as staff rotates. This
could adversely impact the sustainability of the project development outcome in wastewater treatment.



                                                                                                   Page 18 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



Low rates of connection to sewage networks pose a moderate risk to the achievement of full benefits
of project outcomes and to the technical sustainability of services. At project closing, the connection
rate to sewage network was about 40 percent. If the connection rate remains low, the full impact of the
project outcomes on public health and environment could not materialize. This would also threaten the
technical sustainability of services due to an insufficient amount of wastewater to treat. In order to mitigate
this risk, AzerSu has been conducting awareness campaigns to increase the connection rate. It is expected
that in the medium-term, the connection rate to will reach 90 percent (ICR, p.20).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project’s strategic relevance was high, but the approach was inadequate. The project followed the
  first National Water Supply and Sanitation Project too quickly. This first project’s coverage had to be
  reduced from 22 rayons to 4. It was a monolithic task to transform from a delivery system for water and
  sanitation conceived in the era of the Soviet Union, based on heavy subsidization, to a more self-reliant
  system. It was so complex that even effectiveness took 14 months from approval. There were no
  feasibility studies, the local master plans had not been reviewed and implications for the resettlement of
  affected people were unknown. Both the costs and the institutional implications were overwhelming for
  the relevant institutions’ capabilities to implement. The project design benefited from the experience
  gained during the implementation of the Greater Baku Water Supply Project and several other water
  supply and sanitation projects in Europe and Central Asia, such as technical assistance alone would be
  insufficient to implement reforms unless there was strong political commitment and stakeholders
  commitment; and strong and consistent policy dialogue was necessary to increase the prospects of
  achieving development outcomes.

  The economic analysis had shortcomings, but they were mostly because of the absence of reliable data.
  The risks were adequately identified, including the weak financial management capacity of AzerSu, but
  the mitigation measures were inadequate, which resulted in the replacement of AzerSu by AAWMC as
  the project implementation entity. The technical aspects of the project were not properly appraised. When
  feasibility studies were completed after project implementation started, it was found that the project funds
  could only support project activities in eight rayons, not in 21 as originally planned, due to
  underestimation of project cost at appraisal. The absence of feasibility studies during project preparation
  also led to inadequate appraisal of social impacts of the project, such as involuntary resettlement. This
  was identified as a risk, but the mitigation measures were insufficient. The decision to adopt the design-
  build contract basis delayed the Resettlement Action Plans, which had to be undertaken retroactively.
  Potential issues with the availability of counterpart funding were not adequately appraised. Lastly, the
  monitoring and evaluation arrangements (M&E) had shortcomings in capturing project outputs and some
  project outcomes making it somewhat difficult to assess the achievement of the stated objectives and test
  the links in the results chain.

  The Bank performance in ensuring quality at entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory because there were
  significant shortcomings in identification, preparation and appraisal.




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project task team leaders were mostly based in Azerbaijan, and, according to the ICR (p.29), “This
 resulted in well-facilitated day-to-day client engagement, stronger field presence, and strengthened project
 supervision.” This was evidenced in the project team’s attention to the fiduciary aspects of the project; the
 misprocurement incident related to SAWMA was also managed properly. On the other hand, the project
 team should have been aware at an earlier stage in implementation of the strong potential for the project’s
 non-compliance with the Involuntary Resettlement Policy and should have acted proactively to ensure
 compliance regardless of the type of contract. This caused a significant shortcoming in the supervision of
 safeguard aspects of the project, which could only be partially corrected in the remainder of project
 implementation. Finalizing RAPs had to be done retroactively and the project’s non-compliant status with
 this safeguard policy continued through to project closure. Compensation to affected persons was
 consequently delayed.

 The project development objectives were inconsistently re-stated during the various revisions. Deletion of
 the project objectives related to the sustainability of water supply and sanitation services and the
 improvement of the quality and reliability of the latter shows that the focus on development impact was
 weak. Well-functioning water supply and sanitation service systems need to maintain those development
 outcomes beyond project closing; efforts to achieve such important development outcomes cannot be
 stopped just because they are deleted from the formulation of the objectives. This manifested itself as
 challenges in the transition arrangements; after the preliminary operational handover of all assets in eight
 rayons to AzerSu, there were concerns about the sustainable operation of the wastewater treatment
 facilities and the SCADA systems (ICR, p.24). Low technical capacity of AzerSu staff to operate these
 assets still poses a substantial risk for the sustainability of development outcome (see section 7. Risk to
 Development Outcome above).

 The quality of Bank’s supervision is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory because there were significant
 shortcomings in the supervision of safeguard policies and in the focus on development impact.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



a. M&E Design
 The theory of change documenting how the key activities and outputs would lead to the outcomes was
 broadly sound, but partially reflected in the results framework. The objectives were adequately challenging
 for an investment project in water supply and sanitation services. The indicators adequately captured the
 achievement of the four development outcomes of availability, quality, reliability and sustainability for water
 supply, but only availability and sustainability of sanitation services. These outcome level indicators were
 sufficiently specific, measurable, relevant and time-bound. However, there was no indicator to assess the
 project’s achievement in improving the quality or reliability of sanitation services. Furthermore, there was no
 intermediate indicator for technical assistance activities, and only one for the investment activities simply
 measuring the number of rayons where water supply and wastewater systems would be rehabilitated; this
 was not sufficient to capture the project’s activities, including technical assistance support, and outputs
 toward achieving the development outcomes and to test the links in the results chain. Baseline data were
 estimated subject to revision according to the findings of the feasibility studies that would be prepared once
 project implementation started. AzerSu had the capacity to implement M&E, which was to be further
 supported by the project under the institutional modernization component.



b. M&E Implementation
  Confusion in the substance and timing of the project objectives revisions as they were being made led to
  confusing changes in the M&E framework, too. Original outcome indicators were replaced by two new
  indicators at the second restructuring. Reason for this change was generic, lacking justification: “In
  addition, project indicators have been simplified and reduced in number to strengthen overall monitoring
  framework” (Restructuring Paper, Report No: 59627-AZ, p.2). However, some deleted indicators were re-
  instated in the subsequent project restructurings. The introduction of some core intermediate indicators,
  such as water network rehabilitated, sewerage network rehabilitated and new reservoir capacity,
  strengthened the M&E framework in measuring some of the intermediate outcomes and partially allowed
  to test the links in the results chain. The weakness in capturing the impact of the technical assistance
  support and the other investment outputs, such as wastewater treatment capacity, continued through to
  project closing. Starting from the second restructuring, AAWMC, as the new project implementation
  entity, was responsible from M&E implementation, and it was assessed to have sufficient M&E
  implementation capacity. According to the ICR (p.25), M&E data were systematically collected and
  reported. The water supply and sewerage network investments financed under the project are now
  digitized in the geographic information system, and the rayon utilities are equipped with supervisory
  control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems; therefore, the M&E functions are likely to be sustained
  after project closing but subject to continued training of utility staff on the operation of these systems (see
  sections 7.Risk to Development Outcome and 8.b Quality of Supervision).



c. M&E Utilization
  Although the findings of the Mid-Term Review led to an additional financing to increase access to water
  supply and sanitation services, the M&E findings did not result in a correction in the project’s strategic
  direction to achieve all four development objectives of availability, quality, reliability and sustainability;
  rather, they were used to formulate the objectives by deleting some of the development objectives that
  were deemed unachievable during project implementation or were not captured by the results
  framework, such as the deletion of sustainability in the second restructuring and the quality and reliability
  of sanitation services in the fourth restructuring. The M&E data did not provide evidence for the

                                                                                                      Page 21 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



  achievement of all outcomes. There was insufficient data to confirm the project outputs, either. The M&E
  findings did not lead to a subsequent intervention and would not be expected to influence any in the near
  term.



  Overall, there were significant shortcomings in the M&E system’s design, implementation and utilization,
  which made it somewhat difficult to assess the achievement of the objectives and test the links in the
  results chain.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category A under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and triggered
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and International Waterways
   (OP/BP 7.50).

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Due to the planned rehabilitation and construction of sewerage
   and wastewater treatment facilities, the project was classified as Category A. Dust, noise, and damage to
   soil by excavation works were the expected short-term negative impacts of the project activities. An
   Environmental Impact Assessment Framework (EIAF) screening, due diligence, mitigation and monitoring
   was prepared and disclosed in the country in December 2007 and on the Bank’s Infoshop in January 2008.
   Site-specific Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) reports were prepared during project implementation
   and updated to accommodate the additional activities to be financed under Additional Financing. According
   to the ICR (p.25), the project team regularly supervised the implementation of the site-specific plans by the
   contractors, which was found to be in adherence to the EIAs. The Bank’s environmental specialist was
   based in the country and this facilitated a close supervision of the environmental aspects of the project.

   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): At appraisal, it was expected that acquisition of unoccupied land
   might be needed because of the location of the wastewater treatment plants, which would be determined
   after public consultations. Project activities would not result in a resettlement of persons or demolition of
   commercial or private buildings. A Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared by the borrower. The
   project affected about 170 hectares of land, of which about 43 hectares were privately owned. Auxiliary
   structures of four buildings were affected by the project, and one additional structure had to be resettled.
   Fruit trees in the gardens of 246 households had to be cleared due to project activities. Since the
   involuntary resettlement impact of the project activities were identified only shortly before the start of civil
   works, the compensations to project-affected persons (PAPs) were not completed in advance. The project
   was not compliant with the Involuntary Resettlement policy, because the policy requires that the
   compensations to PAPs should be completed before the start of project works. Although eight Resettlement
   Action Plans (RAPs) were prepared between 2014 and 2017 and implemented retroactively, processing of
   compensations to PAPs were substantially delayed and payments were made between two and five years
   after the impact had occurred. The project remained in noncompliant until October 2019 when 99 percent of


                                                                                                     Page 22 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



  the compensations were paid to the PAPs and the remaining funds were transferred to notary accounts.
  The project team became aware of project’s noncompliance with this safeguard policy in 2016, which was a
  shortcoming in supervision. The grievance redress mechanism (GRM) was in place and implemented
  satisfactorily; however, as the project team reported, in one instance, GRM log-books were not available in
  some construction camps.

  Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37): At appraisal, it was expected that in some rayons water might be supplied
  from existing dams to the water supply network. Therefore, this policy was triggered although the project
  would not finance the construction or rehabilitation of any dams. The detailed designs prepared during
  project implementation identified that the water networks in Jalilabad and Masalli rayons would be supplied
  with water from the existing Vilaschchay Water Reservoir. The safety of the reservoir was assessed in 2016
  and a Dam Safety Assessment Report was prepared. As the project team confirmed, the project was in
  compliance with this safeguard policy.

  International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50): This policy was triggered due to the impact of the project on Kura
  and Araks rivers, and the Caspian Sea, which are classified as international waterways, but the project was
  deemed to fall within the exception to the notification requirement under Paragraph (7a) of the policy. The
  project was not expected to have any adverse impact on the quality and quantity of water to the riparians,
  nor to be affected by the water use of other riparians. On the contrary, it was expected that the project
  would lead to a decrease in water intake from the rivers due to the reduction of leakages and improved
  demand management, and improve the two rivers and the Caspian Sea’s water quality because of
  improvements in the quality of the wastewater discharged into these waterways. This exception was applied
  to the Additional Financing, too.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The project implementing unit, i.e., the International Relations and Development Department (IRDD –
  former Corporate Development Department) of AzerSu, would be responsible for the financial
  management of the project, for which it was assessed to have the sufficient capacity. However, within less
  than a year after effectiveness, Azerbaijan Amelioration and Water Management Open Joint Stock
  Company (AAWMC), upon a request from the Government of Azerbaijan, replaced AzerSu as the project
  implementation agency, because AzerSu had already had a US$2.0 billion project portfolio to implement in
  the following five years, and it did not have the capacity to manage this project. A new fiduciary
  assessment of the project implementation unit (PIU) at AAWMC was conducted and it was found to have
  had the financial management and procurement capacity satisfactory to the Bank.

  During Bank supervision missions, the existence of sound internal control procedures was confirmed.
  Interim financial reports were mostly submitted on time; there were delays in the submission of these
  reports towards the end of project implementation. External audits of the project financials were carried out
  regularly. They were unqualified, but submission of two audits was delayed. There were shortcomings in
  counterpart funding which had adversely affected project implementation starting from 2016: Due to a tax
  law change, value added tax (VAT) had to be paid before any payment to contractors could be processed.
  Shortages in counterpart funding resulted in delays in VAT payments; consequently, payments to
  contractors were also delayed. There was also a misprocurement by SAWMA in the early stages of project

                                                                                                  Page 23 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



   implementation (see next paragraph on Procurement). No misuse of funds was reported. At project
   closing, all project funds were accounted for.

   Procurement

   The procurement complied with the Bank guidelines except in one case: a misprocurement was declared
   because of irregularities in the tendering process managed by SAWMA in Nakhichevan. This resulted in
   the removal of SAWMA as one of the two project implementing agencies and the cancellation of project
   activities in Nakhichevan. The PIU at AAWMC, which replaced AzerSu in the first restructuring, was
   responsible for procurement and had a qualified and experienced procurement specialist. There was a
   several years delay in bringing the project to procurement level due to the preparation of feasibility studies
   after the start of project implementation. The procurement methods used were efficient to implement
   complex water and wastewater treatment contracts with frequent design changes.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                   There were significant
                                                                                   shortcomings in appraising the
                                                                                   project, such as the
                                                                                   underestimation of project cost
                                                                                   due to absence of feasibility
                                                                                   studies that resulted in project
                                                                                   scope shrinking from 21 rayons
                                Moderately             Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                   to eight. There were also
                                Satisfactory           Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   shortcomings in Bank
                                                                                   supervision, such as lack of
                                                                                   awareness of irregularities in the
                                                                                   implementation of safeguard
                                                                                   policies and confusing and
                                                                                   inconsistent revisions to project
                                                                                   objectives and results


                                                                                                      Page 24 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



                                                                                framework. Overall, Bank
                                                                                performance is rated Moderately
                                                                                Unsatisfactory.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

This review has drawn three lessons based on the ICR incorporating material on lessons listed on
page 30 of the ICR.

Insufficient project preparation can critically affect project outcomes and implementation of
safeguard policies. This is a rather generic lesson, but the experience from this project needs to be
shared. The project budget was estimated without the completion of detailed feasibility studies, and
the project area was determined as 21 rayons. When the feasibility studies were completed after
project implementation started, it was found that the project cost was massively underestimated, and
the project funds could only finance investments in eight rayons. This was a significant decrease in
the geographic scope of the project limiting the impact of the intervention. Since detailed work plans
were not prepared in advance either, it was not clear whether there would be any involuntary
resettlement or not. It was also found only just before the start of construction works that some
private lands would be affected by the project. Payments to persons affected by the project could not
be processed before the start of the works. This resulted in delays of between 2 and 5 years. The
project team became aware of this issue only in 2016. The project’s non-compliant status with this
safeguard policy continued through to project closing. Additionally, the project implementation
capacity of AzerSu was also inadequately assessed during project preparation. Overwhelmed by a
US$2 billion project portfolio, AzerSu could not implement the project; hence, the project
implementation entity had to be changed early in project implementation.

Weak institutional capacity and lack of performance control can critically affect the
sustainable delivery of water supply and sanitation services. AzerSu predominantly focuses on
expanding water supply and sewerage networks nationwide. There is no performance control
mechanism set or benchmarks established for operational, technical and financial sustainability of
the utility. The steady stream of cash from the central government thanks to high oil revenues has so
far helped AzerSu avoid major financial constraints. The project originally aimed at phasing out
government support to AzerSu through the strengthening of AzerSu’s financial situation, but this
could not be achieved. Currently, AzerSu and rayon utilities are in a financially precarious situation.
This can adversely impact the availability, quality and reliability of these services should there be
shortages in funds transferred from the central government budget. Additionally, AzerSu’s weak
institutional capacity is a concern for the technical sustainability of the wastewater treatment
facilities.

Expanding sewerage network without adequately addressing the households’ connection
issue can hinder the achievement of full development impact while creating potential
technical issues for the wastewater treatment facilities. The project activities did not include the
construction of private connections to households, nor did the utility had any program to incentivize
these connections. Therefore, the connection rate to sewerage network at project closing was at 40

                                                                                                   Page 25 of 26
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NAT'L WATER SUPPLY & SAN II (P109961)



percent. Households use septic tanks. These tanks drain wastewater to underground, and the
remaining fecal sludge is removed once a year or less frequently. Therefore, the cost of maintaining
septic tanks is very low, whereas laying pipes to connect to the sewerage network is costly for low-
income households. However, septic tanks are harmful to environment and poses health risks,
because the wastewater drained to underground mixes with underground water that is used for
irrigation of lawns and vegetable gardens, and for watering orchards. Additionally, a lower
connection rate to the sewerage network would result in a lower amount of effluent being treated at
wastewater treatments plants, which might force the treatment plants to operate at a much lower
capacity and cause technical inefficiencies.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a good overview of the project. It explained a very complex project implementation with
various restructurings. The narrative was candid, but it was mostly descriptive, rather than evaluative. The
explanation of the results chain, i.e., how project inputs were used to achieve the planned outputs, and how
those outputs led to the expected outcomes, was relatively weak.

The section on the quality of monitoring and evaluation could have benefited from a detailed discussion. There
was not sufficient evidence to support the Bank Performance rating, and the discussion on the fiduciary aspects
could have been strengthened. Excluding the discussion on Involuntary Resettlement safeguard policy, the
discussion on other safeguard policies should have included a clear statement as to whether the project had
complied with these policies or not. The Lessons and Recommendations were useful and based on evidence
and analysis but were formulated like findings or suggestions and should have been stronger.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                  Page 26 of 26
