     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022034

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P090723                                   VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                   Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-46490,IDA-56920                      31-Dec-2015                                          105,885,515.90

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Sep-2009                              30-Jun-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          65,260,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                          107,450,116.46                                                0.00

 Actual                                      105,885,515.90                                                0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Alexandra Christina        Maria Vanessa                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Horst                      Corlazzoli




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Vietnam Livestock Competitiveness and Food Safety
   Project (LIFSAP) as stated in the Financing Agreement dated December 10, 2009 included the following three
   elements: “(i) to increase production efficiency of household-based livestock producers, (ii) reduce
   environmental impact of livestock production, processing and marketing, and (iii) improve food safety in
   livestock product supply chains (mainly meat) in the Project Provinces” (FA, IDA 4649, page 5). The Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD) dated August 27, 2009 stated the same PDO (PAD, para 17).


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



   The PAD (Annex 1) and ICR specified the project’s provinces and reiterated that these were located in
   Vietnam’s four “‘at risk’ production regions” based on a risk assessment conducted during project
   preparation.[1]

   The PDO did not change with the Additional Financing (AF) of 2015, and the Financing Agreement of AF from
   July 9, 2015 stated the same PDO (FA, IDA 4649 and IDA 5692, page 5) . Hence, the aforementioned PDO is
   adopted for the purpose of assessing the project’s achievements in this Implementation Completion Report
   Review (ICRR).

   [1] “The project intended to support up to 12 provinces located in four geographical production clusters: Thanh
   Hoa and Nghe An (Central North); Hanoi, Hai Phong, Thai Binh, Hung Yen, and Hai Duong (North); and Cao
   Bang (Northern Border); and Ho Chi Minh City, Long An, Dong Nai, and Lam Dong (South), which supply the
   Greater Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City Metropolitan markets. These four clusters correspond to the four ‘at risk’
   production regions, as per the risk assessment performed during the project preparation.” (PAD, para 20; ICR,
   para 22).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Upgrading Household-based Livestock Production and Market Integration (Appraisal
   estimate: US$66 million, of which IDA US$53.8 million, Government funding US$1.9 million and private
   sector funding US$10.4 million; AF estimate: total US$43.69, of which IDA US$36.02 million, Government
   funding US$1.42 million and private sector funding US$16.25 million; Actual total at ICR: US$110.89 million,
   of which total IDA disbursed US$86.81 million, Government funding US$5.25 million, and private sector
   contribution US$18.83 million). This component aimed to increase the competitiveness of household-based
   livestock production, enhance food safety and hygiene along the meat supply chain, and enhance the
   environmental management of livestock waste (PAD, para 22). Key activities under this component were
   divided into three sub-components focused on:

         (i) the promotion of Good Animal Husbandry Practices (GAHP) among farmers, extension officers,
          and veterinary staff to increase vaccination coverage for common animal diseases, improve
          biosecurity and waste management, and enhance data collection and compliance monitoring on
          GAHP standards and certification
         (ii) the piloting of Livestock Planning Zones (LPZs) -an existing or proposed land area that local
          authorities designate for livestock production promotion- to improve disease monitoring capacity and
          promote the establishment of farmer cooperatives and partnerships with the private sector for better
          knowledge exchange and harmonized application of improved waste management practices and
          biosecurity investments, and
         (iii) the upgrading slaughterhouses and meat markets to improve their hygienic conditions and waste
          treatment and management.



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)




  Component 2: Strengthening Central-Level Livestock and Veterinary Services (Appraisal estimate:
  US$4.3 million, of which IDA US$4.2 million, Government funding US$0.2 million; AF estimate: total
  US$4.36, of which IDA US$4.27 million, Government funding US$0.9; Actual total at ICR US$7.17 million,
  of which total IDA disbursed US$7.15 million and Government funding of US$0.02 million). This component
  was to strengthen the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) Departments of Livestock
  Production (DLP) and Animal Health (DAH) in developing and monitoring the implementation of animal
  health practices, including an update the GAHP guidelines and strategic studies, training of trainers in
  GAHP, piloting of innovative approaches, the provision of equipment and incremental costs to monitor
  livestock breed and feed quality, waste management and environmental compliance, as well as disease
  surveillance and prevention, meat inspection at the provincial level, and collection and monitoring of zoo
  sanitary and food safety data (PAD, para 24)

  Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Appraisal estimate: US$8.7 million, of
  which IDA US$7.2 million, Government funding US$1.4 million; AF estimate: total US$4.83, of which IDA
  US$2.59 million, Government funding US$2.24 million; Actual total at ICR US$13.53 million, of which
  US$11.71 million total IDA and Government funding US$2.87 million). This component entailed the project
  implementation and coordination of various government agencies at central, provincial, and district levels,
  as well as monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of project activities and impact (PAD, para 25).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost and Financing. At appraisal in December 2009, the total project cost for was estimated at
  US$79.03 million, of which US$65.26 million was expected from IDA credit financing, US$10.37 million from
  the private sector (i.e. the cost-sharing contribution of grant beneficiaries), and US$3.4 million from co-
  financing by the Government of Vietnam (GoV) (PAD, para 26).

  In October 2015, an AF of US$54.68 was approved, of which 44.68 million was expected from IDA credit
  US$6.25 million from the private sector US$3.75 million from GoV co-financing. Therefore, the total project
  estimate (both original and AF) amounted to US$133.7 million, of which the IDA credit amount (both original
  and AF) added up to US$109.9 million and private sector financing (both original and AF) to US$16.65
  million and Government funding (both original and AF) to US$7.25 million (ICR, page 2 and page 57; FA,
  IDA 4649 and IDA 5692). According to the ICR (page 2), the actual total project cost at ICR was US$132.4
  (99% of total estimate).

  Borrower Contribution. At appraisal the borrower contribution of the GoM was estimated at US$3.4 million
  and an additional US$3.75 at AF, totaling US$7.25 million (PAD, para 26). At project closure, the ICR
  reports an actual total Government co-financing of US$8.32 million (ICR, paras 23-25).

  Dates and Restructuring. The Project was approved on September 22, 2009 and became effective on
  March 10, 2010. It closed on June 30, 2019. The original closing date was December 31, 2015, which was
  extended through the AF approved in October 2015 and a restructuring for a closing date extension of six
  months in January 2019.

  The project underwent one AF and two restructurings:




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



         In October 2015, an AF of US$44.68 million was approved to scale-up GAHP capacity-building
          activities by introducing a group/cooperative-targeted approach and expansion of improved
          management activities for meat markets under Component 1. It also aimed to increase assistance to
          the GoV for legal and policy dialogue and reform such as the adoption of the food safety guidelines
          as national standards and accreditation of the laboratory network under Component 2.
         In November 2018, a Level-2 restructuring to modify intermediary results indicators and targets[1].
         In January 2019, a Level-2 restructuring to expand the closing date by six months.[2]

   The PDO was not changed with the restructurings or throughout the project implementation.



   [1] Specifically, two Intermediary Results Indicators (IRI) of the Results Framework (RF) were modified:
   lower the end target value of “Groups of livestock producer households in priority production areas having
   received GAHP certification” IRI from 1,200 to 700, and appoint in the IRI the National Center for Veterinary
   Hygiene Inspection No. I as National Reference Center instead of the initially planned Animal Breeding and
   Feeding Center.

   [2] Specifically to allow for the completion of ongoing project activities due to accumulated delays since
   2016 when the project was not sufficiently allocated implementation budget because of constraints placed
   by the GoV on IDA budget allocations.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were relevant at the time of appraisal and project closing and continue to be at the
time of this ICR Review. Agriculture -livestock production in particular- has been a priority to the GoV, as
the growth of smallholder livestock production has played a significant role in reducing rural poverty since
the early 2000s, particularly for the country’s 7 million pig and 8.3 million poultry small-scale household
producers that at appraisal accounted for about 70 percent of the total livestock production. By project
preparation, meat production had increased from about 2 million tons in 2000 to 3.3 million tons in 2007 and
was still experiencing rapidly expanding demand from a growing middle class in Vietnam.

Alignment with Government Strategy: At appraisal, the project objectives were strongly aligned with the
GoV’s 2008 Strategy for the Development of the Livestock Sector and 2003 Ordinance on Food Safety that
had the objectives to meet the increasing demand for safe, quality meat and improve the conditions for
household livestock producers to expand more small-scale “backyard” to a more intensive, commercial
production. They were also directly linked to the Strategy’s key components of livestock disease control,
food safety and enhanced livestock waste treatment.

At project completion, the project objectives remained highly relevant to the GoV’s development priorities of
a sustainable and competitive agriculture and livestock sector. These objectives were supported by the
2011-2020 Socioeconomic Development Strategy and related 2016–2020 Socioeconomic Development
Plan, which aimed at developing “a new environmentally sustainable growth model based on improved


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 23
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



               productivity and competitiveness, and investments in infrastructure development” (ICR, para 36). To date,
               the project objectives continue to also aligned with the GoV’s food safety concerns, outlined in the 2011-
               2020 National Strategy on Food Safety and related Vision to 2030 approved by the Prime Minister in 2012.

               Alignment with World Bank Strategy: At appraisal, the project objectives were also strongly linked to the
               World Bank’s Vietnam FY07-11 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), particularly to Pillar 1 “Improved
               business environment” by strengthening the competitiveness for household livestock producers and
               slaughterhouses, Pillar 2 “Strengthening Social Inclusion” by making basic services accessible to rural
               smallholder livestock producers, and Pillar 3 “Strengthening Natural Resource and Environmental
               Management” by introducing livestock producers, slaughterhouses and meat markets to waste treatment
               technologies to reduce environmental pollution. Moreover, the World Bank had 15 years of agricultural
               sector experience in Vietnam, with previous lending projects such as the Vietnam Agricultural
               Diversification Project that also included a livestock component (PAD, paras 10-12 and 27). It further had
               supported MARD in the development of Vietnam’s Food Safety and Agricultural Health Action Plan and
               commissioned a FAO study on the Livestock Sector Competitiveness in Vietnam. (PAD, para 11).
               Complemented by similar projects in the region, such as the Animal Feed Project in China and the East
               Asia Regional Livestock Waste Management (PAD, para 12), the Bank had a significant sector and country
               expertise at the time of appraisal of LIFSAP.

               At completion, the PDO remained aligned with the current FY18-22 Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
               and its three Focus Areas of (1) Enable Inclusive Growth and Private Sector Participation, which includes
               the promotion of private sector participation and agribusiness development and enhancement of trade
               competitiveness for the agriculture sector, (2) Invest in people and knowledge, which includes the reduction
               in malnutrition and improved access to health services and (3) Ensure environmental sustainability and
               resilience, which includes the reduction in GHG emissions and strengthened natural resource management.

               Based on the above-mentioned information, relevance of objectives is rated high given the clear ambition of
               the PDO, central contribution of the project to the objectives of the CPS/CPF, its continued relevance at
               completion, and the connection of the PDO to the World Bank’s higher-level objectives of poverty reduction
               and enhancing shared prosperity.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Objective 1: Increase in Production Efficiency of Household-Based Livestock Producers

                             Rationale


                                                                                                                          Page 5 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



According to the PAD, output from household livestock production made up about 70 percent of total livestock
sector production in Vietnam at the time of appraisal (PAD, para 19). These small-scale producers had limited
knowledge of safe and modern production practices resulting from weak veterinary and extension services
and applied reactive rather than preventive disease control measures (PAD, para 5). Hence, the PAD
identified that a key measure to enhance production efficiency was to promote Good Animal Husbandry
Practices (GAHP) among household livestock producers, in addition to upgrading the processing practices at
slaughterhouses and meat markets (PAD, para 41). In order to do so effectively, there was a critical need to
strengthen the capacity of the animal health and veterinary services at the central and local level. A 2007 and
2010 assessment of the Vietnamese veterinary services by the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE)
had revealed that field services for livestock diseases were weak and there was a need to update the
veterinary curriculum (PAD, para 7).

Theory of Change. The Vietnam Livestock Competitiveness and Food Safety Project (LIFSAP) was
designed to address the above-mentioned challenges and needs. Objective 1 was based on the Theory of
Change (ToC) that supporting institutional capacity-building to MARD’s responsible departments (Department
of Livestock Production -DLP- and Department of Animal Health -DAH) in updating GAHP standards and
developing guidelines and regulations in various areas[1], combined with the modernization of equipment and
financing of livestock breed and feed monitoring as well as disease surveillance capacity[2], would lead to
enhanced veterinary and extension services. As a result, it was expected that the provision of these
enhanced services to livestock producers would generate their uptake of GAHP, and combined with support
to form GAHP collaborative groups, lead to greater farm-level production efficiency by shortening fattening
times, increasing herds/flocks and reducing animal mortality rates. Similarly, it was expected that improved
veterinary and inspection services would lead to higher compliance rates of livestock processors with national
standards and acquisition of relevant certifications.[3] The outputs and outcomes supporting Objective 1 of
are described in the following:

Outputs (based on ICR page 18 and Annex 1)

      232 (target: 100) GAHP collaborative groups were formed, comprised of 1,217 producers (Target:
         exceeded).
        19 (target: 15) GAHP cooperatives were established, comprised of 552 producers (Target: exceeded).
        25,472 (target: 23,107) farmers were reached with agricultural assets or services (Target: exceeded).
        26,312 (target: 25,000) farmers adopting improved agricultural technology (Target: exceeded).
        4,628 (no target) agricultural and veterinary extension workers were trained in GAHP standards and
         certification, production efficiency, disease control, prevention and reporting systems, livestock waste
         management, and food safety.
        22,906 (no target) household livestock producers (21,983 pig and 923 poultry) were trained in GAHP.
        43,076 additional (no target as indirect beneficiares) farming households outside the project benefited
         from GAHP trainings, an indication of significant spillover effects resulting from the project and
         increased capacity of the DLP and DAH workforce (ICR, para 45).
        373 (target: 350) slaughterhouses (303 small and 70 medium to large) were upgraded and inspected
         (Target: exceeded).
        572 (target: 500) meat markets comprised of 20,538 counters, were upgraded and inspected (Target:
         exceeded).
        30 (target: 30) slaughterhouses obtained certification for Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP), Good
         Hygienic Practices (GHP) and Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) (Target met).


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)




      Vietnam’s undergraduate veterinary curriculum was amended to include courses on food safety along
       the livestock value chain, addressing a weakness identified by the OIE assessment (Target: met)
      10,665 (no target) veterinary staff supervising slaughterhouses and meat markets were trained on
       regulatory enforcement and integrated risk management and meat inspection.

Outcomes

Improved Animal Health and Veterinary Services. The ICR provided evidence that the project-supported
trainings of veterinary staff and extension officers enhanced the quality of support to livestock producers (see
Outputs), and this led to improved outcomes in animal health and veterinary services. Att project completion,
715 groups of livestock producers had received GAHP certification – which require the proven uptake of
specific technologies and practices and which are due to regular inspection-, demonstrating a significant
compliance with GAHP standards (Target: exceeded, Target: 700). Moreover, fungal contamination in animal
feed of project-supported household producers was reduced (no aflatoxin B1 was found - considered the
most dangerous naturally occurring toxin with carcinogenic effect on human and animals). This in an
indication of producers’ heightened awareness and knowledge of animal feed treatment, which can be related
to improved extension and veterinary support in epidemiology, data recording and disease monitoring – all
areas supported by the project. A shortcoming of the ICR is that it does not present the level of aflatoxin B1 in
livestock feed before the project. Furthermore, the vaccination coverage for common diseases in animals
owned by household producers increased to 93.7 percent by project completion (higher than the target of
90.8). Also, the project led to increased sero-surveillance monitoring capacity[4] for the most common
diseases of pigs and poultry, allowing for a more effective determination of disease transmission and
population immunity, in particular with regard to vaccine-preventable diseases (preventative rather than
reactive disease control).

This reduced contamination of animal feed and the increased vaccination rates among project-supported
livestock farms can be linked to the ICR’s evidence on the reduced rate in animal mortality: at project
completion, mortality rate in pigs had reduced from 15 percent to 10 percent (below the target of 11.8
percent) and similarly in chickens from 41 percent to 13.9 percent (significantly below the target of 29
percent). More details and further changes to livestock production efficiency and animal health are described
in the next section.

Improved Livestock Production and Processing Practices. The project also directly supported the
adoption of improved practices in pig and poultry production (on-farm) and processing (off-farm at
slaughterhouses and meat markets): At farm level, the project led to the formation of 232 so-called GAHP
collaborative groups and 19 GAHP cooperatives , complementing the GAHP training targeting household
livestock producers. These establishment of these group and cooperatives had the objective to enhance
knowledge exchange and harmonize the adoption of improved practices, but also to increase producers’
purchasing and bargaining power with input providers to reduce the cost of animal feed as well as with buyers
to secure market offtake. Beyond GAHP, producers received training and demonstrations on feed quality and
balancing and on-farm biosecurity measures, among other topics. A shortcoming of the ICR is that it does not
provide evidence on the adoption rate of the practices among the producers taught in these trainings.
However, the reported outcomes of shortened livestock fattening periods and increased flock/herd sizes
described in more detail below can be affiliated with improved on-farm technical skills and practices promoted
by LIFSAP. Supplementing these trainings and addressing producers’ constraints to financial resources, the
project also provided matching grants for investments in animal health (leading to the construction of 17,493
biogas digesters (ICR, page 67 para 15) and 142 post-biogas effluent treatment schemes (ICR, para 85),
93.7% vaccination coverage for common animal diseases (ICR, para 42), etc.), as well as the construction of

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



1,608 composting facilities, and slurry treatment to increase their production efficiency and reducing
environmental pollution from livestock production (outcomes on the latter are described under Objective 2).

At processing level, the project supported upgrading and improvement of 303 small slaughterhouses (i.e.,
slaughtering 10 to 30 pigs per day) and 70 medium to large slaughterhouses (i.e., slaughtering more than 30
pigs per day) and 572 meat markets (see Outputs). This promoted their adoption of national standards to
enhance hygiene, food safety, and waste management practices of meat slaughtering, butchering and meat
handling. It specifically financed equipment necessary to comply with the national standards and provided
meat inspectors, butchers and middlemen with training on these standards and guidance on how to obtain
certification for Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP), Good Hygienic Practices (GHP) and Hazard Analysis
Critical Control Point (HACCP).

The ICR provides outcome evidence that the project-supported activities led to improved efficiency in
livestock production and processing: at project completion, project-supported farms had a lower livestock
mortality rate than at baseline, as captured by the respective PDO indicator. Specifically, for pigs the mortality
rate reduced from 15 percent (2010 baseline) to 11.8 percent (in 2015) and 10 percent at project completion,
meeting the target of 10 percent. Similarly, for poultry the mortality rate dropped from 41 percent (2010
baseline) to 31 percent (in 2015) to 13.9 percent at project completion, significantly exceeding the target of 29
percent) Other outcomes on production efficiency measured by PDO indicators were (i) livestock fattening
periods which fell respectively by 14 and 15 percent for pigs and poultry in line with the target values, and that
(ii) pig herd sizes increased from 25.6 animals per herd (2010 baseline) to 31 animals (in 2015) to 40 animals
(target: 40) at project completion; poultry flock sizes doubled from 935 animals per flock (2010 baseline) to
1,400 animals (in 2015) to 1,825 animals (target: 1,800) at project completion. Moreover, the ICR described
how GAHP collaborative groups and cooperatives increased production efficiency through joint purchases
from input providers that led to 3 to 5 percent costs savings in animal feed expenses (ICR, page 19). It also
stated that t links with buyers were established but does not provide details (ICR, page 19). Furthermore, at
project completion, all slaughterhouses and meat markets operated in line with design and procedure
requirements, and 30 of the slaughterhouses supported by the project had received certification for GMP,
GHP, and HACCP, achieving the project target of 30 and demonstrating compliance with certification
standards related to food safety and disease control.

Piloting Livestock Production Zones (LPZs). The project piloted the concept of LPZs and implemented
one LPZ scheme – described by the ICR as “a miniature and enhanced GAHP zone” (ICR, para 42). The
project supported consultant services for spatial design planning of the LPZ, construction of basic public
infrastructure (small access roads, electricity and water supply systems), improved biosecurity and veterinary
services, as well as investments in livestock waste management and environmental protection (such as
biogas digesters at the farm level or common central lagoons or pipe systems at the community level). The
pilot scheme was to test if the LPZs’ geographic concentration of livestock activities, with a more harmonized
application of (GAHP) production practices and access to shared services/common facilities would lead to
higher productivity and competitiveness of livestock producers (and ultimately be a potential tool to incentivize
livestock producers to relocate from urban to rural areas to reduce pollution and human health risks.)

The ICR provided only limited information on outcomes of the LPZ pilot, referring to general benefits from
“ease of extension and veterinary services”, common approaches and facilities, and deeper GAHP
harmonization (ICR, paragraph 42c). One specific measured outcome demonstrated a higher efficiency of
LPZ in terms of the proportion of vaccination for common diseases of pigs reaching 95.8 percent (compared
to 93.7 percent in non-LPZ areas). At appraisal, three LPZ pilot schemes were planned (PAD, paragraph 57),
but the ICR explained that environmental, economic, and technical risks had not been sufficiently considered,

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



leading to the piloting of one scheme “through which such risks could be re-examined further before scaling
up” (ICR, paragraph 77). It further stated that the experience of the pilot LPZ would inform the new Livestock
Development Strategy and has been reflected in the formulation of the Livestock Law and the Veterinary Law.

Summary. Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the evidence in the ICR pointed to the success of
the project in increasing the production efficiency of household-based livestock producers, despite some
shortcomings in the demonstration of guideline dissemination and (continued) adoption of improved practices
among the producers. Hence, the efficacy of this outcome for Objective 1 is rated Substantial.



[1] Specifically, guidelines and regulations for (i) biosecurity, (ii) livestock waste management, (iii) quality of
livestock feeds, (iv) sale and use of feed additives, (v) hygiene standards, and (vi) meat inspection. ICR Box 1
(page 20) provides some details on the GAHP handbook developed by the project.

[2] This included carrying out serological surveys, which provide estimates of antibody levels against vaccine
preventable diseases (VPDs) and is considered the gold standard for measuring population immunity due to
past infection or vaccination. It is an important component of disease surveillance (Source:
http://ncirs.org.au/our-work/serosurveillance)

[3] The most relevant certifications were for Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP), Good Hygienic Practices
(GHP) and Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP).

[4] Sero-surveillance provides estimates of antibody levels against vaccine preventable diseases (VPDs) and
is considered the gold standard for measuring population immunity due to past infection or vaccination. It is
an important component of disease surveillance (Source: http://ncirs.org.au/our-work/serosurveillance)



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Objective 2: Reduce the Environmental Impact of Livestock Production, Processing and Marketing

Rationale
Theory of Change. The objectives of increasing production efficiency, reducing environmental impact, and
improve food safety in the livestock value chain are strongly interlinked and share elements of the same ToC.
For Objective 2 specifically, the provision of training to producers on improved waste and biosecurity
measures -in combination with the provision of matching grants for the construction of biodigesters,
composting facilities, slurry treatment, and implementation of biosecurity measures at the farm and communal
level- were expected to not only increase production efficiency but also reduce the environmental impact of
their livestock production. Similarly, the supported upgrading of small, medium and large slaughterhouses
and meat market in their respective waste treatment and management practices was expected to lessen
adverse environmental impacts. Moreover, helping medium and large slaughterhouses and meat markets to


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



comply with national environmental standards (and pass related inspections) was assumed to further drive a
reduction in environmental impact.

Many of the activities and outputs described under Objective 1 (capacity-building of producers and animal
health and veterinary service providers, matching grants for improved livestock production, upgrading of
slaughterhouses and meat markets) also support the achievement of Objective 2 and 3. The outputs and
outcomes specifically supporting Objective 2 are described in the following:

Outputs (based on ICR page 18 and Annex 1)

      25,172 (target: 25,000) households adopted improved waste management measures, from 2015
         baseline of 10,999 households (Target met).
        6,371 (no target) households received technical assistance on upgrading their waste treatment system
         to reduce environmental pollution.
        17,493 (no target, but PAD economic analysis assumed 3,000) biogas digesters were constructed.
        1,608 (no target) composting pits were constructed.
        142 (no target) post-biogas effluent treatment schemes were constructed.
        303 (target: 310) small slaughterhouses upgraded in line with improved waste management practices,
         from 2015 baseline of 193 slaughterhouses (Target: not met).
        70 (target: 40) medium and large slaughterhouses meet national environment standards, from 2015
         baseline of 25 slaughterhouses (Target exceeded).
        572 (target: 500) meat markets meet national environment standards, from 2015 baseline of 378
         markets (Target exceeded).

Outcomes

Improved Environmental Practices in Livestock Household Production. The Project supported capacity-
building activities for extension and veterinary staff and related training of livestock producers included
technologies for improved livestock production waste treatment and management at the farm level.
Furthermore, the upgraded the Department of Natural Resources and Environmental by financing equipment
and incremental costs for monitoring of livestock waste and environmental compliance (at different levels of
the value chain). The ICR claimed that these measures led to a reduction in methane emissions from manure
as well as in GHG emissions from less use of traditional fuels and chemical fertilizers (replaced by bio-slurry).
The ICR provided some evidence to support these statements, but the evidence was based on estimates in
2015 (at completion of phase 1 before the AF) expecting that the introduction of biogas digesters would
reduce CO2 emissions (baseline greenhouse gas) from approximately 442 tons of manure per day,
corresponding to 40,800 tons of CO2 per year (ICR, para 19). It was also expected that the use of biogas
from project-supported digesters for cooking would reduce methane emissions, but the project-specific effects
were not quantified. The ICR, however, did report that the project used mitigation measures to minimize
negative environmental impacts at key stages of activities (design, bidding, construction, and
implementation): The introduction of GAHP and construction of biogas digesters and post-biogas effluent
treatment schemes reduced pollution levels generated by farms, slaughterhouses, and wet markets. The ICR
reported that “environmental performance at 100 percent of the 235 slaughterhouses and 97.8 percent of the
378 wet markets supported by the project has been improved” (ICR, para 85) and met Vietnamese
environmental standards by project closure. Moreover, the PAD stated that at appraisal only a limited
number of household livestock farmers had waste treatment technologies, leading to groundwater and


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



surface water pollution at farm level. The ICR does not provide any evidence in the reduction of groundwater
or surface water pollution.

Compliance with Environmental Standards in Livestock Processing and Marketing. At processing level,
the project supported 373 slaughterhouses to upgrade sanitation and veterinary procedures including
improved waste treatment and management (Target exceeded, Target: 350) . As a result, at project
completion, 70 medium to large slaughterhouses and 303 small slaughterhouses complied with national
environmental standards. The PDO indicator target of 40 for medium to large slaughterhouses was largely
exceeded, given the GoV priority for these facilities. A review of the project document revea that during
implementation the Bank team convinced the GoV of the importance of environmental compliance by the
large number of small slaughterhouses, leading to the near achievement of the end-of-project target of 310
small slaughterhouses. The ICR stated that the project “contributed to improved quality of posttreatment
wastewater discharged into the environment, thereby reducing environmental pollution” (ICR, para 43), but
the report did not provide specific evidence.

At marketing level, the project supported upgrades -including in waste and wastewater treatment- of 572 meat
markets comprised of over 20,000 counters, which led to compliance of all supported markets with national
environmental standards, exceeding the PDO indicator target of 500 meat markets. Similar to
slaughterhouses, the ICR refers to significant improvements in wastewater of these meat markets but does
not state specific measures.

Summary. Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the ICR provides evidence that the project has led to
a reduction in the environmental impact of the livestock value chain (at the production, processing and
marketing levels) and the compliance of project-supported beneficiaries with national environmental
standards as targeted, despite some shortcoming in providing quantitative evidence of the specific
effects. Overall, the efficacy of this outcome for Objective 2 is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Objective 3: Improve Food Safety in Livestock Product Supply Chains (mainly meat)

Rationale
Theory of Change. The objectives of increasing production efficiency, reducing environmental impact, and
improve food safety in the livestock value chain are strongly interlinked and share elements of the same ToC.
For Objective 3 specifically, the project support in training livestock producers in GAHP -including food safety
measures- and providing them with matching grants for production upgrades was expected to increase food
safety at the production/farm level. The complementary training and financing to upgrade the meat handling
equipment of small, medium and large slaughterhouses and meat markets and support to meet food quality
and food safety standards in combination with strengthening meat inspection services was expected to
enhance food safety at the off-farm segments of the livestock value chain. Many of the activities and outputs



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



described under Objective 1 and 2 also support the achievement of Objective 3. The outputs and outcomes
specifically supporting Objective 3 are described in the following:

Outputs (based on ICR page 18 and Annex 1)

      National Center for Veterinary Hygiene Inspection No. I appointed to National Reference Center.
      Food safety good practices included in the national veterinary curriculum.
      70 (target: 40) medium and large slaughterhouses met national environment standards, from 2015
       baseline of 25 slaughterhouses (Target: Exceeded).
      373 (target: 350) small slaughterhouses upgraded to produce meat of improved quality and safety,
       from 2015 baseline of 235 slaughterhouses (Target: exceeded).
      572 (target: 500) meat markets met national environment standards, from 2015 baseline of 378
       markets (Target: exceeded).

Outcomes

Improved Food Safety Practices in Livestock Household Production. Food safety is an important
element for competitiveness, as it determines whether food attributes comply with hygienic
procedures/standards, increasingly demanded by (in particular urban) consumers. At farm level, the project
supported livestock producers to improve hygienic practices and knowledge of food safety standards in the
livestock value chain. The ICR reported farm-level outcomes based on 204 meat samples of beneficiary pig
household producers with 100 percent negative detection of hormones or banned substances (ICR, page 69,
para 23). Tests of animal feed at project-supported farms also had negative results.

Compliance with National Food Safety Standards in Livestock Processing and Marketing. At
institutional level, LIFSAP financed equipment and incremental costs at the Department of Health (and its
provincial sub-divisions) to improve the quality of its services in disease surveillance/prevention and meat
inspection at the provincial level as well as upgrade its capacity for monitoring of zoo sanitary and food safety
data. Moreover, the National Center for Veterinary Hygiene Inspection No. I was appointed Vietnam’s
National Reference Center with support of the project. With this support on food safety monitoring capacity,
results on compliance with food safety standards were more reliable collected and analyzed than before. At
processing level, the project support to upgrade equipment and increasing awareness on procedures for safe
and hygienic slaughtering and meat handling led to a reduced and low microbial contamination on carcass
samples and slaughter tools, according to the ICR. At project completion, all 373 (target: 350) project-
supported slaughterhouses had upgraded their meat handling to improved quality and safety. Moreover, 30
(target: 30) slaughterhouses complied with national food safety/hygiene standards and received certification
for Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP), Good Hygienic Practices (GHP) and Hazard Analysis Critical
Control Point (HACCP) - the ICR does not specify if these are generally medium to large slaughterhouses.
The ICR estimates that about 2.6 million consumers are indirect beneficiaries of these improvements in food
safety at slaughterhouses (ICR, page 69, para 24).

At marketing level, all 572 project-supported meat markets met the national meat quality and safety standards
at project completion (target: 500). In addition to this PDO indicator, food safety monitoring at project-
supported meat markets demonstrates that about 90 percent of pork meat samples met the microbial criteria
for both Escherichia coli and Salmonella, and that 92 percent of chicken meat samples met the criteria for
Salmonella and about 75 the E. coli requirement (ICR, page 69, para 25). The ICR estimates that about 1.8
million consumers are indirect beneficiaries of these improvements in food safety at meat markets (ICR, page

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 23
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



                            69, para 25). This is good evidence of project results beyond the PDO indicators, which would be more
                            meaningful if the ICR had provided the compliance levels at baseline.

                            Summary. Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the evidence in the ICR pointed to the success of
                            the project in enhancing the food safety in the livestock supply chain. Hence, the efficacy of this outcome for
                            Objective 3 is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of Objective 1 -to increase production efficiency of household-based livestock producers - is
                            rated Substantial as a result of positive impacts reported by the ICR, despite some shortcomings in the
                            demonstration of continued adoption of improved practices. The achievement of Objective 2 -to reduce
                            environmental impact of livestock production, processing and marketing- is rated Substantial due to meeting
                            or exceeding indicators and targets, in particular the compliance of more than targeted slaughterhouses and
                            meat markets with national environment standards. The achievement of Objective 3 -to improve food safety in
                            livestock product supply chains - is rated Substantial as a result of sufficient outcome evidence, with more
                            than the targeted slaughterhouses having upgraded their meat handling and received certification for Good
                            Manufacturing Practices (GMP), Good Hygienic Practices (GHP) and Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point
                            (HACCP). Based on this, and given that all targeted project outcomes were either fully achieved or exceeded
                            at project completion, the overall efficacy is rated Substantial despite some shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Scope of Analysis. At appraisal, a conventional cost-benefit analysis was carried out to estimate the
   Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR), using farm models for producers who were considered representative
   of the project beneficiary producers. The analysis was based on quantifiable investments related to project
   interventions at farm level (investments in production efficiency, supporting feed cost reductions from enhanced
   feed conversion and reduced livestock mortality) and quantifiable food safety and environmental improvements
   (prevented food poisoning treatment costs and worker illness productivity losses, and reduced fossil energy
   costs due to biogas use). The overall ex-ante EIRR was estimated at 17.4 percent with a Net Present Value
   (NPV) of US$19.9 million, assuming a discount rate of 12 percent and project lifetime of 25 years.



                                                                                                                              Page 13 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



Economic Analysis. At closing, the ICR calculated the EIRR based on production survey data collected from
project-supported pig and poultry producers and control groups (using incremental financial costs and benefits
analysis to analyze the “with project” and “without project” scenario) to estimate quantifiable production benefits
in terms of net profit per kg meat sold and economic benefits from biogas digesters (using cost-benefit analysis).
The overall ex-post EIRR was estimated at 23.4 percent with a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$287 million,
assuming a discount rate of 9 percent[1] and project lifetime of 25 years. The EIRR results remain robust also at
different sensitivity scenarios of increased and/or reduced benefits: for example, at a reduction of 20% in
benefits, the EIRR is estimated at 17.4%. Overall, the ex-post methodology appears sound.

The PAD and ICR highlight that several economic benefits were not considered in the economic and financial
analysis (both ex-ante and ex-post), which would lead to even higher EIRR. These benefits are related to
increased food safety at the farm level (producers), processing level (slaughterhouses), and marketing level
(meat markets), for which the project did not (plan to) collect data. Similarly, income increases of slaughterhouse
and meat market operators were not considered in the ex-post analysis.

Operational Efficiency. Regarding operational efficiency, the ICR reported that “the project team also
demonstrated a higher level of implementation efficiency as they addressed emerging implementation
challenges in a time and effective manner” (ICR, paragraph 49). However, actual costs for project management
(Component 3) were 20 percent higher than assumed (US$11.71 million compared to US$9.79 million at
appraisal/AF), indicating a lower than expected operational efficiency.

Given the adequacy of the economic analysis, solid internal rates of return, and robust results from the
sensitivity analysis, the project's efficiency is rated Substantial - despite shortcomings in operational efficiency.



[1] The ICR states that the discount rate of 9 percent had been used for World Bank-funded investment projects
in Vietnam.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         93.00
 Appraisal                                                    17.40
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         93.00
 ICR Estimate                                                 23.40
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.




                                                                                                        Page 14 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives is rated High, as LIFSAP objectives were relevant to both the former and current
national priorities and Bank sector strategies. The achievement of the PDO to increase production efficiency of
household-based livestock producers, reduce environmental impact of livestock production, processing and
marketing, and improve food safety in livestock product supply chains (mainly meat) in the project provinces is
rated Substantial, given that all targeted project outcomes were either fully achieved or exceeded at project
completion and additional evidence has been demonstrated for each objective. Efficiency is rated Substantial,
given the project’s sound economic rate of return, robustness in the sensitivity analysis, and adequate
methodology applied. As a result, the combined outcome rating is rated as Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Two main risks to sustaining the DO in the longer term are:

      (i) maintaining the application of GAHP among project beneficiaries and ensuring scale-up to the
       national level for widespread improvements in food safety, given their dependence on adequate
       monitoring and inspection capacity (both technical and financial) of the sector agencies. Hence, there
       is a need for continued budget to support activities established by LIFSAP, especially for district- and
       provincial- level monitoring capacity. These challenges can be expected to be (at least partially)
       addressed through a follow-up operation building on LIFSAP, which is mentioned as interest by the
       GoV in the ICR.[1]

      (ii) the risk and unpredictability of animal disease and its detriment effects on the livestock sector,
       animal (and sometimes also human) health, and economic condition of producers and related supply
       chain actors. At the time of the ICR, Vietnam was experiencing an outbreak of African Swine Fever
       (AFS), which is highly resistant and led to a substantial mortality in pigs. Hence, especially
       smallholder livestock producers of pig were at risk of economic loss and potential exit of the livestock
       business. The ICR contended, however, that “relative resilience of project areas and beneficiaries,
       compared to other areas in the country, demonstrates the value of GAHP and increased biosecurity”
       (ICR, para 48). Project beneficiaries had lower incidences of AFS, as in Hanoi where data from
       October 2019 showed that “SF-affected households applying GAHP was lower (21.3 percent)
       compared to the overall percentage (38.9 percent” (ICR, para 99).



[1] At the time of this Review, an estimated US$150million IBRD loan for the Vietnam Agri-Food Safety
Project (AFSP, P171187) with the objective to “improve food safety management systems and infrastructure
in targeted areas and reduce food safety risks in selected value chains” is in the lending pipeline (with
expected Board approval date in December 2020). If the AFSP becomes effective, the sustainability of
outcomes from LIFSAP are more likely to be sustained and scaled-up. Furthermore, sustainability of GAHP
technical skills of household livestock producers and the adoption and continued availability of equipment

                                                                                                       Page 15 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



and practices to increase hygiene and waste management practices of slaughterhouses and meat markets,
reinforced by an increased demand of growing middle-class consumers for safe food and quality standards.
Furthermore, institutional capacity was built at different levels: (i) at the farm and communal level, the
establishment of livestock planning zones (LPZs) and related infrastructure enhanced data recording and
disease monitoring for better waste management and biosecurity, (ii) at the provincial and district level,
livestock services were capacitated in improved monitoring of feed quality and environmental compliance
and conducted in a pilot livestock identification system for pigs, and (iii) at the central level, support for
livestock and veterinary services led to updated GAHP guidelines and training, improved data collection and
monitoring capacity of livestock breed and feed quality as well as sanitary and food safety data and related
waste management and environmental impact.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The World Bank Task Team ensured that the design of the LIFSAP and its objectives were fully aligned
  with the GoV’s agricultural sector priorities and the World Bank’s strategic involvement in Vietnam at the
  time of project preparation and appraisal. The team built the project design on the Bank’s long-term
  involvement in Vietnam’s agriculture sector and incorporated lessons from relevant Bank agricultural
  projects and relevant analytical studies on Vietnam’s livestock sector to address key constraints to
  livestock competitiveness and food safety. Given this experience, it is surprising that the project did not
  adequately anticipate the time needed/potential initial delays to build capacity of technical staff given the
  introduction of new concepts (such as LPZ, which was adapted to only one instead of three pilots during
  implementation) (ICR, para 77).

  Overall, component design was in line with the PDO, adequate for the capacity of the implementing
  agencies, and funded appropriately with the original activities of the project. The project design also
  incorporated lessons from previous sector projects in Vietnam, such as the importance of supporting
  adoption of improved livestock production technologies, need for private-public partnerships in veterinary
  service delivery to ensure effective veterinary coverage, an taking a decentralized approach to ensure
  ownership and capacity-building at provincial levels (PAD, para 27)

  Moreover, the World Bank Task Team put emphasis on designing an effective coordination mechanism
  using existing systems to generate institutional capacity-building for the time after project completion and
  ensure ownership by the GoV. The anticipated critical risks and respective mitigation measures described
  in the PAD were adequate, such as addressing (i) the risk of producer reluctance to adopt GAHP with
  intensive awareness raising and demonstrations, (ii) the risk of disease outbreaks with enhanced disease
  control reporting and procedural measures, (iii) the risk of unassertive meat inspectors with intensive
  training and external monitoring (PAD, page 12).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)




b. Quality of supervision
 The project was implemented largely according to its design, but it experienced significant initial delays and
 capacity constraints, which the ICR relateed to the novel approaches introduced by the project (ICR, para
 71), such as GAHP, LPZs, biosecurity measures, food safety practices, and livestock waste management.
 The World Bank Task team was responsive in addressing these factors, for example by adapting the plans
 for the LPZ pilot to one instead of three to deeply examine the related environmental, economic and
 technical risks (ICR, para 77). Other factors were outside the control of the World Bank Task Team, such
 as the livestock market fluctuations due to food scares, restrictions placed by the GoV on IDA budget
 allocations, or the African Swine Fever (ASF) outbreak affecting pig production (ICR, para 74-76).. Project
 performance improved after the Mid-Term Review (MTR) – from temporary moderately unsatisfactory
 performance to moderately satisfactory after six months and later satisfactory performance. At completion,
 the project fully achieved or exceeded all targets in the results framework (RF).

 Supervision missions took place on a regular basis with adequate expertise in staffing, and included site
 visits and interactions with various project stakeholders. In addition, especially at early implementation the
 World Bank Task Team provided technical advice to the PCU when needed and brought international
 expertise on specific issues requested by the GoV (in collaboration with FAO). Task Team leadership was
 continuous with one change in Task Team Leadership at AF, which ensured continuity and a
 responsiveness to the client implementing agencies (ICR, para 94). The ICR and implementation status
 reports suggested that the World Bank Task Team was generally proactive in responding to new issues
 during supervision. For example, to address the significant delays in the first years of project
 implementation (ICR, para 33 and 89), the Mid-Term Review (MTR) recommendations were taken
 seriously and led to adjustments in the Results Framework, and the team did not shy away from
 restructurings when necessary.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Theory of Change. Overall, LIFSAP’s M&E design and strategy was well-developed. A Theory of Change
 (ToC) was not (required to be) prepared at appraisal, but the ICR presented an ex-post ToC. This ToC is
 logical and convincing:

       at farm level, the adoption of GAHP and improved practices with complementary on-farm
        infrastructure investments supported through matching grants and piloting of LPZ for improved
        biosecurity and waste management were expected to lead to better efficiency and productivity of
        household livestock production;


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



      at processing level, the upgrading and improvement of slaughterhouses and meat markets as well
       as capacity-building of inspection services was expected to enhance hygiene, food safety, and
       waste management of meat slaughtering, butchering and meat handling throughout the value chain
       and to reduce the risk of animal disease outbreaks and unsafe food;
      - at institutional level, capacity-building and training of both central and provincial animal health
       and veterinary services in GAHP standards and procedures, development and review of guidelines
       and regulations for on-farm and off-farm biosecurity, livestock waste management, hygiene
       standards, meat inspection, and certification was expected to lead to better veterinary services to
       livestock producers, improved animal health, and enhanced surveillance performance of the
       services. The project’s three intervention levels (farm, processing, institutional) are strongly inter-
       linked and share the objectives of more efficient, environmentally-conscious, and safer livestock
       production and processing and ultimately the reduction in animal disease in the livestock chain.

Results Framework. Overall, the mix of PDO and intermediary outcome and output indicators for the
different targeted livestock sub-sectors (poultry, pig) in the Results Framework (RF) design seems
appropriate. Outcome indicators were focused on changes in on-farm production measures, levels of
vaccinations and inspections, and producers and processors/markets meeting national environmental and
food quality/safety standards. Output indicators were focused on establishment of standards and
guidelines, trainings conducted, technologies promoted and adopted among farmers and processors.

Also, the project had a large number of PDO (sub-) indicators in the RF given its three-fold PDO:

      For the production efficiency objective, it identified three measures as (i) reducing livestock mortality
       rates, (ii) shortening of the livestock fattening period, and (iii) increasing the size of flocks and
       herds. This constellation of on-farm production measures is adequate and aligned with the appraisal
       context of food safety concerns and increased domestic demand for meat by a growing middle-
       class.
      For the environmental impact objective, it also identified three measures to disaggregate between
       target beneficiary groups as the percentage of (i) livestock producers, (ii) slaughterhouses, and (iii)
       meat markets meeting national environmental standards. This is also considered adequate.
      For the food safety objective the PDO indicators measured the percentage of beneficiary (i)
       slaughterhouses and (ii) meat markets operating at national food safety standards. These measures
       are adequate but could have been complemented by more intermediate results indicators, such as
       the specific equipment/capacity provided to these facilities and their use.

The ICR rightly highlighted shortcomings in the appraisal RF in the partially unclear definitions of indicators
and the sole dependence on the project’s M&E system without complementary data sources or an impact
evaluation (ICR, para 78). The shortcomings on indicator formulations and definitions were largely adjusted
during the AF preparations. But on the diversification of M&E data sources, the PAD actually does state
that Component 3 would “finance technical assistance (TA) to carry out independent evaluations at mid
term review and after the project is completed”, which were not conducted during project implementation
(to be discussed more under M&E Implementation).

M&E Arrangements. LIFSAP’s M&E design was based on the use of the national system, relying on data
to be regularly collected by GAHP officers and veterinary services from farmers, slaughterhouses and meat
markets. The PAD described that LIFSAP would M&E arrangements would be in line with the GoV’s



                                                                                                    Page 18 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



 Aligned Monitoring Tool (AMT) established by the Ministry of Planning and Investment and key donors and
 finance “a simple” Monitoring Information System (MIS) on the basis of the AMT.

 Relying on the national systems is generally welcome to increase capacity and enhance changes of
 continuity after project completion, under the assumption that sufficient training is provided to ensure
 quality. According to the ICR, M&E staffing at the national and provincial level was adequate and M&E
 reporting was easy due to the project developing user-friendly reporting formats.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E Capacity. The PAD outlined M&E responsibilities in terms of data collection and monitoring across
  the various agencies involved in LIFSAP and planned for a consultant to provide technical assistance to
  the PCU for data collection planning. The ICR stated that the staffing for M&E was adequate and issues
  were addressed in a responsive and timely fashion (more details under Changes to RF/Restructurings).
  Yet, it also highlighted that the results monitoring capacity of the project implementation agencies had to
  be improved, especially at the provincial level/PPMUs. To address this, the project conducted various
  training sessions to PPMUs, which increased the quality of data collection and reporting over time. The
  project’s M&E rating improved from moderately satisfactory to satisfactory in the last two years of
  implementation.

  M&E Data Collection. Despite plans for establishing “a simple MIS” at appraisal, the ICR criticized that
  LIFSAP did not develop f a simple web-based MIS for key results indicators. This system would have
  allowed for the collection of and access to real time information. The MIS system would have generated
  time savings.

  Furthermore, a review of the RF at project completion reveals the lack of baseline values for the majority
  of results indicators (except the PDO indicators on production efficiency). Similarly, no (independent)
  impact assessment was conducted despite financing plans for technical assistance for “necessary
  surveys and independent evaluation reports” (PAD, page 42 para 10). The ICR contended that these
  shortcomings were addressed by the generation of “endline to baseline comparative data” using the
  project M&E system to also collect data on control groups to assess project impacts. However, it also
  explained that its overall M&E Quality rating is modest “due to the lack of the independent impact
  evaluation” (ICR, para 83) and it generated a lesson on the need for a robust M&E design and collection
  of at least two evaluations (ICR, para 103).

  Changes to the RF. The PDO did not change throughout project implementation, but a number of results
  indicators were amended for the AF to address some of the identified shortcomings in the M&E design.
  These changes were appropriate to provide clearer outcome measures (such as more precise wording or
  the clarification of applicability of national standards) and to adjust to the M&E capacity (such as the
  changes from measuring absolute versus percentage values). They also helped to demonstrate
  outcomes at a disaggregated level by type of livestock (pigs versus poultry). Some changes to the RF
  were already proposed during the 2013 MTR and noted in the MTR mission Aide Memoire, but no
  changes were implemented until the preparation of the AF in 2015. The ICR does not address why the
  2013 MTR suggestions for the RF were not addressed and/or if the decision had been made to not move
  forward with them.




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR briefly described how the M&E systems was utilized for project management or other purposes.
  It states that the M&E information was used to inform government decision-making on disease outbreak
  preparedness, rate of slaughterhouse and meat market upgrading, and the financing impact of project-
  supported biodigesters, among others. It is not described if the M&E system will be used or modified for
  the follow-on project.

  Overall, M&E Quality is rated Modest. This rating reflects the generally adequate M&E design, but
  shortcoming in the implementation to generate adequate baselines for several indicators and lack of a
  final assessment, as well as the limited utilization of M&E results.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified as Environmental Category B, as it was not
   expected to lead to any significant negative environmental changes. It triggered Environmental Assessment
   (EA) 4.01 and Pest Management 4.09 Operational Safeguard Policies. The PAD states that during project
   preparation an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was prepared and found satisfactory by the
   Bank. However, no details on the EMF disclosure or public consultations with stakeholder in Vietnam are
   provided in the PAD or ICR.

   As mentioned in the Efficacy Section, the introduction of GAHP and construction of biogas digesters and
   post-biogas effluent treatment schemes reduced pollution levels generated by farms, slaughterhouses, and
   wet markets. While there is no detailed description on the monitoring and reporting practices by the
   Environment and Social Safeguard Officer of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU), the ICR highlights that
   the project built capacity at the responsible central and provincial institutions to better monitor and manage
   environmental compliance and livestock waste, using a comprehensive environmental quality monitoring
   database generated by the project. In addition, over 80,000 farmers received training to enhance
   awareness on GAHP, waste management, and biosecurity. The project was proactive in updating the EMF
   during implementation to comply with the Code Chapters of the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE)
   and to react to environmental pollution resulting from the use of cleaning chemicals. According to the ICR
   and a review of the Implementation Status Reports (ISR), over time the environmental compliance improved
   from mostly moderately satisfactory to satisfactory throughout the last two years of project implementation.

   Social Safeguards. The project triggered the Indigenous Peoples 4.10 and the Involuntary Resettlement
   4.12 Operational Safeguard Policies. In response, the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Ethnic
   Minority Policy Framework (EMPF) including the Resettlement Plan and Ethnic Minority Development Plan
   were updated and disclosed before appraisal. The ICR reports that the project led to no displacements and
   only minor land acquisitions with appropriate compensation and no complaints. It established a database of
   beneficiaries with disaggregated information on ethnicity, gender, and economic status, allowing to



                                                                                                   Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



   demonstrate that ethnic minority people benefited more than expected from the project. Overall, no major
   complaints or grievances on environmental or social management were filed during project implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The PCU capacity for financial management (FM) was adequate and provided
   timely interim unqualified financial reports. Similarly, all annual financial audit reports were unqualified. FM
   supervision missions regularly confirmed the adequacy in FM staffing, accounting and internal control
   systems that consolidated FM reporting from 12 participating provinces and checked that disbursements
   were in line with the disbursement plan and guidelines. During project implementation, the FM rating
   improved from mainly moderately satisfactory to satisfactory ratings in the last 18 months of
   implementation, demonstrating capacity enhancements.

   Procurement. The PCU capacity for procurement was largely adequate after the implementation of
   actions agreed from the procurement capacity assessment conducted during project preparation. Good
   procurement planning and frequent technical support by the Bank procurement specialist led to a largely
   timely completion of planned procurement activities during implementation. Shortcomings were found
   mainly in procurement planning at the provincial level and some delays due to inadequate bid evaluation
   and approval processes. Procurement capacity and reporting at the central and provincial level improved
   over time, leading to satisfactory performance in the last 18 months of implementation. Overall, there were
   no major complaints during bidding processes and no mis-procurement occurred during project
   implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR reports several unintended positive effects resulting from project activities, including (i) economic
   benefits for beneficiaries of biodigester investments, leading surplus gas used as fuel for cooking and
   water boiling with estimated savings of about US$15 to US$20 per month per household; (ii) unmeasured
   spillover effects of the GAHP promotion to neighboring non-beneficiary farmers who adopted GAHP; and
   (iii) unmeasured spillover effects of upgrading of markets for livestock traders that incentivized upgrading
   also among non-beneficiary fish and vegetables traders. Another unintended effect claimed by the project
   is its link to address antimicrobial resistance by promoting GAHP and thereby reducing the use of
   antibiotics.



d. Other
   None



11. Ratings



                                                                                                      Page 21 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)



                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons draw from the ICR with adjusted language:

    1. Adjust (or phase) project interventions to stay relevant to country priorities and shape
         national strategies. The project implemented and tested several concepts that were new to
         Vietnam’s livestock sector (such as Good Animal Husbandry Practices -GAHP- or Livestock
         Production Zones -LPZ). While all concepts were relevant, the project adjusted the intensity
         and/or timing of implementing these according to country priorities to provide confidence and
         proof of concept of easier to convey concepts (such as GAHP) before moving on to pilot
         more complex and challenging concepts (such as LPZ). As such, it stayed relevant to
         country priorities, gained the trust of the government counterparts and other stakeholders,
         and consequently its results shape the development of the National Livestock Strategy and
         follow-on projects.

    2. Invest in replicable models for scale-up. Projects should consider the replicability in terms
         of affordability of investments and routine operations and maintenance when selecting
         infrastructure upgrades and improvements. The ICR lessons state uncertainty around scale-
         up of the elaborate slaughterhouse model by the private sector after project completion. To
         maximize the probability of successful implementation models, projects have to consider
         private sector interest and financial ability for certain equipment/infrastructure, be prudent in
         the selection of supported infrastructure, and carefully monitor that procurement processes
         would be straightforwardly replicable by actors responsible for scale-up.

    3. Incorporate long-term effects on food safety in project intervention design diseases
         calls for projects to anticipate and manage emerging issues, rather than responding only to
         immediate concerns. Projects should encourage client governments to put in place systems,
         practices, and knowledge that strengthen the resilience of the livestock production supply
         chain and fortify consumer trust and confidence that such systems are equipped to manage
         potential food safety hazards.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No


                                                                                                       Page 22 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Livestock Competitiveness&Food Safety (P090723)




14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is comprehensive and well-presented. It shows a good understanding of the technical content of the
project activities and the logic of the project is explained well in the ex-post Theory of Change. It identifies and
discusses critical issues and shortcomings, such as in the M&E design and implementation. The ICR also
makes a good use of summary tables that underline its arguments and provide a good overview of project
activities and findings. However, at times it provides detailed explanations on some issues such as Boxes on
the GAHP Manual, beneficiary testimony, AFS outbreak, which are interesting but not essential and makes it a
longer than the standard document.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 23 of 23
