          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          First Comp. and Fiscal Mgmt. Prog. DPL(P151448)



                                                                                     Report Number : ICRR0021884

   1. Project Data



    Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
    Jamaica                                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


    Programmatic DPL
    Planned Operations:          2               Approved Operations:         2

    Operation ID                                Operation Name
    P151448                                     First Comp. and Fiscal Mgmt. Prog. DPL


     L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
     IBRD-84700                                 31-Dec-2015                                         75,000,000.00

     Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
     03-Mar-2015                                31-Dec-2015

                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                            75,000,000.00                                             0.00

     Revised Commitment                             75,000,000.00                                             0.00

     Actual                                         75,000,000.00                                             0.00




     Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
     Zeljko Bogetic              Paul Holden                  Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)


PHPROJECTDATATBL




     Operation ID                               Operation Name
     P163586                                    JM Second Comp and Fiscal Mgmt Prog DPF ( P163586 )



                                                                                                      Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Comp. and Fiscal Mgmt. Prog. DPL(P151448)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                     Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-84700,IBRD-87590                    30-Jun-2018                                             70,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 08-Jun-2017                              30-Jun-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            70,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             70,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         70,000,000.00                                               0.00




2. Program Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The program development objectives (PDO) were: (i) improving the investment climate and competitiveness;
   and (ii) sustaining fiscal consolidation and enhancing public financial management. (Program Document, First
   Competitiveness and Fiscal Management Development Policy Loan, January 28, 2015, p.v). Loan
   agreements for both DPLs do not specify program objectives.
   Program objectives were not changed during the life of the series.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   Policy objectives were identical to the policy pillars.
   Under Objective 1, improving the investment climate and competitiveness, three sets of activities were
   pursued: (i) reducing delays in the process of approval of “development approvals” of construction permits,
   (ii) reducing the high cost of electricity, and (iii) supporting the logistics hub initiative and related trade
   facilitation measures.
   Under Objective 2, sustaining fiscal consolidation and enhancing public financial management the Program
   supported actions aimed at (i) strengthening of debt management in support of the ongoing fiscal
   consolidation, which have also been a part of the IMF program and a parallel budget support program from
   the IDB; (ii) improving the efficiency of public expenditures; (iii) tightening budget processes and execution;
   (iv) human resource reform that aimed at eliminating inefficiencies in public sector employment and
   improving the match between public sector remuneration and job requirements; (v) enhancing procurement
   processes; (vi) reducing budgetary impact of pensions, and (vii) improving public sector investment planning
   and implementation.




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Comp. and Fiscal Mgmt. Prog. DPL(P151448)



c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   The first DPL was approved on March 3, 2015, disbursed upon effectiveness on March 12, 2015, and closed
   on December 31, 2015. The second DPL in the amount of $70 million was approved on June 8, 2017,
   disbursed on June 30, 2017, and closed on June 30, 2018. Both DPLs were fully disbursed.
   The second operation was originally planned as a $150 million policy-based guarantee (PBG) but before the
   Board approval, the government requested that the operation be converted into a standard DPL because the
   pricing advantages of the policy-based guarantee had meanwhile declined due to developments in
   international interest rates. The Bank agreed with the request and provided the second operation as the
   second, standard DPL in the series. The Policy framework remained unchanged.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  The objectives of the Series were highly relevant at appraisal, and they remained relevant at closing. They
  were also highly relevant to the country’s strategic orientation, country conditions, and the Bank’s country
  strategy. The operation was especially relevant to dealing with the twin problems of low economic growth,
  which had averaged about 1 percent over the previous two decades, as well as the extremely high public
  debt, which amounted to 140 per cent of GDP.
  The Series targeted those twin challenges—growth and fiscal consolidation—by focusing on policies aimed at
  improvements in competitiveness and public debt management and fiscal sustainability. The objectives were
  directly aligned with the third national goal of making Jamaica’s economy prosperous and also contribute to
  the fourth goal of a healthy natural environment They were aligned with one of the four themes in the
  government’s Medium-Term Socio-Economic Framework focusing on economic stability and employment
  (Jamaica National Development Plan “Vision 2030,” Program Document Box 1, p. 10).
  The Series’ objectives represented the continuation of the government’s initial, comprehensive stabilization
  and reform program, which had been launched in 2013 with the support of the IMF’s three-year Extended
  Fund Facility (EFF), a standalone, $130 million Bank supported Economic Stabilization and Foundations for
  Growth DPL, and a parallel budget support operation of the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB). The
  focus of those reforms had been to initiate fiscal consolidation and growth, reflecting the need for Jamaica to
  avoid debt default, to significantly reduce public debt and to begin creating fiscal space for larger and better
  designed public investments that, in concert with other reforms, could contribute to accelerated economic
  growth and poverty reduction. That standalone DPL, which was subsequently the subject of an IEG PPAR,
  was successful in launching these reforms. The DPL series under this ICRR validation has aimed to
  consolidate and deepen those reforms.
  The Series was well aligned with Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the period 2014-17 (approved on
  April 2014) which aimed to establish conditions for broad based private sector-led growth, improving public
  sector efficiency and reducing vulnerability. DPL objectives were fully aligned with the strategic objectives in


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Comp. and Fiscal Mgmt. Prog. DPL(P151448)



  the CPS. The Series was coordinated with other, technical and project activities aimed to support capacity
  building.




  Rating
  High

b. Relevance of Design


   The causal chain was not explicitly described in the Program Documents, but information contained therein
   allow for its reconstruction. The program targeted two main binding constraints: low growth and
   competitiveness, and debt overhang. These constraints were well documented and analyzed in a CEM
   (Jamaica: Unlocking Growth, Country Economic Memorandum, World Bank, May 26, 2011, Report No.
   50374-JM) and several other reports such as Improving the Investment Climate in Jamaica Policy Note
   (2014), Making the most out of the Jamaican Logistics hub initiative (2014), A Framework to Assess Fiscal
   Risks of Public Bodies (2013), .and in the context of the parallel Public Sector Transformation Project
   (2014).
   There were three prior actions under each objective/pillar, which were substantially relevant to the
   objectives and linked to the results framework. For example, the first prior action under the first objective
   was that the Government of Jamaica’s approved a policy that revises the development approvals process
   for issuing construction permits and started implementation of system for tracking applications at Parish
   levels. While construction permits were identified in the earlier diagnostics such as the CEM (2011) and the
   Investment Climate in Jamaica Policy Note (2014). as the 2010 Enterprise Survey and Doing Business
   indicators did not consider construction permits as a major constraint to competitiveness; other constraints
   not addressed in this operation were seen as significantly more binding, such as crime, taxes and
   informality. Another prior action under the second objective required the adoption of fiscal rules to
   strengthen fiscal transparency and set a target for debt reduction by approving amendments to Financial
   Administration and Audit Act and Public Bodies Management Act. This action was relevant to the fiscal
   objective of the DPL and the need to engender fiscal prudence by adopting explicit fiscal/debt targets. Also,
   the time of clearance was identified as a major constraint for Jamaican and foreign firms operating in
   Jamaica, which depend heavily on timelines of clearance for the efficiency of their operations. However, an
   equally important indicator was the cost of clearance which was not measured.
   The analytical underpinnings helped identify policy reforms under the. The high electricity costs and
   inefficiencies in logistics and hub infrastructure were identified as a long-standing problem, holding back
   private sector investments in Jamaica. By targeting these long-standing problems, individually and taken
   together, these measures could be reasonably expected to contribute to improving competitiveness and
   strengthening fiscal and debt management. Approval of development permits took 7 months, much longer
   than regional average of 2-4 months and Jamaica was losing investments and jobs due to the onerous
   approval process. (Program Document, 2015, p. 15). However, the magnitude of this constraint could be
   question although it could be expected to reduce costs in the key hospitality industry and well-designed


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            First Comp. and Fiscal Mgmt. Prog. DPL(P151448)



         concessions on Kingston Container Terminal and the Airport could be expected to improve efficiency of
         operations and expand capacity, thereby contributing to improving competitiveness of Jamaica’s port and
         airport infrastructure. On the fiscal side, adoption of the fiscal rules and other measures could be expected
         to support ongoing fiscal consolidation by making the government’s deficit and debt subject to explicit
         targets, improving transparency and accountability of fiscal management.
         The series was complementary to the programs of two other major International Financial Institutions (the
         IDB and the IMF) and one bilateral institution (DFID) supporting the government’s program. The IMF
         supported reforms on macro and fiscal stability while the IDB focused on tax policy.
         There were some weaknesses in translating objectives into results indicators, which were subsequently
         redefined in the second operation to improve focus and clarity. The number of prior actions and triggers in
         the for the second operation was excessive. Some (e.g., trigger 9 on environment policy) were not relevant
         to the PDOs and others (e.g., trigger 10 passing of the Procurement Act) overambitious. These were both
         dropped as prior actions for DPL2.
         Two other triggers were dropped, and associated results indicators were reworded for focus and clarity, one
         on investment climate and another on PPPs and some triggers for DPL2 were converted into more
         outcome-oriented measures. For example, the results indicator for trigger 1 was changed from one
         measuring implementation with respect to the number of parishes using AMANDA to ensure accountability
         and data transparency in local parishes in the development approval process to an outcome-based
         indicator (the increase in the speed of approval).
         The change of government in February 2016 contributed to the reconsideration of priorities in the policy
         dialogue. By and large, changes in the results indicators resulted in the improvement in the formulation of
         prior actions and the results framework for the second operation. Government representatives indicated
         that a simpler results framework with fewer triggers from the outset would have been desirable. Overall,
         relevance of design overall is deemed substantial.
         Overall, with respect to the causal chain, these measures could have been reasonably expected to
         contribute to the objective of improving the investment climate and competitiveness. Reducing the time for
         building approvals could be expected to lead to lower construction costs, shorter construction times and an
         increase in private investment in commercial real estate, which is linked to the key hospitality industry in
         Jamaica. However, as noted above, it is not clear that this was the most binding constraint to
         competitiveness as compared with some which were consistently featuring near at the top of the constraints
         to private sector growth: crime, taxes and informality. In this regard, the causal link of this prior action was
         tenuous.




       Rating
       Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1

                                                                                                           Page 5 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Comp. and Fiscal Mgmt. Prog. DPL(P151448)




 Objective
 Improving investment climate and competitiveness

 Rationale

  Under this objective, three targets were met, one was substantially met, and one was not met. Under
  those that were met, 89.9 percent of building applications were approved within 90 days as of June 2018
  (exceeding the target of 66%) (although this indicator was related to a prior action that itself was not
  sufficiently relevant.) This compares favorably with the average of 18 months for approval before the
  project (PD p. 13). The percent of electricity generated using heavy fuel oil and diesel in 2018 was 66.0
  percent (exceeding the target of maximum 75%); and 69.2 percent of the declarations/shipments were
  cleared within 24 hours (exceeding the target of 65%). Achievement of the target of making operational
  the Building and Approvals Board under the Buildings Act has been delayed but substantial progress had
  been made by 2019 in identifying potential members of these boards and approving their terms of
  reference, suggesting that this reform was continuing.
  One target was not met: the conversion of 40% of companies from free economic zones to special
  economic zones (JSEZA). Free economic zones were not compliant with WTO guidelines. By contrast, the
  change towards special economic zones was justified as it was compliant with WTO. Also, the shift
  towards JSEZ provided a better environment to promote small Jamaican firms and farmers and their
  integration into the global value chain and strengthen their competitiveness. By contrast large, established
  firms mostly benefited from free economic zones. However, only five out of 109 companies (4.6 percent)
  had converted from free zone to Special Zone Operators. This appears to be related to the fact that until
  December 2019 the existing law provided disincentives for companies in the Free Zones to change their
  registration to JSEZA.
  Achievement was substantial.
  Supplemental indicators of Jamaica’s investment climate and competitiveness collected under this ICRR
  also indicate improvements as well as concurrent increases in foreign direct investment and an
  acceleration of growth in the 2018-19 period compared with the long-term average (PPAR of Jamaica
  Economic Stabilization and Foundations for Growth 2019). In January 2019, Fitch upgraded Jamaica’s
  credit rating to B+, and raised the country rating ceiling to a decade high of BB- (IMF Fifth Review Under
  the Standby Arrangement, April 2019, p.6). These supplemental indicators support an overall picture of
  improvement in the investment climate and fiscal fundamentals which were targeted under the DPL series.
  attribution to the Bank Series alone is difficult, but it is reasonable to assume that the policy agenda
  supported by the Series—in conjunction with the support of the IMF and IDB and broader government’s
  efforts—contributed to the improvement.




 Rating
 Substantial
PHREVDELTBL


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            First Comp. and Fiscal Mgmt. Prog. DPL(P151448)




PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     Sustaining fiscal consolidation and enhancing public financial management

    Rationale
    Under this Objective, four targets were met and two were not met. Under targets that were met, the public
    debt-to-GDP had fallen to 101.1 percent by March 2018 (significantly better than the maximum target of
    115% of GDP) and the debt trajectory continued to improve with public debt estimated at 96.1 percent of
    GDP in March 2019 (PPAR report Jamaica—Economic Stabilization and Foundations for Growth
    Development Policy Loan, September 2019, p.9). This is a major accomplishment given the scale of
    adjustment and political consensus and ownership that was needed to make it happen.
    Two Reports on Contingent Liabilities were published on the Ministry of Finance and Public Service
    (MOFPS) website (meeting the target of two reports). In addition, the total number of bid proposals executed
    through the electronic government procurement system was 1,113, which represents 100 percent of bid
    proposals (exceeding the target of 5 percent). Finally, capital costs are captured in the Capital Budget.
    Although recurrent costs are estimated at the design and decision stage but are not included in the PSIP.
    Both are considered jointly in the budget but not necessarily together in the PSIP envisaged in the target; the
    target is therefore substantially met. All indicators were directly related to fiscal consolidation and financial
    management.
    One target was substantially met. Virements (the process of transferring items from one financial account to
    another) were to be eliminated both for compensation to employees and for capital expenditures. They were
    only eliminated for the compensation of employees which was, however, the largest budgetary item and the
    principal cause of virements; virements continued to be allowed for capital investments but given the modest
    size of capital budget this was less of an issue for overall fiscal management.
    Finally, one target was not met but broader evidence indicates progress in this reform area as well. In
    2018/19 employee contributions represented 2.4 percent of total pension plan expenditures, against a target
    of 12 percent. As of April 2018, all public servants began contributing 1.0 percent of earnings to the pension
    plan and will contribute an additional 1.0 percent each year until their contributions reach 5.0 percent. This
    suggests that some small progress was made. Supplemental evidence, however, suggests that pension
    reform has made substantial progress with the passage of the Pensions Act in 2018 (which traced its origins
    to the Bank supported white paper before the beginning of the stabilization in 2013), major improvement in
    the fiscal position, including controls of the cost of pensions (IMF Article IV consultation 2019).
    Overall, the above indicators were also broadly related to the second objective. The indicator of public debt
    represents substantial fiscal consolidation efforts and, therefore, measures contribution of fiscal policy to the
    reduction of the debt overhang (after taking account of GDP movements). While publication of reports on
    contingent liabilities is an output measure of fiscal transparency, it also contributes to better monitoring and
    identification of fiscal risks, thereby contributing to the overall fiscal consolidation.
    With a majority of the targets achieved (7) or substantially achieved (2), out of 11, and two targets that were
    not achieved but with evidence of progress, efficacy is rated substantial.




                                                                                                         Page 7 of 13
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               First Comp. and Fiscal Mgmt. Prog. DPL(P151448)




    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  With high relevance of objectives and modest relevance of design as well as substantial efficacy, outcome of the
  Series is Moderately Satisfactory.


  a.      Outcome Rating
          Moderately Satisfactory


  6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

  The Series has supported the government’s significant reforms that were focused on growth and fiscal
  stabilization. Those reforms have been ongoing since 2013, underpinned by political leadership, government
  ownership, stakeholder consensus and close monitoring of the reform program by the Economic Program
  Oversight Committee, which included all key stakeholders in the reforms. After the successful conclusion of the
  earlier IMF three-year EFF program and the Bank’s standalone Economic Stabilization and Foundations for
  Growth DPL, the new government that that came in 2016 continued to build on this track record, deepening
  reforms in both critical areas of competitiveness and fiscal management.
  The very large primary fiscal surplus of 7.5 percent of GDP was maintained during the life of the series, helping
  reduce public debt well below the program target. Economic growth has also picked up in 2018-19 above the
  long-term average of 1 percent and foreign direct investments have increased, indicating that Jamaica is
  beginning to reap the benefits of long-term fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. Meanwhile, political
  consensus and reforms continued after the change of government in 2016, which took place between the two
  operations in the series. In view of these developments and the strong track record of the government, the
  likelihood that political risk, weakening ownership and stakeholder consensus will undermine the achievements
  of development outcomes has decreased from the time of the outset of the series. Nevertheless, the risks of
  reform fatigue of what has been a long and difficult reform process as well as political risks and external risks of
  natural disasters that can derail continued fiscal adjustment are not insignificant. Therefore, at the time of this
  validation (April 2019), the risk to development outcomes is considered high, in large part because of the new
  and difficult context of the global, COVID19 pandemic and its potential fiscal impact on an economy where
  tourism is such an important component of GDP.




                                                                                                         Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Comp. and Fiscal Mgmt. Prog. DPL(P151448)



a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
    High

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank maintained deep and continuous policy dialogue on key growth, competitiveness and fiscal
  management issues before the Series. The relationship with the government was cooperative and
  productive. The Bank coordinated closely and effectively with the IMF and the IDB, both of which also
  provided financial support. Division of labor between these agencies was agreed early on, with the Bank
  focusing on structural reforms for competitiveness and certain fiscal management and transparency
  reforms while the IMF continued to focus on fiscal stabilization and the IDB on tax reform.
  The macroeconomic framework was sound at the outset. However, there was room to improve alignment
  of the competitiveness enhancing PAs with diagnostic findings of the most pressing constraints and the
  large number of triggers, some of which were cumbersome with several sub actions, was a weakness of
  design.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  As would be expected in the programmatic series, the Bank team maintained a strong and continuous
  dialogue with the government. Two supervision missions under the first and three missions under the
  second operation attest to the intensity of engagement. This was especially important as the new
  government came to office between the two operations. These events can sometimes result in changes in
  direction or a slowdown of reforms and, therefore, requires enhanced engagement of the Bank. With strong
  and continued ownership of the government, the Bank team provided continuity of the dialogue from the
  previous operation and prepared the second operation with limited, technical delays from the original plan.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  The series covered the period that straddled two different government administrations, which often can
  result in change of direction or slowdown of reforms. This did not happen. Government ownership
  remained high through the life of the Series because the objectives of the series were focused on growth


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Comp. and Fiscal Mgmt. Prog. DPL(P151448)



  and competitiveness and fiscal management, which were also government’s priorities. The evidence for
  high ownership is reflected in strong and sustained fiscal consolidation and continued gradual progress
  on structural reforms as well as an explicit mechanism for building and maintaining stakeholder
  consensus (See below).
  The operations’ objectives also targeted some of the well documented constraints such as construction
  permit approvals, inefficiencies in customs and logistics, public investment management processes etc.
  The underlying reasons for high government ownership and stakeholder consensus had to do with the
  continued operation of the Economic Programme Oversight Committee (EPOC), which played a socially
  cohesive role during difficult reforms, included representatives of the private sector, the banks, the
  unions, civil society/academia, the Central Bank, and the government. As such, it was the key
  mechanism of building and maintaining stakeholder consensus. (See PPAR on Jamaica Economic
  Stabilization and Foundations for Growth DPL, 2019). It also used its monthly meetings reviewing the
  progress of the government’s program to provide factual communiques to the public, explaining candidly
  progress made and remaining challenges.
  The new government in 2016 continued to rely on EPOC in this role and pressed ahead with an
  essentially unchanged long-term reform agenda focused on growth and fiscal consolidation. Planning
  Institute of Jamaica (PIOJ) and Ministry of Finance and Public Service showed commitment and strong
  engagement during design and implementation. The new government was also proactive in the policy
  dialogue in that it engaged the Bank in the reconsideration of some of the triggers/prior actions for the
  second operation, which in several cases improved clarity and focus of those actions in the second
  operation.


  Government Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  N/A


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Not Rated

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  Design of indicators was sbstantial. Indicators were defined with clear baselines and targets, and they relied on
  data available from the official sources. Indicators were relevant to the objectives. In a few cases, indicators
  could have been more clearly defined (e.g., regarding virements on capital investments and compensation to



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Comp. and Fiscal Mgmt. Prog. DPL(P151448)



  employees) or targets could have been less ambitious (e.g., regarding pension contributions). In the second
  operation, in the dialogue with the government, some indicators were better defined and focused.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Ministry of Finance and Public Service (MOFPS) and PIOJ were the agencies in charge of coordinating
  the data collection from the government’s side and their presentation in the course of the policy dialogue and
  evaluation. Data were made freely available.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR does not provide information whether or to what extent the data were used by the government in
  their decision-making processes.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  The Series was expected to have neutral impact on the environment with some potentially positive impact
  from the reduction in the share of the petroleum-based generation of electricity. (Program Document, table
  6). Also, the new Electricity Act provides a framework for improved energy efficiency (ICR, p. 10). However,
  the ICR does not explicitly note the ex ante nor ex post environmental classification of the Series.
  Although no firm data are provided, the ICR credibly states that through the beneficial aggregate impact on
  poverty and employment, the reform supported by the Series would be expected to benefit the poor and new
  entrants to the labor market.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Fiduciary environment was adequate for the continuous IMF programs since 2013 and the World Bank’s
  budget support. However, ICR notes remaining, substantial risks that relate to weaknesses in the audits.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR notes that reduction in the share of power generated by heavy oils has contributed to lessening the
  impact of the economic activity on the environment. With unemployment at an all-time low, and

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       First Comp. and Fiscal Mgmt. Prog. DPL(P151448)



   disproportionate representation of women in the labor force, it is likely that the women may have benefitted
   from the recent upturn in growth and the associated decline in unemployment.



d. Other
    ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                       IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                                  Moderately Satisfactory    ---
                               Satisfactory
Risk to Development
                               High                      High                       ---
Outcome
                                                                                    There were issues in the
                                                                                    alignment of the
                                                                                    competitiveness enhancing
                                                                                    prior actions with diagnostic
                                                                                    findings of the most pressing
Bank Performance               Satisfactory              Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                    constraint. Also, the large
                                                                                    number of triggers, some of
                                                                                    which were cumbersome with
                                                                                    several subactions, was a
                                                                                    weakness of design.
Borrower Performance           Satisfactory              Satisfactory               ---
Quality of ICR                                           Substantial                ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

 IEG concurs with the three general lessons of the ICR:
 1. Effective coordination with other multilaterals/partners can enhance the impact of a Bank-
 supported operation, at all stages, from preparation, design to supervision. In Jamaica, there was a high level
 of cooperation between the Bank, the IMF, the IDB and DFID which enhanced the effectiveness of the
 operation.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       First Comp. and Fiscal Mgmt. Prog. DPL(P151448)



2. Multilateral efforts can achieve higher level results that go significantly beyond the achievement of results
indicators targeted by Bank operations alone. In particular, in Jamaica, these efforts led to an exceptional
reduction in the debt burden that exceeded the target.
3. Technical assistance and/or investment lending to bolster capacity and accompany implementation of a
DPL can be essential for achieving development objectives. This was an important component of the Jamaica
series.
To these lessons, IEG adds the following:
4. In preparing programmatic DPL operations that may extend beyond a single government administration,
obtaining clear indications of continued political commitment, increases the probability of policy continuity. In
Jamaica, the Economic Programme Oversight Committee contributed strongly to the continuity of the
program following a change in government.
5. In designing prior actions and triggers for policy frameworks, fewer but critical actions are better than larger
number of actions of varying criticality. In the Jamaica DPL series, initial twelve triggers were excessive but
were appropriately streamlined in the second operation.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

ICR is well written and candid and, overall, presents appropriate basic evidence needed for the evaluation of
the project. One omission is that the efficacy of the first objective is rated modest, which is clearly an error as
the write up and evidence on achievement presented is consistent with rating substantial, as acknowledged in
the interview with the ICR author. Another one is that the ICR did not comment on the implementation and
utilization aspects of M & E. Finally, the ICR could have noted the environmental safeguards classification of
the Series.




a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 13
