     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Statistics for Results Project (P147356)



                                                                                         Report Number: ICRR0022114

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P147356                                       Ethiopia Statistics for Results Project

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Ethiopia                                      Poverty and Equity


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)                   Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-17115,TF-A5617                             30-Jun-2019                                           15,428,227.53

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 30-May-2014                                   30-Sep-2019

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                15,500,000.00                                    15,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                 15,428,227.53                                    15,428,227.53

 Actual                                             15,428,227.53                                    15,428,227.53




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Igor Pejovic                  Judyth L. Twigg               Malathi S. Jayawickrama           IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Program Development Objective (PDO) of the project was to enhance the capacity of the Central
   Statistical Agency at the organizational, human, and physical levels in order to produce and disseminate
   reliable, accessible, and timely statistics. The statement of the PDO in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD,
   p. 8) is the same as in the Grant Agreement (May 12, 2014, p. 5).




                                                                                                       Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Statistics for Results Project (P147356)



   Although some key outcome targets were revised at a 2017 restructuring, the adjustments did not impact
   efficacy ratings. A split rating is therefore not performed.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  15-Jun-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Organizational and Infrastructure Capacity Development in the National Statistical
   System (NSS) (US$4.90 million at appraisal, US$7.80 million during Additional Financing (AF), and
   US$11.90 million actual) was to improve organizational performance, staff productivity, and data
   accessibility by strengthening planning and physical infrastructure at the Central Statistical Authority (CSA).

   Component 1 had three sub-components:

   - Organizational Strengthening: This sub-component aimed at enhancing institutional management and
   logistical capacity at the CSA, through: (i) strategic planning and visioning exercises for the introduction of
   improved management and administration systems in the CSA, and technical assistance to strengthen the
   national account statistics; (ii) upgrade of office space at the headquarters; and (iii) executive development
   training, peer-to-peer learning, and knowledge sharing with sister institutions for CSA and NSS stakeholder
   staff.
   - Physical Infrastructure: This sub-component aimed at enhancing staff productivity in the CSA by improving
   working conditions. It was to support construction and furnishing of four of the 25 branch office buildings
   that the CSA has planned to build in the next few years to introduce new work methods, organizational
   design and information technology (IT) systems.
   - Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Infrastructure, Systems and Tools for Data Production
   and Management: The objective of this sub-component was to modernize data collection, data entry and
   storage, data analysis, and dissemination capacity in the CSA, accomplished through provision of a data
   center, video conferencing equipment and infrastructure, and the latest survey technology and institutional
   management tools.

   Component 2: Statistical Data Development and Management (US$1.5 million at appraisal, US$3.20
   million during AF, and US$1.63 million actual) was to strengthen the quality of statistical data production,
   compilation, and validation, including preparatory activities and technical assistance to help undertake
   selected National Statistical Development Strategy (NSDS) priority surveys.

   Component 2 had five sub-components:


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Ethiopia Statistics for Results Project (P147356)



- Development of Business Statistics: This sub-component aimed to strengthen the CSA’s statistical
capacity in the area of business statistics, which combined various resources from relevant national and
regional agencies. The project was to finance: (i) the design of a comprehensive business register that
integrates data sources; (ii) the pilot computerization of the register and development of mechanisms to
remove duplicates; (iii) the development of bridge tables to reclassify the register entries to the International
Standard Industrial Classification; and (iv) the set-up of a system that regularly updates the business
register and caters to changes in the status of business entities.
- Development of Mining, Energy, Construction, and Transport Sector Statistics: The objective of this sub-
component was to narrow the gap in data needed for national accounts. The project was to finance: (i)
design of survey instruments (e.g. sampling frames, questionnaires, manuals, etc.) to help consolidate and
reveal data gaps in national accounts; and (ii) training of statistical staff and officials.
- Support for Planning and Development of the Next Agricultural Census: The sub-component aimed to
support the preparatory activities of the agricultural census in 2014-2015. It was to finance: (i) preparatory
planning workshops for the next agricultural census; (ii) design of survey instruments (e.g. sampling frames,
questionnaires, manuals, etc.); (iii) piloting of new methods for data collection; and (iv) research studies on
“standard and non-standard” units in estimation of area and production, among other areas.
- Improving Coverage and Quality of the Annual Agricultural Sample Survey (AGSS): This sub-component
aimed to develop and test a survey methodology to expand the coverage of AGSS in pastoral areas (Afar
and Somali regions). It was to finance: (i) piloting of new methods in selected pastoral areas; (ii)
implementation of Computer-Assisted Personal Interviewing in selected AGSS enumeration areas; and (iii)
field staff training.
- Planning and Compilation of Vital Statistics: This sub-component aimed at laying the foundation for long-
term development of vital registration systems in the regions, as outlined in the approved Vital Statistics
Law. The NSDS had already made plans for a review and implementation of the system by the CSA in
collaboration with regional governments. This component was to finance technical assistance in the areas
of instrument design and building CSA’s vital statistics data management and analytical capacity.

Component 3: Statistical Methodology, Standards and Data Quality Assurance and Information
Dissemination (US$1.90 million at appraisal, US$2.40 million during AF, and US$0.41 million actual) was
to promote, sensitize, and implement the Data Quality Assurance Framework Standard (EDQAF) prepared
by the CSA for the NSS, and to support improvements in services for users, including dissemination of
regular statistical publications produced by both the CSA and its key ministries, departments, and agencies
(MDAs) as per the release calendar, and to promote statistical education of citizens and non-governmental
organizations.

Component 3 had two sub-components:

- Statistical Methodology, Standards and Data Quality Assurance. This sub-component was to support
development of the DQAF-E. It was to finance: (i) educational and outreach materials for use at the CSA
training center to be set up under the project; (ii) organizing “specialized” short- and long-term educational
statistical courses and study visits for CSA and partner MDA staff on select data quality assurance topics
(e.g. survey methods, poverty mapping techniques, gender analysis of household surveys, data production
priorities); (iii) assistance to the Household Consumption & Expenditure Survey and Welfare & Monitoring
Survey; and (iv) technical assistance to improve the quality of poverty mapping and gender statistics and
analysis.
- Information Dissemination: The aim of the sub-component was to support improvements in services for
users. It was to finance: (i) stakeholder analysis, including development of a user satisfaction index,
and training and communication support (e.g. via web, media, radio); (ii) upgrades to the CSA library and

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ethiopia Statistics for Results Project (P147356)



  open web portal, to enable civil society, NGOs, researchers, and the private sector to access the CSA and
  NSS data for policy making, investment decisions, or research purposes; (iii) publication of flagship
  statistical reports and documents produced by the CSA to build the CSA brand; and (iv) the launch of an e-
  CSA mobile education office by identifying and training appropriate staff, offering adequate per diems, and
  procuring a vehicle (air-conditioned bus or similar transport) equipped with multi-media and ICT tools, as
  well as relevant statistical education materials and publications, for visits to educational institutions,
  libraries, municipalities, Woredas, and other locations.

  Component 4: Monitoring and Evaluation (US$1.70 million at appraisal, US$2.10 million during AF, and
  US$1.49 million actual) was to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation capabilities of the CSA with
  respect to the NSDS and the project's coordination and fiduciary requirements, including Environmental and
  Social Management Framework (ESMF) implementation. It was to finance consultations for the
  development of the next NSDS, provide technical assistance to strengthen the national account statistics,
  and support M&E of the country's Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP) and GTP2. The component was
  also to support Statistics for Results project management activities, including ESMF implementation
  requirements and price contingency. As part of this component, parallel financing was provided by UK
  Department for International Development for a period of three years to fund an in-country statistician to
  serve as an advisor to the Director General CSA and support work with the Donor Working Group.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  The project was approved on May 30, 2014. It was to be financed through a US$10 million grant by the
  Statistics for Results Catalytic Fund (SRF-CF). The project became effective on June 13, 2014. An AF from
  SRF-CF of US$5.5 million was approved on February 26, 2018. Both grants were fully disbursed and closed
  on February 28, 2019. The borrower had no part in the financing of the project.

  The project underwent three restructurings to extend the project closing date, to revise the results
  framework, and to reallocate funds between components due to AF. The AF helped strengthen CSA
  capacity in IT systems and tools for data dissemination. Component 2 was changed to support for social,
  poverty, and price statistics. In terms of project financing, although the AF allocated additional funds to all
  four components, actual spending increased only for the first component.

  The first restructuring, approved on June 15, 2017, extended the closing date of the initial project by 20
  months, to February 28, 2019, and revised the results framework. The number of PDO-level indicators was
  reduced from five to four, some PDO indicators’ target values were adjusted, and the target dates for the
  PDO and implementation progress (IP) indicators were adjusted to align with the new project closing date.

  The second restructuring, including AF of US$5.5 million, was approved on February 20, 2018. The
  project’s closing date was extended by four months, from February 28, 2019 to June 30, 2019. This
  restructuring and AF retained the same PDO, project components, and PDO-level indicators. However, the
  results framework was revised to monitor progress on the scaled-up and new activities added under the
  intermediate indicators, and end target dates for both the PDO and IP indicators were adjusted to reflect the
  additional time for implementation and the new project closing date.


  The third restructuring was approved on April 19, 2019 and extended the project closing date from June
  30, 2019 to September 30, 2019. The results framework end target date was changed to align with the

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
                                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                        Ethiopia Statistics for Results Project (P147356)



                                      project’s new closing date without any change in target values.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               During project appraisal, the Government of Ethiopia (GoE) was implementing an ambitious GTP 2010/11–
               2014/15, which set a long-term goal of becoming a middle-income country by 2023, with growth rates of at
               least 11.2% per year during the planned period. To achieve the GTP goals and objectives, the GoE
               followed a "developmental state" model with a strong role for the government in many sectors of the
               economy. It prioritized key sectors, such as industry and agriculture, as drivers of sustained economic
               growth and job creation. The GTP identified sectoral targets and strategies to enhance economic growth
               and achieve medium and long-term objectives. The development strategy highlighted the importance of
               data to track and monitor achievement of targets underlined in the plan.

               The PDO is highly relevant to the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework at project closing (CPF)
               (2018–2022). The objective of the CPF is to foster sustainable inclusive growth through job creation and
               economic transformation. The objective of the project aligns with the objectives stated in the CPF, as
               enhanced statistical capacity is mentioned in several places within the document (p. 42), and the CPF
               Objective 3.3 coincides with the project’s objective. At completion, the PDO remained highly relevant and
               aligned to the country’s development priorities, as indicated in NSDS II (2015/16 to 2019/20), which calls for
               improved data for policy decision making.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Enhance the capacity of the Central Statistical Agency (CSA) at the organizational, human, and physical
                             levels in order to produce and disseminate reliable statistics

                             Rationale
                             As demonstrated in the ICR's reconstruction of the project's theory of change (p. 8, Figure 1), the project
                             intended to provide an integrated package of support to the NSS focusing on the CSA and selected MDAs to
                             build capacity, both human capital and physical and statistical infrastructure. It envisioned that project support

                                                                                                                                      Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ethiopia Statistics for Results Project (P147356)



would contribute to a longer-term outcome of a strengthened NSS with an enhanced capacity to provide
accessible, timely, and reliable statistics relevant for evidence-based policy making.


Reliability. This objective was to be achieved through short- and long-term training of CSA and NSS staff;
the introduction of software, systems, and tools for data production and management; establishment of a
business registry database; and the improvement of a data quality assurance framework standards through
assistance and training.

Outputs

Six new branch office buildings were made operational, achieving the target. A new conference hall and
training center was established and made operational at CSA headquarters. A Statistical Business Register
system was developed and made operational. The project planned to directly support eight surveys, out of
which six surveys were supported. Of 534 planned female CSA and MDA staff to be trained on specialized
quality assurance topics including EDQAF, survey methods, poverty mapping techniques, and the gender
analysis of household surveys, the actual number of women who received training was 542, exceeding the
target. Three user satisfaction survey reports were planned, and all of them were carried out. All of the
planned 2,944 CSA and MDA employees who were to be trained annually on areas of organizational
management, IT, and statistics received this training. Of these, 719 of the planned 765 were women.

Through the implementation of EDQAF, which was achieved, statistical information generated from line
ministries is now assessed, among others, for quality, relevance, accuracy and timeliness. Furthermore,
implementation of EDQAF is expected to identify the critical bottlenecks affecting the quality of data.


Outcomes

Indicator 1: Number of key NSS members who have applied the EDQAF (Target: 5. Actual: 5). This target
was fully achieved, as all the key members (Ministry of Agriculture, Education, Health, Road, and Water
Resources) have applied the EDQAF.

Indicator 2: Percentage of users who are satisfied with official statistics methodologies as determined by the
user satisfaction survey (Target: 97%. Actual: 80%). After the first restructuring, the end target value was
reduced from 100 percent to 97 percent. This target’s achievement, expressed in percentage, is 82.5%.
The reason for some shortfall in this target was the preparation work for the Population and Housing Census,
which was postponed several times and forced the CSA to cancel several planned activities.
Even though the user satisfaction target was not met, the targeted number of agencies adopted and started
applying the EDQAF manual, which is sufficient for a Substantial rating of this objective.

The overall rating for Objective 1 is substantial.




Rating


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ethiopia Statistics for Results Project (P147356)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhance the capacity of the Central Statistical Agency (CSA) at the organizational, human, and physical
levels in order to produce and disseminate accessible statistics

Rationale
Accessibility. This objective was to be achieved by supporting information dissemination and statistical
awareness activities, including user satisfaction surveys, and through developing physical infrastructure (i.e.
offices, conference centers, and training centers) as well as by improving the CSA online systems.

Outputs

Six new branch office buildings were made fully operational, achieving the target. A conference hall and
training center were established and made operational at CSA HQ, as planned. CSA websites were made
user-friendly. Six of the planned eight video conference centers were established.

Outcomes

Indicator 1: Percentage of users who are satisfied with the accessibility of official statistics as determined by
the user satisfaction survey (Target: 97%, Actual: 80%). This target’s achievement, expressed in
percentage, is 82.5%. The shortfall was because the preparation work for the Population and Housing
Census, which had been postponed several times, forced CSA to cancel several planned activities, which
likely reduced the level of achievement for this indicator. The end target value was increased from 85% to
97% after the first restructuring of the project.

The activities implemented by the project contributed to an increase in the level of accessibility as more
offices were built and the CSA websites were made more user-friendly, but the way in which the achievement
of this objective was measured is questionable. Instead of using the user satisfaction surveys, some other
methods might have been preferable, i.e. completeness of portals, etc. As this information is missing and the
target for user satisfaction was only partially achieved, this objective has a Modest rating.

The overall rating for Objective 2 is Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Enhance the capacity of the Central Statistical Agency (CSA) at the organizational, human, and physical
levels in order to produce and disseminate timely statistics

Rationale

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Ethiopia Statistics for Results Project (P147356)



                            Timeliness. This objective was to be achieved through training of CSA and NSS staff, among other things,
                            for statistical data production; establishing and developing the Statistic Business Register; and supporting the
                            NSDS II.

                            Outputs

                            Six surveys were directly supported by the project, as planned. The project also supported finalization
                            and approval of the NSDS II. When it comes to the number of people trained 198 people were trained in
                            areas of statistical data production, not meeting the target of 387.

                            Outcomes

                            Indicator 1: Percentage of execution rate of annual statistical release calendar (Target: 75%, Actual: 71%).
                            Target was substantially achieved by 94.7%. Percentage of execution rate (dissemination) was analyzed
                            through the number of activities implemented within a year. The dissemination activities included info graphic
                            competitions and statistical awareness activities on television, radio, and other media. The preparatory
                            activities under the planned Population and Housing Census occupied most of the CSA’s resources, including
                            the yearly activities that were planned under the annual statistical release calendar, producing the minor
                            shortfall.


                            The project helped to achieve this objective with adequate activities and, despite missing the targeted number
                            of trained staff, therefore impacting the level of capacity building achieved within the CSA, it still greatly
                            contributed to the overall achievement of this objective through a considerably high execution rate of the
                            annual statistical release calendar.

                            The overall rating for Objective 3 is Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            At project completion, out of the four PDO-level indicators, one was fully achieved, namely number of key
                            NSS members who have applied the EDQAF manual, and two PDO-level indicators were substantially
                            achieved. The way in which some of the achievements were measured could have been improved by having
                            a more precise and relevant indicator and by providing more information, thus better explaining the
                            achievement of objectives. The user satisfaction survey could have focused more on tangible aspects related
                            to the level of services provided by the CSA instead of measuring the target through how satisfied the users
                            were with the official statistical methodology. Another example where the indicator should have been phrased
                            in a way which would have assessed the target achievement is the one related to the percentage of execution
                            rate of annual statistical release calendar. This indicator was supposed to track the progress made in terms of


                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ethiopia Statistics for Results Project (P147356)



  increasing the CSA’s capacity but measuring the achievement of this target would have been better if the
  number of dissemination activities was the indicator. Additionally, there were some minor and some
  substantial discrepancies between the planned and achieved output targets, but this did not jeopardize the
  overall accomplishment of objectives. The planned outputs were designed in a way which contributed to the
  overall achievement of objectives. In addition, the Ethiopia Statistical Capacity Index increased over the
  project period, from 61.11 in 2014 to 72.22 in 2018 (ICR, p. 5). With this improvement likely attributable, at
  least in part, to project activities, and with two objectives rated Substantial and one rated Modest,

  Overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The project was not amenable to financial analysis because national statistical agencies have very limited
opportunities to recover the costs of data collection and analysis. National statistics are generally considered a
public good and are usually financed from government revenue. The type of investments implemented by the
CSA covered the essential aspect of its mandate, which is data production and dissemination. CSA had utilized
99.5% of the budget allotted for the project by the end of September 2019 (at project closing). The budget
utilization shows that there was disproportionate use of funds across components compared with the initially
planned budget. Some components ended up receiving far more funds whereas funds for others were reduced.
ICR Annex 4 shows the actual cost of each component at project closing compared with the amount after the AF
and restructuring. There were several reasons for this: some activities were ambitious, some were understated
in the PAD, and others could not be implemented due to the country’s regulatory framework, for example, open
data portal development.

Even though there were good reasons for restructuring the project three times (to extend the project closing
date, to revise the results framework, to reallocate funds between components due to AF), this still affected the
efficiency of project implementation. Moreover, there were several issues that hindered project implementation.
One of the biggest problems was related to the procurement process, mainly due challenges in preparing
specifications, Bill of Quantities, and terms of reference for complex activities. During the meeting with the TTL
he stated: During the AF preparation, a procurement capacity assessment of the CSA-PIU was carried out. The
assessment found that the CSA-PIU had experience in implementing World Bank-financed projects and it is the
reason why the last two branch offices were constructed in a more time-efficient and well contracted procedure.”
However, this should have been done before the start of the project.

There was also the issue of missing or inadequate documentation related to some decisions made during
procurement processes. During the meeting between IEG and the TTL, the TTL said the following:
“Procurement risk of the CSA was thoroughly assessed at appraisal and rated High in the PAD. As a result,
action plans were prepared to mitigate risks. In addition, the World Bank provided periodic training to the project
implementing team particularly on procurement and Financial Management. However, frequent staff turnover




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ethiopia Statistics for Results Project (P147356)



due to low salary levels limited the ability of CSA-PIU to apply agreed procurement procedures and led to delays
in procurement activities.”

In addition, local suppliers were sometimes slow which led to some bids being cancelled, subsequently leading
to late deliveries of goods or products. According to the ICR one other issue was the shortage of foreign
exchange which slowed down the procurement process. Finally, during the project period, there were mass
movements and civil unrest in many parts of the country, which negatively affected the supervision of
construction activities (ICR, p. 22).

Overall, when relating costs to benefits, the project received 50% more funds than had been planned, but the
ambition and goals of the project did not increase commensurately. Given this consideration and the
noted implementation efficiencies, efficiency is rated Modest.



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?           Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

With the relevance of the PDO rated High, overall efficacy rated Substantial (with substantial achievement of
two objectives and modest achievement of one objective), and efficiency rated Modest, the outcome of the
project is rated Moderately Satisfactory, consistent with overall moderate shortcomings.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There is a risk that, after project closure, there will be a financing gap in relation to repair and maintenance
expenses of infrastructure investments, including the newly built six branch offices, headquarters conference

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Statistics for Results Project (P147356)



center, training center and its renovated library, and ICT improvements, as well as the regular user
satisfaction surveys that had been conducted with the support of the project. Continued support for CSA will
be provided through its role as a primary verification agent for the Bank's Enhancing Shared Prosperity
through Equitable Services project (US$ 600 million, 2015-2023). One other potential risk was heard from
the project TTL: “However, there remain issues related to unstable connections, and further improvements in
connectivity are required to make the video conferencing facilities 100% functional and reliable.” This is an
issue which cannot be solved quickly as the internet quality in the country is quite poor and it will mostly
affect the capacity building and the share of knowledge within the CSA. As part of sustainability, Enhancing
Shared Prosperity through Equitable Services (ESPES) project will continue financing CSA on indented
project activities (ICR p. 26, par 86).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design reflected the strong interest and commitment of the government (including the CSA,
  MDAs, and NSS members) to improve the provision of reliable and timely statistical data. The project was
  strategically relevant as it was aligned with the GTPII priorities and was closely related to the goals
  outlined in the World Bank’s 2013–2016 Country Partnership Strategy. Its design aimed to support NSDS
  I, which was expected to provide the relevant indicators to be used in formulating, updating, monitoring,
  and evaluating the strategies and targets of the country’s social and economic development programs.
  Therefore, the project design reflected the government's strong interest and commitment to address the
  demand for statistical information in the country. The technical design of the project was based on a
  detailed institutional analysis of CSA and the related entities comprising the NSS. The Bank’s
  procurement and technical experts reviewed specifications for construction works, purchase of computing
  and communications equipment, business process re-engineering plans, and human resource training
  needs. However, they failed to consider frequenting staff turnover due to low salaries, as well as the lack
  of capacity within the PIU.

  However, the project may have benefited from a more detailed and precise results framework that clearly
  reflected the outputs of the project (to measure the project’s progress) including its immediate, short-
  term, and long-term outcomes. Additionally, during the initial year, the project encountered start-up
  challenges related to procurement planning, the setup of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), and
  internet connectivity (ICR, p. 21). There were also delays in site allocation for the construction of the first
  four new branch offices.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision of the project was instrumental in the achievements that the project made by closure. All three
 restructurings and AF were necessary to help achieve the project objectives. The Bank’s technical

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Statistics for Results Project (P147356)



 specialists who helped design the project continued supporting the project to ensure timely completion of
 ICT, physical infrastructure, and capacity improvement tasks, and their successful implementation to
 support statistical data production and dissemination (ICR p. 25, par 79). However, the ICR doesn’t present
 any evidence to support such a claim. The team provided hands-on support by sharing knowledge on how
 similar project activities are generally managed in Ethiopia and other countries. For example, info-graphic
 competitions were started in Ethiopia, learning from a similar dissemination activity conducted in Rwanda.
 Introduction and implementation of ICT in survey activities were also conducted through strong World Bank
 guidance and support. The World Bank ensured that project implementation was carried out according to
 the project specifications spelled out in the project funding agreements. As evidenced by Implementation
 Status and Results Reports (ISRs), the World Bank team conducted regular supervision missions and
 made efforts to resolve many of the issues following project implementation delays while correctly
 identifying the need to revise the results framework to improve the recording of project accomplishment
 and tracking of project progress. Most of the World Bank team was present in the country and therefore
 was able to provide continuous, timely support and follow up with project implementation (ICR, pp. 25-26).
 The TTL gave some additional information related to the issue of construction works and administrative
 work accompanying those works: “The World Bank assessed the performance of CSA-PIU and
 recommended mitigation for challenges that kept arising during the construction implementation. The
 technical team frequently visited construction sites and provided technical operational recommendations on
 next steps for administration. However, the low capacity of contractors and contractors not delivering as
 promised is a country wide problem and persisted throughout the project’s duration, without this being
 related to PIU capacity. Changing contractors in the middle of a construction could have extended the
 project's duration and risk of a worsened delivery. Low salary of the project management team also led to
 staff turnover, leading previously hired procurement specialists to change positions when they receive a
 better paying contract elsewhere. The World Bank team should have prepared for this scenario before the
 beginning of the project so that this issue could be avoided. The strong follow-up and assistance of the
 World Bank team helped the client alleviate most of the construction challenges that arose during
 construction. All branch offices were finally delivered on time, and all new buildings are now operational.”



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Some of the indicators in the original results framework lacked baseline data and/or realistic targets. As a
 result, it was difficult to monitor project implementation progress in the early stages of the project. After the
 first project restructuring, PDO and IP-level indicators had clear target values and M&E became more
 systematic. Despite the fact that the project went through three restructurings some of the indicators
 remained inadequate in terms of how well they could track the achievement of the objective, and they
 should have been phrased differently.


                                                                                                       Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Statistics for Results Project (P147356)




 CSA was the responsible institution for M&E, and its key staff, as well as MDA statisticians, had good
 professional and analytical capacity. When it comes to the issue of causation between the project’s
 activities, outputs, and outcomes, the M&E design was adequate.



b. M&E Implementation
  The PIU regularly produced progress reports summarizing recent developments, including information on
  budget, capacity building, data production and dissemination, and procurement and financial
  management (ICR p. 21, par 59). However, these reports were not a part of the ICR and no link with
  them was made. Such reports emphasized key implementation challenges and provided status updates
  on all issues, recommendations, and progress on actions agreed at previous implementation support
  missions through ISRs and aides-memoire.



c. M&E Utilization
  Project M&E data and analysis was used to adjust the project at the first restructuring and the AF.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   As the environmental and social impacts of the proposed project activities were insignificant, the project was
   rated Category B for environmental purposes. The project entailed the construction and rehabilitation of
   select CSA offices and, in this respect, triggered World Bank safeguard policy OP/BP 4.01 on
   Environmental Assessment. Only a few (about four) CSA branch offices were constructed, and they had
   moderate office space requirements (e.g. for about 15 professionals and 70 other staff members. To ensure
   the minimization of any negative impacts, the CSA prepared an Environmental and Social Management
   Framework. Among other things, an environmental clause for construction contractors was annexed with
   the construction contract agreement and signed by the contractors, so that the guideline could be legally
   binding and so that the constructors could take mitigation measures as per the environmental clause. The
   branch offices regularly monitored the implementation of mitigation measures. However, the contractors did
   not formally report to the branch offices about actions taken in compliance with the requirements of the
   environmental clause. No occupational health or safety incidents and no outstanding environmental
   safeguards issues were reported or recorded during the implementation of the project. Therefore, overall
   social safeguard implementation and compliance was rated Satisfactory in the ICR (p. 23).




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Ethiopia Statistics for Results Project (P147356)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The information provided in the ICR on fiduciary issues is incomplete, particularly regarding financial
   management dimensions. The ICR mentions that there were five external audit reports produced (ICR, p.
   14), but it does not say whether they were qualified. In a meeting between IEG and the project TTL, the
   TTL said: “Audits were periodically conducted, and the project was audited five times over the period. The
   auditors in the final audit also issued a clean report, and the copy of that report together with the
   management report was duly submitted to the World Bank Country Office by the Central Statistics Office.”

   There were moderate procurement challenges, as outlined in Section 5.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   -



11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                             ICR                    IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                     Two objectives were
                                                                                     substantially achieved, one was
Outcome                             Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                     modestly achieved, and
                                                                                     efficiency was modest.
                                                                                     Quality at Entry was Moderately
Bank Performance                    Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory   Satisfactory and Supervision
                                                                                     was Satisfactory.
Quality of M&E                      Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                      ---                    Modest


12. Lessons

The lessons in the ICR (pp. 26-27) are deemed appropriate and precise.

a) Having client commitment, ownership, and accountability around a strengthened NSS is key for
the achievement of results. The CSA has demonstrated a high level of commitment to statistical
development. In this case, there was: (a) a continued understanding of project objectives and
support for its success, related decision making, and management of the project; (b) a clear
understanding of how the project was helping in development of the institution; and (c) a deeper

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Ethiopia Statistics for Results Project (P147356)



knowledge of the broad sector reform process.

b) Without proper follow-up and oversight of achieved project results, there is risk to their
sustainability. Risks might be a consequence of insufficient government funding after the project
completion, lack of facility maintenance, inadequate or no professional training for staff, etc.

In addition, IEG lists these closely related lessons:

a) Having a significant presence of the World Bank team in the country in which a project is being
implemented greatly contributes to the success of a project.

b) The capabilities and experience of any institution responsible for the implementation or
organization of some activity need to be assessed beforehand in order to avoid any issues that
might hinder the achievement of objectives. In this case, the PIU had insufficient experience in
managing procurement processes.

c) If any project outcome targets or objectives depend on the quality of internet connection, this
needs to be taken into account, and measures should be taken to either increase internet quality or
find a way to work around the issue. In this case, the poor internet connection greatly affected staff
training and slowed down procurement processes. The issue of internet speed and reliability is of
particular importance for projects in developing countries.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clearly written and concise. It is candid and critical. However, it fails to mention and address some of
the critical aspects of the project. The discussion on the assessment of the achievement of outcomes is too
short, as is the discussion on efficiency. The ICR does not mention the quality of the evidence and whether it is
sufficient to assess the achievement of objectives. It also fails to give a detailed account of the causes behind
some of the issues related to procurement procedures and construction works. Additionally, more detail would
have been preferable when it comes to fiduciary matters. The project received AF in order to scale up project
activities, but the ICR does not state which specific activities were scaled up. Due to these shortcomings, the
ICR quality is rated Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Ethiopia Statistics for Results Project (P147356)




                                                                                 Page 16 of 16
