     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0022130

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P143652                                     BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Benin                                       Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53370                                   31-Jul-2019                                         25,810,363.50

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Dec-2013                                 31-Jul-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             28,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              27,975,089.65                                              0.00

 Actual                                          25,819,715.29                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Joy Antoinette De Beyer      Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Behrens                     IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
    “The objective of the Project is to increase the coverage and utilization of community-based child growth and
   nutrition interventions in selected areas in the Recipient’s territory." (Financial Agreement (FA) signed
   February 11, 2014, p. 5)




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Policy and program development, management and coordination (Appraisal US$7.2 million, actual
   US6.7 million). (Source for actual amount is TTL, from the project accountant, provided in CFA francs, and
   converted at exchange rate as of end of project.)

   This component aimed to strengthen and support multisectoral nutrition program planning, management,
   monitoring, evaluation and coordination at the central and Commune level. It would: (i) develop
   multisectoral policy, coordination and oversight mechanisms at the central level (among the Food and
   Nutrition Council (CAN), line ministries, other public institutions and development partners) and
   decentralized level (among the Communal Councils and their stakeholders); (ii) strengthen sectoral
   programs for improved nutrition, inter alia in agriculture, health, and social affairs, and integrate nutrition into
   sector plans and strategies including in Commune Development Plans, building local community
   accountability; and (iii) support nutrition-focused research.

   The project would work mainly with the ministries of health, agriculture and social affairs, given their explicit
   mandates to improve child growth and nutrition, and systems in place to deliver services at Commune and
   community level. Each had a clear role. Health would promote health and nutrition as part of mother and
   child health services. Social Affairs would identify and follow up at-risk and vulnerable children. Agriculture
   would advise communities on appropriate methods and technologies for diversified food production, storage
   and processing (e.g. drying, fermentation, cheese making).

   The main coordinating body at the central level would be the CAN, and the Communal Councils and their
   stakeholders at the decentralized level. At the Commune level, Communal Consultative Groups (CCG)
   would be set up comprising representatives from health, agriculture, social affairs and non-governmental
   organizations (NGOs). The CCGs would be responsible for developing a common results framework for
   delivering child nutrition services, informing local government decisions relevant to nutrition, and making
   proposals to the Commune authorities for integrating nutrition into the Commune Development Plans and
   Budget. They would also coordinate and monitor nutrition service delivery.

   This component would support the following inputs/activities: (i) long-term technical assistance to build the
   capacity of the Permanent Secretariat of the Food and Nutrition Council (SP CAN); (ii) joint planning by
   sectors and stakeholders to develop and support integrated nutrition-specific and nutrition-sensitive sector
   policies; (iii) orientation and in-service training workshops with stakeholders to improve coordination,
   implementation, and management of nutrition and food security at all levels; (iv) monitoring, reporting,
   surveillance and operational research; and (v) advocacy and strategic communication to elevate the topic of
   food security, nutrition and health at all levels. In addition to consultant services, workshops, training and
   communication, this component would finance material, equipment and operating costs.

   2. Community mobilization and services delivery strengthening (Appraisal US$20.8 million, actual
   US17.6 million).


                                                                                                         Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)



  The PAD described this component as “the operational core of the project” (PAD, p. 9). It focused on social
  and behavior change communication and service delivery in communities to protect and promote food and
  nutrition security of mothers and young children, adolescents and pregnant women. NGOs would be
  contracted to work on behalf of the Commune authorities, to mobilize communities and implement and scale
  up a package of community-based food and nutrition security actions, strengthening essential public health,
  nutrition and food services. The project would establish a Commune-level Consultative Committee (CCC) to
  coordinate all food and nutrition security services and stakeholders in each participating Commune, to be
  chaired by the Mayor.

  The project would target at least 40 municipalities (Communes) in six regions with high levels of food
  insecurity, that had been selected as target areas in the National Food Security Program. Implementation
  would start with ten Communes in the first year, and then add fifteen more in each of the second and third
  years of the project. The main activities to be funded were as follows:

        Community sensitization, mobilization and organization, largely through a network of Nutrition Care
           Groups (GANs);
        Social and behavior change communication;
        Monthly growth monitoring of about 7,500 children from 0 to 59 months per municipality;
        Individualized counseling on infant and young child feeding, integrated management of childhood
           illnesses, and adequate water, sanitation and hygiene practices;
        Community-based screening of children and management of (moderate) acute malnutrition and
           referral of severely malnourished children to specialized centers for appropriate management;
          Community treatment of infectious diseases according to national protocols;
          Distribution of micronutrient supplements according to national protocols;
          Installation handwashing devices and other health-preserving personal hygiene measures in
           households;
          Support for households with children aged 0 to 59 months in order to produce and process food that
           would provide access to diversified nutritious food;
          Cooking demonstrations; and
          Community reporting.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Costs, Financing, and Borrower Contribution: Total project costs were estimated at US$ 28
  million (SDR 18.3 from FA) at appraisal, financed by an IDA credit. There was no borrower
  contribution. Final disbursements after closing were US$ 25.82 million, 92.2 percent of the total
  commitment. Accounted in SDRs, the project disbursed 99.9 percent of the total credit. Exchange rate
  changes account for the difference. Final disbursements reported by the project staff in CFA and converted
  to US$ total US$24.25 million.



  Dates: The project was approved in December 2013 and became effective on April 8, 2014, after timely
  ratification and enactment. A Mid-Term Review was completed as scheduled in 2016. The project closed as
  planned in July 2019, with no extensions. There were three restructurings. In October 2017, a level II
  restructuring changed the disbursement letter to allow the use of unaudited Interim Financial Reports (rather

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)



   than statement of expenditures) as the basis for withdrawal requests for replenishing the designated
   account. The expansion of community-based interventions to 40 municipalities was creating a larger volume
   of expenditures than could be handled efficiently within the original ceiling on the designated account of one
   billion CFA francs (equivalent to approximately US$1.6 million), which was increased to FCFA 1,500 million.
   The second restructuring, in June 2018, made small changes to the results framework: (i) a fifth PDO
   indicator was added to track the number of people in the groups delivering community-based services, (ii)
   the target was reduced for the number of households setting up handwashing stations, (iii) the indicator for
   the number of people attending education sessions was changed to refer only to pregnant women and
   mothers of young children who were the primary intended beneficiaries of the project, (iv) the indicator for
   the number of workers trained was amended to refer specifically to the number of GAN workers trained, and
   (v) two new corporate indicators counting beneficiaries replaced three outdated Core Sector indicators. The
   third restructuring approved in February 2019 reallocated SDR 745,945 (4 percent of the project total) from
   component 2, where expenditures were a little lower than anticipated, to component 1, with the justification
   that this would enable the full amount of the credit to be disbursed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project addressed Benin’s stagnant high malnutrition rates, described in the PAD (pp. 1-4) and
ICR (p. 5). At appraisal, Benin’s rates of underweight (18 percent), wasting (9 percent), stunting (43
percent), and low birth weight (15 percent) were higher than in most countries in West Africa and (for the
latter two indicators) higher than the sub-Saharan averages of 39 and 13 percent. Food insecurity had
worsened substantially in the 2-3 years before appraisal; in 2010, 34 percent of households were food-
insecure and 22 percent at risk of becoming so. Malnutrition contributed to Benin’s high infant, child and
maternal mortality, and low life expectancy at birth of only 56 years (2010). Although Benin had achieved
gains in child survival and maternal health in the decade before appraisal, nutrition indicators had not
improved. Malnutrition affects cognitive development and reduces productivity and life-time earnings. The
main causes of malnutrition were all widespread in Benin: inadequate diet and repeated bouts of illness,
inadequate hygiene and sanitation practices, inadequate infant and young child feeding practices,
inappropriate home-based care of sick children, insufficient access to enough diversified foods of high
nutrient value throughout the year, teenage pregnancy, short child spacing, and lack of access to safe
water and sanitation facilities. The project would address many of the immediate and proximate causes of
malnutrition through services and interventions to support community-based action.

Throughout the project, the objectives aligned with the national priority newly being given to
nutrition, as a result of the work that began in 2007 with the formation of a Core Group on Nutrition (CGN).
The CGN comprised a small group of professions from government, the University of Abomey-Calavi, the
Regional Public Health Institute, civil society and local government. The CGN produced analyses of the
political economy of nutrition policies, and a Roadmap for Nutrition Reform in 2009 that fed into the
Strategic Plan of Food and Nutrition Development (PSDAN), a four-year Results-Based National Food and
Nutrition Program, and a decree to create the CAN that was set up in 2012 under the President’s Office. As
a result of the work of the CGN, Benin was among the first members countries of the Scaling-Up Nutrition
(SUN) movement set up at United Nations General Assembly in 2011. Progress in nutrition was recognized



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)



               as a core dimension in Benin’s 2011-2015 Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy, which incorporated the
               full PSDAN.

               Throughout the project life, its objectives were fully consistent with the World Bank’s assistance
               strategy in Benin. The Country Assistance Strategy FY09-FY12 specifically mentioned malnutrition of
               children under five as a priority and called for increasing access to basic services to improve health
               outcomes for children. The Country Partnership Strategy FY13–FY18 similarly included improved access to
               health and nutrition services, especially for poor households, as a priority. The Country Partnership
               Framework (CPF FY19-FY23) flagged “tackling malnutrition along with improving equitable access to
               quality education and other basic services” as “critical for improving opportunities for disadvantaged groups”
               (under Development Priority 2: “Equitable access to opportunities and inclusion of the poor in the growth
               process”). It cited the experience of the 2013-2018 program that “investment projects that directly assist the
               poor in such areas as agricultural diversification, community development, and health and nutrition have
               yielded quantifiable results, and that those programs have led to important policy and institutional reforms”
               (CPF p. 10), which attests to the continued relevance of the project.

               The project built on Bank technical and financial support to efforts to “kickstart a reform process of the
               moribund food and nutrition sector” (PAD p. 4) since 2007. This support included a Technical Assistance
               project (P109724) that closed in 2011; and a pilot Community Nutrition Project in 10 Communes (P124191),
               funded through the Japanese Social Development Fund with the Bank. The project complemented the
               Bank-supported Health Systems Performance Project.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve coverage of community-based child growth and nutrition interventions

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was that project support for multisectoral nutrition program planning, management,
                             monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and coordination at the central and Commune level would result in clear
                             intersectoral plans and budgets for delivering and supporting community-based nutrition services, with the
                             ministries of health, agriculture and social affairs playing important roles. The project phased roll-out in
                             successive groups of communes of this support, and contracts with NGOs would ensure a systematic
                             increase in the geographic scope where a defined set of nutrition services would be offered. Training and
                             community mobilization were an essential part of the project activities to enable the increased coverage of
                             interventions. The increase in coverage is a supply-side measure, served by both the policy environment that
                             would give greater attention to nutrition, as well as the building of institutions for nutrition action. (This was


                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)



complemented by the second part of the PDO, aiming at increased utilization, a demand-side measure of the
actual use and uptake of the services, discussed below.)



Outputs and Intermediate Results (ICR, pp.11-15 and Annex 2)



Technical assistance and financial support for the development of policies, protocols, and tools
resulted in:

      A national nutrition policy and the “Multisectoral strategy document for community-based health, food
         and nutrition standardizing roles and responsibilities of stakeholders” were developed.
        Nutrition was incorporated into the National Development Plan, and integrated into agricultural and
         health sector policies and plans.
        A Common Results Framework to combat chronic malnutrition (2016-2025) was developed to help
         coordinate the efforts of the different sector actors; the 40 participating Communes each adopted a
         municipality-level common results framework.
        A study on the impact of gender on nutrition was completed and its findings disseminated through a
         high-level meeting and series of workshops with all 77 municipalities in the country.
        A protocol for community management of moderate acute malnutrition (CMAM) was finalized and
         validated.
        A national nutrition M&E system was developed.
        An ad hoc communication task force developed a national nutrition behavior change communication
         strategy.
        The CAN played an important role in building support for integrated, multisectoral action on nutrition,
         providing high-level leadership and coordination.



The project supported intersectoral collaboration at municipal levels for planning, supervising and
monitoring nutrition interventions:

      Local government authorities were coached in leadership and coordination, prevention and
         management of nutritional deficiencies, strategies to mobilize local communities, and monitoring and
         evaluation
        Regular training and support for stakeholders continued throughout the project to ensure that capacity
         was maintained despite turnover of elected or appointed officials and other stakeholders.
        Communes developed annual nutrition work plans.
        NGOs were recruited and contracted to help Communes set up community-based service delivery
         platforms, initially in 21 Communes (the 10 covered in the pilot project plus 11 new ones); then in 19
         additional Communes.
        NGOs facilitated identification and selection of beneficiary villages with especially high malnutrition,
         poverty and food insecurity levels and poor availability of sanitation and handwashing facilities.



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)




      GANs were set up in all participating villages and their members trained in delivering door-to-door
       nutrition services in villages. The NGOs consulted with village authorities in selecting members,
       explaining the kind of social and technical skills that would be needed.
      Monitoring and evaluation and communication tools were developed and rolled out in all participating
       Communes to guide and accompany the community-based interventions.



In addition to the 40 beneficiary municipalities, the CAN also encouraged the other 37 municipalities in the
country to engage in nutrition activities by sharing information on the activities under the project and including
non-project areas in training opportunities. By the end of the project, 20 of these municipalities were
disbursing funds for food and nutrition security development.



Training: The project funded training for project staff on implementation, management, M&E, communication,
financial management, and procurement. More than 1,000 social and health workers were trained (or
retrained) on CMAM. Social workers and health personnel were trained on prevention and management of
malnutrition. Close to 27,000 women were trained in the production and transformation of nutritious foods.



Outcomes



PDO Indicator Results

The two PDO indicators that assessed coverage both exceeded their targets. The number of municipalities
that executed at least 25 percent of their joint annual work plans rose from the baseline of 7 to 40, well above
the target of 30. At the end of the project, there were 20,729 GAN members in place for delivering
community-based services in the 1,241 villages, 122% of the target of 17,000 (the baseline was 0).



Intermediate Indicator Results

The SP-CAN achieved two policy-related intermediate indicators: A multisectoral strategy document for
community-based health, food and nutrition standardizing roles and responsibilities of stakeholders was
developed, and a protocol for community management of moderate acute malnutrition was finalized and
validated.

The number of Communes that disbursed funding for food and nutrition security development increased from
the baseline of 10 to 60, 5 more than the target of 55.

The number of social and health workers (re-)trained on CMAM increased from the baseline of 94 to 1,038,
more than double the target of 500.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)



Children 6-59 months who received a vitamin A supplement in the previous 6 months was the same at the
end of the project as the baseline of 104%, compared to the target of 80% (the PAD reports that the baseline
percentage was above 100% because of the inclusion of children outside of the target age group).

Finally, the core indicator for the number of pregnant/lactating women, adolescent girls and/or children under
the age of five reached by basic nutrition services is reported at 13.4 million compared to a target of 8 million.
However, two aspects of this indicator are puzzling. Despite the fact that a pilot project was being
implemented in 10 Communes at appraisal, the baseline was reported as 0; the pilot project presumably was
providing these services to some women and children. Second, the total population of Benin was about 11.5
million in 2018, so it is difficult to understand how the project could have provided services to a larger number
of women and children, unless this is a cumulative number over several years of implementation. Indicators of
coverage usually refer to a specific period, such as a year.



Rating: High, taking account of the levels of achievement relative to the targets set, and the relevance of the
indicators to the project objectives. The PDO indicators relate to the availability of budgets and people trained
and ready to deliver nutrition services. The intermediate indicators also relate to availability of budgets and
trained workers, as well as covering policies and guidelines, and measuring the extent to which the project
reached primary beneficiaries. Both PDO indicators for coverage surpassed their targets. All six relevant
intermediate indicators met or exceeded their targets.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve utilization of community-based child growth and nutrition interventions

Rationale
Rationale

The theory of change expected the utilization of services to increase as a result of the increased provision of
services and the outreach to community leaders and members to raise awareness of the importance of
nutrition, and to educate and inform people on the behaviors that could help improve nutrition and health
outcomes on which the project then provided education and training. Utilization was also expected to increase
as a result of the community-based approach, in which known and trusted community members would be
trained to provide the nutrition services.



Outputs and Intermediate Results




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)



The project produced the following outputs and intermediate results (ICR, pp. 11-23 and Annex 2):



Sixteen NGOs were hired to work with community leaders and stakeholders (especially the ministries of
health, agriculture and social services), recruit and train GAN members from the community, and support the
delivery of a defined package of basic community-based health and nutrition services.

Education and awareness raising was provided especially to pregnant and lactating women, mothers of
young children, and adolescents, on reproductive health, the importance of handwashing, exclusive
breastfeeding of infants up to the age of six months, regular growth monitoring, and treatment of diarrhea with
oral rehydration solutions. The GANs held these education sessions at least monthly, supported by the
NGOs, and complemented them with informal sessions.

Vaccination and vitamin A supplement campaigns were held regularly, with GAN members helping ensure
that all households with young children were reached.

GAN members made monthly visits to all households to monitor growth of young children and refer those with
extreme cases of acute malnutrition to recuperation centers for treatment, and then for follow-up in the
community once stabilized, and for community-based support according to the new protocol for children with
moderate malnutrition.

Agricultural staff offered training in producing, storing and transforming (drying, etc.) of diversified and
nutrient-rich food crops and raising chickens, and provided 413,214 mango and lemon trees to women in
beneficiary communities.



Outcomes



Three PDO indicators related to utilization, that is, the uptake of services. The percentage of children 0-23
months who were benefiting from a minimum package of monthly community-based growth promotion
activities in targeted Communes was reported to be 92% at the end of the project, compared to a target of
25% (baseline 0). The percentage of children 0-5 months who were exclusively breastfed in targeted
Communes increased from the baseline of 33% to 75%, far above the target of 45%. The number of women
with under-five children trained and engaged in the production and transformation of diversified and nutrient-
rich foods reached 16,435, 183% of the target of 9,000.



Intermediate Outcome Indicators

The target for the number of households in targeted municipalities that established a designated hand
washing station was decreased from 15,000 to 10,000, but the project reported 20,977 as the final
achievement, more than twice the revised target and 140% of the original target.



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)



                            The percentage of children under five with diarrhea who were treated with oral rehydration therapy (ORT) in
                            targeted Communes increased from the baseline of 54% to 65%, fully meeting the target. The (revised)
                            indicator for the percentage of women with children under-five and pregnant women attending community
                            nutrition education sessions in targeted Communes increased from a baseline of 56% to 80%, compared to a
                            target of 70%.



                            Rating: High, as assessed by the results reported against the indicator targets, which are relevant measures
                            of utilization of the core services supported by the project. All three PDO indicators for utilization of services
                            exceeded their targets by large margins. One of the three intermediate indicators met the target fully, and the
                            other two exceeded their targets.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                            Attribution of Results to the Project

                            The ICR noted that there were no other donors working in nutrition on a large scale, so it is likely that the
                            results can be strongly attributed to the project. Benin had joined the SUN program before the project became
                            effective; this provided a supportive global community but not funding or direct support for nutrition programs.
                            Regarding the counterfactual of what the situation might have been in the absence of the project, although
                            the ICR noted the increasing recognition of the importance of nutrition by the government, Benin is a poor
                            country with a very low allocation of funding to health and nutrition services ($30 per capita in 2016, less than
                            half of the average for Sub-Saharan Africa of $78 per capita). This makes it unlikely that there would have
                            been a substantial nutrition program in Benin without the project.

                            Although the ICR commented that there were no available “evaluation data to be able to compare
                            beneficiary/non-beneficiary municipalities” (p. 21), it did compare national data from the 2018 Demographic
                            and Health Survey (DHS) with data from the project nutrition survey in the 40 participating municipalities in
                            2018 (pp. 19-20). It is notable that stunting in the project areas was only marginally above that for the country
                            overall, although the DHS showed a steep gradient by income nationally. Low income and high malnutrition
                            and food insecurity were among the criteria for selecting the project municipalities, so their levels of stunting
                            would be expected to be higher than the national average. The ICR reported that anemia was substantially
                            lower in project areas (60 percent) in 2018 than the national level (71 percent) in 2018. However, the national
                            and project surveys use very different methodologies, which means their findings are not truly comparable.




                                                                                                                                Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)



  Validity of Indicators

  The ICR reported the source for most indicator values as the project monitoring system or SP-CAN, except
  for two indicators (breastfeeding and diarrhea treatment) whose data source was reported as a Lot Quality
  Assurance Sampling (LQAS) survey. A comparison of the last Implementation and Supervision Report (ISR
  number 10, November 2018) in the project portal documents, and the final results reported in the ICR, raises
  questions because of the differences in several indicators. The percentage of infants exclusively breastfed
  was reported as 43 percent in the ISR but 75 percent in the ICR the following year. Similarly, the ISR reported
  37 percent of children with diarrhea being treated with ORT in the community, but the number reported in the
  ICR jumped to 65 percent – exactly the target. Also, the number of households with hand washing stations
  was just over 11,000 in November 2018, and then more than two times that number are reported for the end
  of the project (July 2019) in the ICR with no comment on how the remarkable increase was achieved. (The
  TTL explained that Rapid Results Initiatives were undertaken, and that after very slow uptake initially, uptake
  of hand washing stations reached a "tipping point" and then accelerated fast in the final year of the project.
  Source: Interview with TTL) Another surprising difference is in the PDO indicator for the number of women
  trained and engaged in production and transformation of diversified and nutrient-rich foods: the reported
  number decreased from 28,343 in the November 2018 ISR to 16,435 reported in the ICR. Although these
  discrepancies raise questions, there is no basis provided in the ICR for doubting the validity of the results
  reported, and the TTL explained that the way that the data were aggregated across the 40 participating
  Communes also made systematic mis-reporting unlikely (interview with TTL).



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  High



 5. Efficiency
Ex-ante analysis of efficiency. The PAD (Annex 6, pp57-60) presented a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) of the
economic soundness of the project, taking account of direct costs and benefits. It used global evidence to
estimate feasible benefits. It had a conservative scope, in considering only the possible benefits from reducing
stunting in beneficiary children under 5 in the poorer quintiles to the same level as the national average, and no
effect on stunting among better-off households. The CBA estimated a net present value (NPV) of US$19 million
and a benefit/cost (B/C) ratio of 2, assuming a 50 percent project coverage, a 10 percent lifetime earnings
premium from reduced stunting, and a 5 percent discount rate. It also offered sensitivity analysis: if the earnings
premium was assumed to be 20 percent (as estimated by some researchers), the estimated NPV increased to
US$58 million and the B/C ratio to 3.9. Other variations in key assumptions gave estimates within this range: a
10 percent earnings premium and discount rate of 10% resulted in a NPV of US22.3 million and B/C ratio of 2.4;
the 10 percent earnings premium and 5 percent discount rate but higher project coverage of 80 percent
suggested a NPV of US$42.3 million and B/C ratio of 3.1. The PAD summarized the analysis as showing the
project to be “a sound investment (that) yields high benefits even in the conservative base scenario” (PAD, p.
59).

The benefits included only the estimated change in lifetime earnings as a result of reduced stunting, and the
PAD cited the range of global estimates used to guide the analysis (p. 59). The total cost used in the analysis
was US$24 million, 86 percent of total project costs, which was justified as a conservative scenario for the likely

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)



intensity of nutrition interventions. Overall, the PAD provided a systematic, well-grounded and reasonable
analysis.



Ex-post analysis of efficiency. The ICR recalculated the economic efficiency of the project using the same
methodology as in the PAD's Annex 6, relying on the same "best available” global research and estimates of the
impact of stunting on earnings. The ICR set the parameters at 10 percent for the earnings premium from
reduced stunting and 5 percent for the discount rate. It used a project reported coverage rate of 83 percent (ICR,
Annex 4), the mean percentage for the indicators that measured the percentage of children of the appropriate
age groups who benefited from the nutrition interventions, vitamin A supplements and diarrhea treatment, and
the percentage of mothers with children under 5 who attended educational meetings, and engaged in diversified
food production and transformation. Taking the total project cost of US$28 million and a slightly smaller total
number of beneficiaries than estimated in the PAD (1.64 million children compared to 1.69 million), the ICR
estimated the project NPV at US$8.7 million and a B/C ratio of 1.3 (Annex 4, Table 4.5, p. 62; the text of the ICR
incorrectly cited the NPV at US$15.6 million and the C/B ratio at 1.8).

The ICR calculations assumed that the project would be able to reduce stunting rates among the poorest
quintiles down to the national average levels (33 percent as per Figure 3 from the DHS, ICR p. 20, but
incorrectly cited as 43 percent in the ICR Annex 4). If the data shown in Figure 2 in red (“malnutrition chronique
globale”) are for stunting, then the average for the 40 project municipalities found in the 2018 Situation Survey
was not significantly different from the national average from the DHS 2018, which provides some plausibility for
the assumption (with the caveat noted above that the two surveys use different methodology and are not
strongly comparable).

The ICR asserted that implementation strategies were “highly efficient in light of the steep scaling up of nutrition
interventions from 10 to 40 municipalities” (ICR, p. 24), despite the protracted hold-up in procurement in the
initial years, and argued that the time during the procurement delay was used for preparation, and that
implementation proceeded rapidly once the issue was resolved.

The rating for efficiency takes into account the economic analysis, on-time completion of the all planned project
activities within the estimated costs, and substantial increases in all indicators.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)




* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High due to addressing important development challenges, and alignment with
country conditions and with current Bank and government strategy. The achievement of the project's objective is
rated High due to relevance of the project targets to the objectives, full achievement of all project targets and
results far in excess of several targets, and the absence of other large funders or significant non-project factors
to which the project results might be attributed. Efficiency is rated Substantial in light of the economic analysis,
the strong global evidence on the important development impact of improved nutrition, and the fact that
implementation was able to regain momentum and complete the project without extension despite one (albeit
prolonged) episode that disrupted procurement. Overall Outcome is therefore rated Highly Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Looking at the project itself and the national context, the risks to development outcome seem modest. The
project objectives remain consistent with national policies and strategies on improving nutrition. Well-
designed institutions and processes were put in place and were functioning well at the end of the project.
Commune development plans included nutrition actions and budgets, and all 77 Communes – including
those not formally part of the project – have been trained in nutrition. The project gave considerable attention
to important behavior change communication, with regular reinforcement, and putting in place platforms for
action and processes that gained wide participation from municipal authorities and community members. The
community-based approach had been well tested in other countries, and functioned well in Benin. A new
World Bank-financed series of three projects was developed and the first one approved before the end of the
project, continuing support for the nutritional services set up under the project and expanding them to include
dedicated support for child stimulation, protection, and learning as well as parenting.

However, the potential for climate change to disrupt agricultural yields and hence food security, and the
potential impact of Covid-19 on growth, budgets, incomes, and health care services, both increase the risk to
the project development outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project addressed an important development challenge. It was clearly focused on maternal and child
  nutrition, and planned a baseline survey from which to be able to assess the project's impact. The
  technical design drew on recent global experience and best practice and lessons from similar approaches

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)



  in other low-income countries, on the promising results of a pilot Community Nutrition Project in ten
  Communes in Benin, and on the Bank-supported Decentralized Community-Driven Services Project that
  used Communes as the entry point for interventions. It drew on several years of close support by the
  Bank for nutrition policy and institution building in Benin (including a Technical Assistance Project that
  had closed in 2011) that provided a good basis for a strong relationship between the Bank team and
  country counterparts.

  The project design included adequate technical assistance, regular training, and careful preparation and
  planning. An Institutional Development Fund grant had been secured to enable CAN members to visit
  other countries to see similar projects first hand, undertake training, and develop communication visual
  tools. The SP-CAN was a new agency with no prior experience with Bank procedures, but the PAD noted
  that this risk had been mitigated by the use of the TA Project to develop the needed procedures and
  manuals, hire fiduciary staff, and provide necessary training for the project staff. The PAD reported that
  the SP-CAN had become "fully operational" in 2013 (PAD, p. 12); however, the fact that the SP-CAN had
  no office space for the first year of the project suggests that this was not entirely accurate. This omission
  contributed to significant delays in project implementation in the first year. The project built in provision for
  periodic training and TA support to the SP-CAN. To mitigate uncertainty as to whether competent NGOs
  would be available to work in all the new Communes, the project included a phased roll-out.

  Project design was simple with just two components, a limited number of activities, and a clear, logical
  results chain. Implementation arrangements were clearly described, and because multisectoral
  interventions at the local level were new, field coordinators were included in the project at a level between
  the SP-CAN and Commune to provide necessary support and closer oversight. In addition, the legal
  covenants required regional financial staff to be hired (in addition to an internal auditor and project
  auditor).

  The results framework selected a well-chosen set of indicators to monitor project outputs and outcomes
  comprehensively. The number of indicators struck a good balance in their number and scope. The PAD
  outlined well-planned monitoring and evaluation arrangements, although in retrospect, the long delay in
  contracting an independent agency to carry out the baseline survey indicates that additional steps during
  preparation and appraisal to ensure that baseline data would be collected on time would have been
  helpful.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 There was strong continuity in team membership, and the team was led by a senior nutrition expert with
 extensive experience in Africa and beyond. Prior engagement on nutrition by the team, notably during the
 TA, IDF, and Pilot project, had built a strong foundation for a constructive and collegial relationship
 between the Bank team and their counterparts. The project became effective quickly, and the mid-term
 review and project closing took place on schedule. Regular ISRs were filed that provided updated
 information on all indicators and a concise account of progress and issues. Mission aide-memoires
 described achievements and actions needed to achieve the desired results.


                                                                                                        Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)



 The ICR stated that the regular implementation support missions and the consultants hired by the Bank
 team to work with the SP-CAN “helped contain the organizational delays from which the project suffered
 during the initial years of implementation” (ICR, p. 31). The Bank team helped SP-CAN overcome the
 problems caused by the delay in getting their own office space, even arranging for them to use Bank
 offices on occasion. The ICR noted that "the [Bank] team was proactive in their partnership with the SP-
 CAN by developing and/or revising plans to overcome obstacles, which has facilitated implementation
 delays to be kept to a minimum and push the project’s agenda forward” (ICR, p. 37). After the initial delays,
 the project documents consulted suggest that implementation proceeded smoothly, with consistent and
 effective support from the Bank team. The three restructurings undertaken are also evidence of proactive,
 responsive supervision to address issues as they arose.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design had many strengths. The PDO was clearly stated, and the indicators were well chosen to
 track project outputs and outcomes and met the “SMART” criteria. The results framework was complete
 with clear definitions of indicators, baseline and target values for all years of the project, and clearly
 specified responsibility for data collection. The objectives and PDO indicators sensibly related to
 intermediate outcome indicators known to have an important impact on nutrition and health status. The
 PAD and ICR provided no discussion of the level of ambition/feasibility of the targets; a previous pilot
 project had provided some useful experience as to what the project might achieve, but the TTL explained
 that there was high uncertainty given the need to set up completely new institutions, and given that very
 little had been done in nutrition in Benin in the decades before project (interview with TTL). The results
 framework stood the test of time well. When it was carefully revisited during project implementation, the
 only changes decided on were minor (including updating corporate indicators). The PAD noted that the
 comprehensive routine M&E system being set up for the project would monitor the implementation of
 planned activities, measure progress towards intended outcomes, and include a mechanism for using
 findings from routine monitoring for corrective action during implementation (PAD, p. 15). It also referred to
 a detailed M&E plan being developed that would include plans for information products and dissemination
 strategies, and “both process and project evaluations… (as) a key feature of the project to strengthen
 learning from implementation." However, no specifics were provided in the PAD, which suggests that
 earlier attention to detailed M&E planning during project preparation would have been helpful, especially
 with regards to planning for the baseline survey.




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)



b. M&E Implementation
  Monitoring: The major shortcoming was the long delay in contracting an independent agency to carry
  out the survey intended to provide baseline data, which was only completed in year 3 of the project – too
  late to provide baseline data, and too early to be a good measure of final project results. The ICR
  pointed out that the team made the best of the situation by finding a new purpose for the survey: as a
  Situation Analysis that developed the first commune-level nutritional profiles in Benin, and
  demonstrated their use for data-driven nutrition decisions by the CCCs.

  Although not part of the original M&E plan, an LQAS survey was done in the 40 beneficiary municipalities
  to help validate the data from the Situational Analysis, and to develop municipality-level capacity in the
  methodology. Data from the LQAS were cited as the source for some of the end-of-project data,
  supplementing the routine monitoring data.

  In the discussion of project efficacy, this ICRR noted abrupt changes in some of the indicator values
  between the ISR filed in November 2018 and the final results reported in the ICR. If the ICR had reported
  and discussed trends in key project outputs/outcomes over the course of project implementation,
  explanations for these surprising differences would have improved confidence in the reliability of the end-
  line data.



  Evaluation: The gender study was a useful evaluation of the role played by gender in decisions relating
  to nutrition. The ICR provided no information on any other evaluation undertaken.



c. M&E Utilization
  Findings from the gender study were disseminated and discussed, informing project communications
  and approaches. The change in the financing arrangements is an example of utilization of (financial)
  data during implementation; the Restructuring Paper explained that monitoring the rates at which the
  project account needed to be replenished when there were only 21 communes made clear that
  bottlenecks would be likely once the project added the rest of the planned Communes. Growth
  monitoring was a central activity in project implementation, and is an example of how M&E utilization is
  at the heart of the project’s community-based approach to nutrition; the data from monthly weighing and
  measuring of young children are plotted on a standard growth chart for each child, triggering action
  when a child is seen to be falling off an acceptable growth path.

  The NGOs contracted under the project undertook yearly self-evaluations as a basis for findings ways to
  improve over time. The community structures also discussed results regularly and developed 100-day
  Rapid Results Initiatives to develop new ways to achieve faster progress towards lagging targets
  (information in this paragraph provided by the TTL).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   No environmental safeguards were triggered in the project, classified as category C.

   The project posed no social safeguards risk. It had a positive social impact by improving access to nutritious
   food and simple hand washing facilities, and helping protect child and maternal health and nutrition. The
   government developed a Community Score Card to assess feedback on the services in Communes in the
   last year of the project; the ICR did not report on the extent of its use or on any feedback from beneficiaries
   or other stakeholders.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Fiduciary performance was generally satisfactory. The project staff were able to manage the
   challenges of enabling disbursements for sub-projects in 40 Communes, despite the SP-CAN’s initial lack
   of experience with Bank procedures. The financial management (FM) ratings were satisfactory or
   moderately satisfactory throughout the project. There was an initial delay in hiring the internal auditor and
   FM staff required in the project covenants, but once these gaps were filled, no staffing disruptions were
   reported, and the project ended with the FM staff at full strength.

   Key procurements were delayed for more than 6 months at the start of the project because the approving
   authority was removed from the President’s office. The delay in contracting an agency to undertake the
   baseline survey has been noted. Procurement proceeded slowly for the first three years of implementation,
   and then accelerated and proceeded smoothly for the final two years. Restructuring near the end of the
   project that reallocated remaining funds between the components helped enable most of the project funds
   to be disbursed.

   The Interim un-audited Financial Reports were satisfactory to the Bank.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)



                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                   Minor shortcomings in Quality at
                                                                                   Entry justify Satisfactory rating
Bank Performance                 Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory
                                                                                   for Quality at Entry and therefore
                                                                                   Bank Performance.
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

These lessons are drawn from the ICR (with editing):



Good institutional arrangements, from national to community levels, are important to the
success of community-based nutrition programs in reducing stunting. Consistent, coherent
and visible policy at the national level that engages all key sectors, clarity on the key roles that each
sector needs to play that facilitates multisectoral collaboration at each level, and support and
capacity-building for implementing partners, notably communities, all contribute to effective and
sustained action.

Local government ownership of a project is as important as community mobilization. In this
case, municipality-level multisectoral platforms fostered formal partnerships across decentralized
services, enabled sharing of information, provided a visible way for mayors to show their
commitment, ensured that nutrition was integrated into municipal annual workplans and budgets,
and increased accountability for nutrition outcomes in the community.

Several factors contribute to effective communication for behavioral change: messages on
improved behaviors that “make sense” in the context of the culture (values, beliefs, etc); relate to
powerful motivations such as ensuring child health and survival; are possible to act on; are
frequently reinforced and supported by opinion leaders and influencers; and whose possible result is
evident, such as in local testimonies and exemplars of exclusive breastfeeding for 6 months, or
successful home gardens or successful treatment and recovery.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain



                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BJ Food, Health and Nutrition Project (P143652)



  The ICR contains evidence gaps that could be filled by a field evaluation. (See Objective 1 and Overall
  Efficacy section for discussions of data inconsistencies.)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear and provided a rich description and assessment of project design, implementation and
results. It mostly followed guidelines. The lessons and recommendations were thoughtfully selected. It
included a comprehensive list of supporting documents that makes clear that it was well researched. However,
there was no discussion of the reliability of the data on project results. A discussion of trends in indicator data
would have been useful, including an explicit comparison between the data from the LQAS and the Situation
Analysis. The discussion on attribution was inadequate; a map of relevant other projects was provided, but no
information was provided on their scope to be able to assess whether other projects might have contributed to
the project results. The ICR was not as critically objective as would be desired, reflected in the tone in several
places. Less repetition could have kept the ICR length closer to the guidelines. The Outcome rating was
reported as Satisfactory in the text (p. 26) but Highly Satisfactory in the Data Sheet. There were shortcomings
in some of the Annexes: Annex 1 Table B provided only cursory information on project activities and outputs
(just seven items). Annex 3 did not provide the actual values at project closing. Annex 5 did not state the source
for the material provided therein.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 19
