     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GLR:Displaced Persons and Border Comm (P152821)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022075

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P152821                                    GLR:Displaced Persons and Border Comm

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Africa                                     Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58150,IDA-D2300                        31-Dec-2021                                              401,761.03

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 27-May-2016                                31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                      0.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                                335,376.85                                                0.00

 Actual                                            401,761.03                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Maria Vanessa               J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Corlazzoli                  Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the Africa Great Lakes Region: Displaced Persons and Border Communities project for
   US$20 million IDA credit was to improve access to livelihoods and socio-economic infrastructure for displaced
   people and host communities in target areas of the territory of the Republic of Zambia (PAD, pg.11).

   As part of an Additional Financing (AF) in June 2017, a second objective was added to the original parent
   project. Therefore the project had two objectives: (i) improve access to livelihoods and socio-economic
   infrastructure for displaced people and host communities in target areas of the territory of the Republic of

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GLR:Displaced Persons and Border Comm (P152821)



   Zambia, and (ii) support regional learning on development (Financial Agreement IDA-D2300, 2017, pg. 5 and
   Project Paper, para 5a). This second objective was financed by a US$3 million IDA grant for the International
   Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) in order to extend regional capacity building and learning
   activities on development responses to forced displacement to government (Project Paper, para. 1).

   The parent project, however, experienced several setbacks. The Government of Tanzania withdrew from the
   project during appraisal process shortly before project negotiations (ICR, para 10). The Government of
   Zambia withdrew from the project in March 2018 prior to it being declared effective (ICR, para 14). The
   parent project was officially closed on March 29, 2019. While no activities were implemented under the first
   objective because the parent was never declared effective, the IDA grant to ICGLR grant proceeded and was
   declared effective in November 2017 (ICR, para 13). That said, with the decision to close the parent project in
   March 2019, this left the ICGLR IDA grant orphaned. As a result, in June 2019, it was also decided that the
   IDA grant to ICGLR would be closed and unspent funds were cancelled (ICR, para 17).

   It is not necessary to conduct an ICR on a project that failed to become effective. The parent project in this
   case never became effective and there is no legal agreement. The legal agreement for the ICGLR grant from
   IDA was signed on August 16, 2017. While this agreement was an amendment to the parent grant
   agreement, it had two objectives but it only funded activities to support the second objective, namely the
   ICGLR grant. As a result, this ICRR will only focus on the achievement of the second objective. During this
   review, the Additional Financing Project Paper was used as the primary reference document as opposed as
   the PAD that was prepared for the parent project.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  25-Jul-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Regional Learning (Appraisal cost was estimated at US$717,000. At closing the cost was
   US$68,773). This component aimed at bringing together key representatives through a range of events in
   order to raise awareness, capacities, identify challenges, and durable solutions to forced migration (Project
   Paper, para 25). The relevant stakeholders were to be gathered to share knowledge, experience and good
   practices regarding developing processes to respond to forced displacement (Financial Agreement, pg. 6).
   The second part of this component was to provide technical assistance to support the existing ICGLR
   Technical Sub-Committee of experts on land. This committee was tasked with establishing reporting
   systems, research land and displacement topics, and conduct future subcommittee meetings (Financial
   Agreement, pg. 5, and Project Paper, para. 27).



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GLR:Displaced Persons and Border Comm (P152821)



  Component 2: Regional Research (Appraisal cost was estimated at US$1,084,000. At closing there were
  no expenditures for this component). This component sought to conduct regional research through studies
  and data collection activities aimed to fill knowledge gaps for enabling evidence-based policy making
  (Financial Agreement, pg. 5; Project Paper, para 28)

  Component 3: Project Management and Institutional Capacity Building (Appraisal cost was estimated
  at US$1,199,000. At closing the cost was US$321,434). This component aimed at strengthening
  management skills and institutional capacity of the ICGLR through the provision of technical advisory
  services in order to implement the following: day-to-day planning, implementation and supervision of project
  activities, support the Project Advisory Group, administration and financial management, and project
  monitoring and evaluation (Financial Agreement, pg. 5).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. At appraisal, the total cost for the parent project was estimated at US$20 million, of which all
  would be allocated by the World Bank (PAD, pg. i). At appraisal, the estimated cost for the ICGLR project
  was US$3 million (ICR, pg. 43). If both the parent and the ICGLR project had been implemented then the
  total appraised cost would have been US$23 million.

  Financing. The total of US$23 million was financed through two different legal agreements.

  A total of US$20 million from an IDA credit was approved for the parent project. When the project was
  closed none of the credit had been disbursed.

  An additional US$3 million grant was provided by IDA grant in 2017. The actual disbursement of this grant
  at the end of the project was US$401,761 (ICR, pg. 2).

  Borrower Contribution. There were no provisions in the PAD or in the legal agreement that indicated that
  the Borrowers committed to making a financial contribution to the project.

  Dates. The parent project was approved on May 27, 2016. In March 2016, shortly before the project
  negotiations, the Government of Tanzania withdrew from the project (ICR, para 10). The Government of
  Zambia withdrew from the project in March 2018 and the IDA credit portion of the project never became
  effective. It was officially closed in March 2019 (ICR, para 14).

  As noted already above, on July 25, 2017 an additional financing was approved for the parent project. It
  consisted of an IDA grant to fund activities in the ICGLR (ICR, para 12). An additional objective was added
  to the parent project. PDO indicators and components were not changed throughout the life of the project
  (ICR, pg. 16). On the other hand outcome and intermediate outcome indicators were added to the project
  during implementation. The IDA agreement for the ICGLR became effective on November 13, 2017 (ICR,
  para. 13). Since the level of ambition for the project that was declared effective was not reduced there was
  no justification for a split rating of objectives.

  On June 25, 2019, the project closing date was changed from December 31, 2021 to June 20, 2019 (ICR.
  para 17).




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GLR:Displaced Persons and Border Comm (P152821)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale

At the time of appraisal, within the Great Lakes Region, there were more than 4.3 million refugees and
internally displaced persons. Individuals that were displaced tended to have lower incomes, lower
employment rates, and greater dependency on direct transfers than non-displaced (ICR, para 2). Hosting
displaced persons also had considerable strains on services and environmental degradation (ICR, para 2).

At the time of appraisal, most interventions related to displaced persons in the Great Lakes Region were
humanitarian in nature. In order to adequately address forced displacement it necessitated a regional and
collaborative approach. While regional institutions had strong mandates to address forced displacement
they lacked a permanent regional platform to sustain policy dialogue and knowledge sharing (ICR, para 3).

Previous Sector Experience: While the World Bank’s role historically tackled the medium-term socio
economic dimensions of forced displacement, it had experience supporting regional platforms in the Horn of
Africa Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) Regional Secretariat for Forced Displacement
and Mixed Migration (ICR, para 1 and 3).

Alignment with World Bank Assistance Strategy: The project’s objective closely aligned with the World
Bank Assistance Strategy, in particular, the World Bank’s Great Lakes Regional Initiative (GLRI). This
initiative was designed to work in support of peace, security and cooperation through regional projects (ICR,
para 4). Forced displaced persons were identified as a vulnerable group under the first pillar or the GLRI
(ICR, para 4). The project was conceived to operationalize a development response to forced displacement
in the Great Lakes Region as part of the GLRI (ICR, para. 5).

Alignment with Development Goals: The ICGLR project’s objective did not have an explicit alignment to
the World Bank Development twin goals of reducing extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity. That
said, implicitly the objective of this project would eventually be able to support the World Bank’s goals if the
project was able to increase knowledge and support regional learning on how best to address issues
related to forced displacement.

Alignment with Government Development Strategy: The project aligned with the Government of
Tanzania and Zambia’s government development strategy while it was being conceived. However, both
countries held elections and new governments were formed. Both the Government of Tanzania and
Zambia withdrew from the project, which indicated that implementing the project and subsequently
achieving the objectives was not a priority that had the support of political forces across political parties in
those countries.

Furthermore, the project’s objective did not align with the Government of Zambia’s priority as outlined in the
Country Partnership Strategies (CPS) at the project's start or closure. For example, the Country Partnership
Strategies (CPS) of Zambia (CP FY2013-2017 and CPS FY 2019-23) did not explicitly seek to address or
collaborate on issues related to forced displacement.

The objective of the project was more closely aligned with one of the focus areas outlined in the Country
Partnership Strategy for Tanzania. In the CPS 19-22, the CPS acknowledges the regional priority to work

                                                                                                        Page 4 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GLR:Displaced Persons and Border Comm (P152821)



               on issues related to refugees and forced migrants. The CPS showcases one project aimed at dealing with
               refugee issues along the Tanzania/Burundi border (CPS19-22, pg. 34). However, support for regional
               learning on development or on forced migration was not a central theme of the CPS at project closure.

               The Government of Burundi is the host country of the ICGLR. During the ICGLR project inception, one of
               Burundi's CPS pillars was regional integration (CPS 2013-16, para 51-52). As a result the project's objective
               was relevant to achieving Burundi's development priorities. At project closure, the CPS (2019-2023),
               acknowledges the need for regional cooperation with its neighbors on a range of issues, including forced
               displacement (CPR 19-23, para. 5).

               Overall, the project’s objective was relevant given the context. The World Bank also had experience
               supporting regional forums. However, the objective of the project only implicitly supported the World Bank's
               Twin Development Goals. There was also limited evidence to indicate that the objective was a priority of
               the Government of Tanzania or Zambia. The objective was, however, relevant to the priorities of the
               Government of Burundi. On balance, the relevance of the project objective is rated as modest.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support regional learning on development.

                             Rationale
                             The project aimed at achieving the objective by identifying means to support displaced people and improve
                             community resilience, promote regional integration, and support the ICGLR’s Humanitarian and Social Issues
                             sector (ICR, para 19).

                             The theory of change assumed that there would be an increase in awareness of the long-term responses to
                             forced displacement by bringing together key policy makers and facilitating ongoing regional processes. It
                             also assumed that by increasing the capacity of the ICGLR technical Subcommittee it would be better able to
                             establish reporting systems on key protocols related to land for displaced people. Lastly, it assumed that by
                             commissioning regional research initiatives it would lead to more evidence-based policies (ICR, para. 20).

                             The theory of change also tackled key leverages that could lead to evidence-based policy making
                             (gatherings, research, capacity strengthening). However, the approach was technocratic and to be successful
                             it would have needed to account for political sensitivities that prevent the implementation of best-practices.
                             The ICR outlined several other important assumptions and risks that the project team was aware of including:
                             political risks of governments to pursue development responses that may not be supported by public opinion,


                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GLR:Displaced Persons and Border Comm (P152821)



volatile regional and domestic political developments, and unknown or limited knowledge of whether a
regional learning platform could influence "on-the-ground" interventions (ICR, para 21a).

The logical framework stressed the importance of implementation of knowledge and research by introducing
strong indicators on uptake and use. That said, there were limitations to uptake beyond the scope of the
ICGLR grant that needed to be holistically addressed. While uptake and use were important, there were no
activities to support uptake and use of the research as outlined in the Project Paper. As a result, by project
design, the uptake of the new knowledge was limited.

Outputs (Targets were not provided):

      One Project Advisory Group (PAG) meeting was held in July 2018 and was attended by 7 government
       officials (ICR, para. 39).

      One workshop was held in January 2019 (ICR, para 40). It was attended by 40 participants (ICR, para
       41).

      No research outputs were developed under the Regional Research component (ICR, para 45).

      No evidence was provided in the ICR of capacity strengthening or support to the ICGLR Technical
       Sub-Committee of Experts on Land

Outcome

A year after the project implemented its first activity, the project was closed. In that year, the project was able
to convene one workshop “Government, Institutional and Governance Arrangements for Development
Responses/Solutions to Forced Displacement in the Great Lakes Region.” Participants in this workshop were
able to share information through peer-presentations and short briefs (ICR, para 41). Workshop participants
stated that they found the meeting useful because it was “interactive, allowed for cross-fertilization of ideas for
better working methods, people with different expertise shared views freely, there was improved knowledge of
development solutions...and participants were able to identify weaknesses and good practices” (ICR, para
42).

Government officials from different countries noted that they used the information provided in the workshop.
For example, the Government of Zambia stated that they used the information to strengthen and
institutionalized coordination among ministries (ICR, para. 43). The Government of DRC noted that it was
motivated to host its own workshop focused on four provinces most affected by forced displacement (ICR,
para 43). Meanwhile, the Regional Durable Solutions Secretariat (ReDSS) used the information to inform their
Great Lakes regional strategy (ICR, para 43).

In March 2019, the Governments of the Great Lakes Region re-affirmed their commitment to seeking regional
solutions to forced displacement. During a high-level meeting among Ministers in charge of refugee issues,
that was co-hosted by the Director of the Humanitarian and Social Issues Sector, participants stated that the
ICGLR was a valuable collaborative vehicle. They recommended that the ICGLR develop a Regional Strategy
for Durable Solutions for the Great Lakes Region, and an action plan (ICR, para 35). These statements by
the different government officials indicated that there was a need for the project and appreciation for the work



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GLR:Displaced Persons and Border Comm (P152821)



                            that was taking place. According to World Bank staff, the project gave ICGLR additional legitimacy and profile
                            at this Forum (World Bank Staff Interview 2020).

                            Unfortunately, there were only 2 activities implemented in this project, implementing one preparatory meeting
                            and one workshop. While the activities were well implemented and there is some evidence of preliminary use
                            of the information exchanged, the project was unable to generate a sufficient outcome to achieve its
                            objective. For example, no research initiatives were undertaken during the life of the project. As a result, the
                            outcome of this objective is rated negligible due to the lack of activities implemented during the life of the
                            project.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project had a short duration and it was only able to implement two activities. While the workshop
                            organized was useful to the participants and there is some evidence of uptake, its reach is probably limited
                            due to the fact that it was a one-off-event. Moreover, there were numerous other activities outlined in the
                            Project Paper that were not implemented, including research initiatives. While the project was able to support
                            a high-level forum of government officials in March 2019, the project was unable to implement the majority of
                            planned activities. The overall efficacy of the project's achievements is therefore rated negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                               Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   Scope of Analysis: A financial and economic analysis was not carried out during the additional financing of the
   project (Project Paper, pg. 16). The Project Paper stated that this analysis was not undertaken because the
   activities focused on technical assistance, learning events, and research rather than implementation of works
   and field-level activities (Project Paper, pg. 16). Instead, efficiency would be achieved through: (a) using the staff
   of the existing PCU within the ICGLR and augmenting their salaries to enable full-time positions, rather than
   recruiting new staff members; and (b) use of financial proposals (alongside technical proposals) to comply with
   least cost criteria in the selection of consultants and firms (Project Paper, pg. 16).

   Economic Analysis: At project closure, only 18% of the funds were disbursed (ICR, para 53). This is an
   indication of poor operational efficiency. Moreover, 82% of the funds that were disbursed were used under
   project management and institutional capacity building components.




                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GLR:Displaced Persons and Border Comm (P152821)



Operational Efficiency: There were a few other factors that negatively affected the project’s
efficiency. According to the ICRR, “tremendous amount of time and effort was spent by the World Bank team in
reprocessing the project internally.” (ICR, para. 49). The project was closed prematurely, and as a result
activities were not implemented and outcomes not achieved. The project also faced a number of bureaucratic
hurdles related to: (i) preparing a stand alone project, (ii) retro-fitting it to an Additional Financing process, (iii)
delays in setting up a new P-code, (iv) delayed negotiations due to administrative errors, (v) acquiring waiver for
an AF for an non-effective project, (vi) deferring requirements for re-structuring the parent project (vii) delays in
appealing to regional VP to secure approval not having a waiver to clear the AF (ICR, para 49). As the ICR
reflected, the ineffective “processes and time spent largely reflected and inflexible bureaucracy which took time
and energy away from the client, yet nonetheless did not prevent the final outcome of the ICGLR having to halt
activities prematurely.” (ICR, para 49).

Overall, the project had grave operational inefficiencies. Processes required to implement the project were
cumbersome and time-consuming. The project also closed prematurely and as a result the time invested to set
up the project was not a productive investment. As a result of the operational inefficiencies, the efficiency of the
project is rated as negligible.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?               Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         0
 Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         0
 ICR Estimate                                                  0
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s objective was relevant given the context. In order to resolve forced displacement a regional
approach was needed. The World Bank also had experience supporting regional forums. However, the
objective of the project only implicitly supported the World Bank Development Goals. There was also limited
evidence to indicate that the objective was a priority of the Governments of Tanzania or Zambia. As a result, the
relevance of the objective is rated as modest.

The project had a short duration and it was only able to implement two activities. While the workshop organized
was useful to the participants and there is some evidence of uptake, its reach is probably limited due to the fact
that it was a one-off-event. Moreover, there were numerous other activities outlined in the Project Paper that



                                                                                                           Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GLR:Displaced Persons and Border Comm (P152821)



were not implemented, including research initiatives. The efficacy of the project's achievements was rated
negligible by this review.

The project also had grave operational inefficiencies. Processes required to implement the project were
cumbersome and time-consuming. The project also closed prematurely and as a result the time invested to set
up the project was not a productive investment. Considering the pervasive operational inefficiencies, the
efficiency with which the project was implemented is rated as negligible.

The overall outcome of this project is therefore rated highly unsatisfactory due to severe shortcomings in its
efficacy and efficiency (both rated negligible), and a major shortcoming in the relevance of the project's objective
(rated modest).


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There is one main risk to the development outcome:


Perceived lack of donor support for regional approach to forced displacement. Due to the abrupt
closure of the project, countries may perceive that the World Bank is not committed to a regional platform on
development responses to forced displacement (ICR, para 75). This perception may affect stakeholder’s
willingness to invest in safe regional platforms that enable difficult conversations to take place.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of the project was based on a series of identification missions to the region. The Government
  of DRC, Tanzania and Zambia each identified their priorities. The ICGLR was also consulted and
  submitted a letter of request in 2015 (ICR, para 6). By 2016, the ROC had endorsed that the ICGLR
  component be a stand-alone project. However, in the course of 2016, the position of the World Bank’s
  Regional Vice President had changed towards portfolio consolidation and this project became part of the
  parent-project (ICR, para 12).

  The design of the project included lessons learned from other projects, including work done by the
  Intergovernmental Authority on Development. The lessons learned included building capacity of the
  existing Project Coordination Unit and initiating research and events based on country priorities (ICR,
  para. 65). previous regional projects. It also included extensive consultations

  The ICGLR grant fits nicely into the parent project as it complemented its objectives and desired
  outcomes. The ICGLR grant’s theory of change was ambitious, yet simultaneously commendable, for

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GLR:Displaced Persons and Border Comm (P152821)



  trying to ensure that research and events were implemented. The team was aware of the various
  potential risks that could impact the project and upon reflection it recognized that the mitigation measures
  could have been strengthen (ICR, para 67).

  The project team had to go through numerous time consuming mandatory bureaucratic processes to
  have the ICGLR grant approved, which led to operational inefficiencies at the design stage.

  Overall, the quality of entry is rated as moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team provided ongoing support to the ICGLR and ensured that it maintained a clear
 communication through the different project stages. Unfortunately, the project suffered several set-backs
 as a result of a lack of proper political economy analysis and internal bureaucratic rigidity. For example, a
 proper political economy analysis may have better identified political risks and interests of political actors
 that were not supportive of the Bank’s financing of refugee/host community interventions. This could have
 helped to create a broader coalition that would support the parent-project given the inevitability of elections
 in Tanzania and Zambia. The Bank’s internal bureaucratic rigidity led to the project being closed despite
 the team’s various efforts to re-process the grant in order to continue activities while also achieving
 portfolio consolidation (ICR, para 69). For example, the team explored different options such
 as integrating the project into an existing project or incorporating it into new projects (ICR, para. 16). These
 efforts were not successful. The Bank task team responded by working with the ICGLR to identify EU-
 funding and World Bank Trust Funds to continue to implement activities with alternative financial support
 (ICR, para 73). On balance, the quality of supervision is rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project aimed to support regional learning on development as it related to forced migration by
 identifying means to support displaced people and improve community resilience, promote regional
 integration, and support the ICGLR’s Humanitarian and Social Issues sector (ICR, para 19).



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GLR:Displaced Persons and Border Comm (P152821)



 The theory of change assumed that there would be an increase in awareness of the long-term responses to
 forced displacement by bringing together key policy makers and facilitating ongoing regional processes. It
 also assumed that by increasing the capacity of the ICGLR technical Subcommittee it would be better able
 to establish reporting systems on key protocols related to land for displaced people. Lastly, it assumed that
 by commissioning regional research initiatives it would lead to more evidence-based policies (ICR, para.
 20).

 The theory of change tackled key leverages that could lead to evidence-based policy making (gatherings,
 research, capacity strengthening). However, the approach was technocratic and to be successful it would
 have needed to overcome for political sensitivities that prevented the implementation of best-
 practices. The project document outlined governance risks such as geopolitical tension, host country
 sensitive operating environment, and historical conflict between member countries (Project Paper, para.
 18). The ICR outlined several other important assumptions and risks that the project was aware of
 including: political risks of governments to pursue development responses that may not be supported by
 public opinion, volatile regional and domestic political developments, unknown or limited knowledge of
 whether a regional learning platform could influence on-the-ground interventions (ICR, para 21a).

 The logical framework stressed the importance of implementation of knowledge and research by
 introducing strong indicators on uptake and use. During the Additional Finance, the project paper
 introduced new indicators. The new indicators aimed to measure not only the reach of the research
 initiatives (number of participants, number of research pieces created), but also the perceived usefulness of
 the events (% of participants that found the event or research useful) (Project Paper, pg. 20). To measure
 the full impact of the project, outcome related indicators could have measured changes in policy,
 processes, institutional reform, and application of research findings. Some of these impacts would have
 been outside the reach of the project given the limited size of the grant. As a result, it was sufficient
 that the results framework intended to measure the use of knowledge and how stakeholder used the new
 knowledge (ICR, para. 59).

 The Additional Finance outlined a straightforward monitoring and evaluation system. It was designed with
 the aim to track activity outputs and measure indicators associated with outcomes. These activities were
 meant to (a) confirm that the timing and nature of activities were consistent with the project design and
 implementation; (b) make mid-course corrections if any issues were found to hamper implementation; (c)
 gauge progress towards intermediate outcomes; and (d) better understand any specific needs and
 dynamics that may become apparent over time (Project Paper, para 31). One of the key measurement
 tools was a perception survey to be administered one year after the end of the event. Other key monitoring
 tools included (a) quarterly progress reports and (b) a midterm and end-of-project independent evaluation
 (Project Paper, para 32).



b. M&E Implementation
  The project was able to implement evaluation surveys to measure qualitative outcome indicators at the
  PAG meeting and the workshop (ICR, para 60). The project also collected feedback from workshop
  participants, and interviews were conducted to validate findings(ICR, para 60). Due to the closure of the
  project, a quantitative survey to collect data against indicators six months after the learning event was not
  sent (ICR, para. 60). According to the ICR, this affected the evidence base for justification of outcome
  achievements (ICR, para. 60).



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GLR:Displaced Persons and Border Comm (P152821)




c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR, “potential project re-processing and closure was initiated before M&E could be
  sufficiently utilized.” (ICR, para 60). The ICR also reflected that “not much time was available to
  implement M&E.” (ICR, para. 61)

  The overall rating of quality of M&E is rated as modest. The M&E design was strong as it attempted to
  measure the reach, usefulness, and utility of the gatherings and knowledge products. The
  implementation of the M&E system was rolled out during the handful of events that were
  organized. Unfortunately, the qualitative survey was not implemented due to the early closure of the
  project. Due to the short implementation period of the project the M&E data collected was not readily
  used.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Environmental Category “B” Partial Assessment, as per the Additional
   Finance. Despite the Partial Assessment “B” category, the activities did not trigger any safeguards because
   there were no physical works and no direct social impacts (Project Paper, pg. 17). The project anticipated
   indirect positive social impacts through regional dialogue and improved responses for forced displacement
   (Project Paper, pg. 17). The project was expected to implement principles to support social inclusion,
   including gender, and conduct consultative research ethically. At project closure, no safeguard policies had
   been triggered (ICR, para 61).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project submitted FMR quarterly reports on a timely matter. Audit reports were submitted before the
   respective deadlines. The project received an unqualified audit opinion for December 2017, June 2018,
   and June 2018-2019 (ICR, para. 63). Procurement of goods and services funded followed Bank
   procurement procedures (ICR, para 63).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



                                                                                                 Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GLR:Displaced Persons and Border Comm (P152821)




d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               According to IEG guidelines a
                                                                               modest rating for relevance, and
                                                                               negligible ratings for efficacy and
                                                                               efficiency indicate severe
Outcome                        Unsatisfactory       Highly Unsatisfactory
                                                                               shortcomings in the operation's
                                                                               achievements and an overall
                                                                               Development Outcome rating of
                                                                               highly unsatisfactory.
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                    Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The following two lessons were extracted from the ICR:

    1. Institutional rigidity and internal administrative objectives can be harmful to
       implementing regional projects. For example, to have this project approved it needed to
       go through several administrative processes and waivers to avoid having a stand-alone
       project. When the parent project was closed, the associated IDA grant was prematurely
       closed. Throughout the application process, agile principles were not applied (ICR, para. 77)


    2. Political Economy Analysis is necessary to understand client countries and mitigate
       risks. For example, forced displacement is inherently a political issue. Prior to beginning a
       project, the World Bank would do well to assess and fully understand political actors’
       motivations and interests. When it came to the parent project for this operation both Zambia
       and Tanzania withdrew due to changes in the political alignments of their newly elected
       governments. A strong political economy analysis could have signaled the different priorities
       of political parties, and provided the World Bank an opportunity to address all actors’
       interests in the project's design.

       The following lesson was extracted by IEG:




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GLR:Displaced Persons and Border Comm (P152821)



     3. Regional forums are able to bring together key stakeholders to discuss politically
         sensitive topics. For example, while the project was only able to implement one workshop
         of stakeholders, preliminary data indicate that there was some use and uptake of information
         shared at the workshops. Furthermore, there has always been a regional commitment to
         discuss and share emerging best practices among neighboring countries in the Great Lakes
         region.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear and well written. The ICR adequately described the limitations of the project’s
implementation as a result of the Bank’s rigid procedures. It provided detail of what was and was not achieved
in the different areas of the review, although Annex 3 was incomplete and misleading. It is generally insightful,
reflective, and provides useful lessons learned for future regional projects. Overall, the quality of this ICR is
rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 14
