     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Housing Finance (P117242)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0022122

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P117242                                 TZ-Housing Finance

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Tanzania                                Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-47120,IDA-55900                     31-Dec-2015                                         95,551,802.89

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Mar-2010                             28-Jun-2019

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          40,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                           99,257,208.81                                             0.00

 Actual                                       95,551,802.89                                             0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               John R. Eriksson            Christopher David Nelson       IEGFP (Unit 3)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (page 7):




                                                                                               Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Housing Finance (P117242)



   " To develop the housing mortgage finance market through the provision of medium and long-term
   liquidity to mortgage lenders".

   The revised PDO following the Additional Financing (AF) for the project on February 2, 2015, (the main
   difference was the deletion of "mortgage" from " "housing finance" market).

   " To facilitate the development of the housing finance market through the provision of medium and
   long-term liquidity to lenders".



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  02-Feb-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three components at appraisal (PAD, pages 7 - 9).

   1. Development of the Mortgage Market. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$33.0 million. With AF,
   the revised estimate was US$73.8 million. The actual cost was US$73.8 million.

   This component aimed at developing a financial intermediary - the Tanzania Mortgage Refinancing
   Company (TMRC) - for providing medium and long support to mortgage lenders. The IDA credit aimed at
   supporting the initial, start-up phase of the TMRC's operations as a second-tier facility, for refinancing long-
   term residential mortgage loans (The second tier mortgage lenders are the non deposit taking and
   specialized wholesale lenders, whose financing enables primary lenders to offer lower mortgage rates and
   longer tenors than otherwise possible). The TMRC was expected to begin issuing bonds in the capital
   market for sustained funding of its operations. This component included, capacity building of the
   mortgage lenders for developing a mortgage credit line, and helping the TMRC issue its first bonds. Funding
   for this component was increased with AF, to support a more reliable source of longer term funds to
   mortgage lenders including, through allowing TMRC to pre-finance the mortgage portfolio, in addition to
   refinancing mortgages (discussed in section 2e), and to support a gradual move from IDA financing to full
   market-based funding for TMRC.

   2. Development of Housing Microfinance. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$5.0 million. With AF,
   the revised estimate was US$20.5 million. The actual cost was US$20.5 million.

   Given that a vast majority of Tanzania's population worked in the informal sector, housing microfinance was
   deemed to be more appropriate than traditional mortgages to the needs of many
   borrowers. This component aimed at financing an initial study to develop this product, and develop a

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TZ-Housing Finance (P117242)



  feasibility study for setting up a Household Microfinance Fund (HMFF). This study was to be followed by
  setting a HMFF for providing loans directly to Housing Microfinance institutions. The scope of this activity
  was scaled-up with AF.

  3. Expansion of Affordable Housing Supply. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$2.0 million. With
  AF, the revised estimate for this component was US$4.3 million. The actual cost was US$4.3 million.

  This component aimed at developing the private developer industry. Activities in this component included,
  conducting a housing market study to identify the constraints facing the housing market, capacity building of
  the National Housing Corporation (NHC) and the banks to provide real estate developer finance, and
  promoting the use of low-cost construction technologies for affordable housing. Activities were scaled up
  with AF for the project. The following actives were added: (i) setting guidelines for low-income housing: (ii)
  setting a Housing Information Center: (iii) Information Communication Technology (ICT) requirements for
  Watumishi Company Limited Design team: and (iv) strengthening the National Housing and Building
  Research Agency (NHBRA).

  The following component was added with AF.

  4. Project Management. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$0.0 million. The actual cost was
  US$1.4 million.

  This component provided project management support, including support for monitoring and evaluation and
  providing funding for a mortgage finance specialist and a procurement specialist.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


  Project cost. The estimated project cost at appraisal was US$42.0 million. With AF, the estimated project
  cost was US$102.4 million. The actual project cost was US$97.9 million.

  Project financing. The original project was financed by an IDA credit of US$40.0 million. AF of US$60.0
  million was approved on February 2, 2015. With this, the total project cost was US$100.00 million. The total
  amount disbursed was US$95.5 million.

  Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution was estimated at US$2.0 million at appraisal. Their
  contribution was more than planned at US$2.4 million.

  Dates. The original project, approved on March 2010, became effective on January 21, 2011. AF was
  approved on February 2,2015. The project closed on June 30, 2019.

  Other changes. The project was restructured three times, with two Level 2 restructurings and one Level 1
  restructuring. The following changes were made with the first Level 2 restructuring on February 12, 2013,
  when 6% of the original IDA credit was disbursed.

        The project faced a slow start due to the time it took to meet the credit effectiveness and
         disbursement conditions, which included establishing the TMRC, as a fully licensed entity. TMRC


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Housing Finance (P117242)



          became operational only in 2011. Further, the initial demand for the mortgage refinance facility was
          low, due to the reluctance on the part of primary mortgage lenders to use the refinancing facility.
          This was exacerbated by deteriorating macroeconomic conditions (doubling of inflation during the
          first two years of the project), making the banks reluctant to extend credit (including for mortgages).
          To address these constraints, the government and the Bank agreed to restructure the project, to
          allow TMRC pre-finance mortgage portfolios, in addition to refinancing mortgages.
         Targets were revised to: (i) strengthen attribution: and (ii) strengthen measurement of outcomes
          within the influence of the project, as opposed to its catalytic impact on the broad market (discussed
          in section 9a).

   The following changes were made following the approval of AF, through a Level 1 restructuring on February
   2, 2015:

         The PDO was revised to better align the PDO with the existing project scope. The change from
          "housing mortgage finance" to "housing finance", ensured that the PDO more fully captured both
          instruments - mortgages and housing microfinance -that were financed under the project.
         The PDO indicators and targets were revised in order to take account of the activities that
          were added with AF (mainly scaling up funding for the housing microfinance funding facility).
         The closing date for the original project was extended by two years (from March 31, 2015, to March
          31, 2017).

   The project closing date for the AF project was extended by 15 months from March 31, 2018, to June 28,
   2019, for completing the scaled-up AF activities, through the second Level 2 restructuring on March 28,
   2018..

   Split rating. The original PDO specified mortgages explicitly, and implied coverage of housing microfinance
   as specified in the legal agreement. The revised PDO ensured that the PDO captured both instruments -
   mortgages and housing microfinance - and reflected the entire project scope. Although targets were revised
   following the first restructuring of the project discussed above, only 6% of the credit had been disbursed by
   then. Given that the revised PDO was representative of the project activities and the project scope was
   expanded with AF, this review does not use a split rating of objectives, and this assessment is based on the
   revised PDO.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


Country context. The urban population in Tanzania, increased from a low-base of 6% to 23% between
1967-2002. The total housing deficit was over 2.2 million units in 2000, (with average annual demand for
plots in Dar es Salaam at 20,000 units, far outstripping average annual supply at 700 units). The financial
markets for refinancing mortgages remained low, with the mortgage to Gross Domestic Product (GDP) ratio
at 0.3%, as compared to 0.5% in Nigeria, 1% in Uganda and 34% in South Africa. The housing finance
market was at a nascent state, for a combination of factors including, lack of access to finance, lack of

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TZ-Housing Finance (P117242)



               technical and managerial capacity in the real estate sector, high cost of construction and lack of
               land titles. The PDOs of supporting improvements in the incentive structure for market participants,
               supporting development of multifamily residential apartment complexes and affordable single residential
               homes through expanding the mortgage market, and housing finance products for the financially
               underserved population who would not be able to afford traditional mortgage finance, were important for the
               government strategy.

               Government strategy. The PDO's were well-aligned with Tanzania's Second Poverty Reduction Strategy
               (SPRS) called the "National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty" (or MKUKUTA) for 2005-2010,
               at appraisal. The first cluster of the strategy articulated the need for sustaining growth and reducing
               poverty, specifically through "deepening financial sector reforms". In the years before approval, the
               government had also enacted legislation for improving the environment of lending for the housing sector,
               such as through the Mortgage Finance (Special provisions) Act in 2008, for strengthening the ability of
               creditors to enforce collateral, and Unit Titles Act of 2008, aimed at the titling process for improving the
               prospects for mortgages.

               Bank strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with the Bank strategy. The first objective of the Country
               Assistance Strategy (CAS) for 2012- 2015, articulated the need for promoting inclusive and sustainable
               private sector-led growth, including through improving financial intermediation. The CAS also explicitly
               stated the need for supporting the nascent mortgage market, and creating jobs in housing construction-
               related activities. The first focus area of the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2018 - 2022,
               articulated the need for " enhancing productivity and accelerating equitable and sustainable growth ",
               through increasing access to credit for micro, small and medium enterprises and women.

               While the original PDO explicitly mentioned mortgage financing, the revised PDO more fully captured both
               instruments financed under the project. Both mortgage financing and housing microfinance addressed the
               needs for the vast majority of Tanzanians in the informal sector who not afford conventional mortgage
               finance, and were also aimed at alleviating the excess demand for housing, the relevance of PDO is rated
               as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To facilitate the development of the housing finance market through the provision of medium and long-term
                             liquidity to lenders.

                             Rationale


                                                                                                                           Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Housing Finance (P117242)



Theory of change. The results framework was logical. Establishing the TMRC for providing long-term
mortgage financing, supporting the mortgage literacy program, technical assistance to mortgage lenders and
to the TMRC for issuing bonds, were expected to aid in developing mortgage lending. Setting a HMFF facility
and capacity building of the participating microfinance institutions, were aimed at improving access to
affordable housing to the low and middle-income segment of the population. While the above-mentioned
activities aimed at increasing access to housing finance, activities such as, financing a housing market study,
capacity building for real estate developers and the National Housing Company (NHC) to facilitate the
availability of titled land and guidelines for low-income housing, aimed at addressing supply-side constraints
of the housing sector. The combination of these activities were expected to contribute to the long term
development outcome of improving the livelihoods of Tanzanians. The links between the project activities, the
outputs and outcomes were clear, and the intended outcomes were measurable.

Outputs (ICR, pages 26 - 36 and pages 50 - 56).

Mortgage financing.

      The TMRC - a private sector owned and operated entity - was set up in 2011, for providing refinancing
       of mortgages and pre-financing mortgages (to be converted into refinancing in three years). The
       TMRC stakeholders (private sector banks and mortgage companies), increased from an initial five in
       2011 to 17 by mid 2019. At project closure, the number of financial institutions providing
       mortgages increased from four at the baseline, to 33 in mid-June 2019. The interest rates for
       mortgages reduced from over 21% in 2011 to 15% in mid-2019, and mortgage volumes increased at a
       compound annual growth rate of 29% over the course of the project. The mortgages were available at
       a longer maturity, from a maximum of 10 to 15 years before the project to 25 -30 years by mid-2019.
      The mortgages of fifteen financial institutions were refinanced by TMRC, exceeding the target of four
      There were three indicators on the outstanding volume of loans by TMRC: (i) Refinanced mortgages
       increased from 5.6 billion Tanzanian Shillings (TZS) in 2014, to 61 billion TZS in mid-2019: (ii) Pre-
       financed eligible loans increased from 3.8 billion TZS in 2014, to 16 billion TZS in mid-2019: and (iii)
       Pre-financed loans increased from 17 billion TZS in 2014, to 69 billion TZS in mid-2019.

Housing Microfinance loans.

      The HMFF, a state-owned special fund, was set up in 2015, with the Bank of Tanzania (BOT) as the
       executing agency. The housing microfinance product was intended to provide housing loans for those
       who could not afford or qualify for conventional mortgages, but needed access to finance for housing
       construction or housing improvements.

Expansion of Affordable Housing Supply.

      Technical assistance was provided to the National Housing Corporation (NHC) for devising an overall
       plan to encourage market-based solution, to address the large and growing housing deficit in
       Tanzania, as targeted.
      ICT resources were provided to Watumishi Housing Company (a public entity established in 2013, as
       a property developer and licensed fund manager for managing the Watumisti Housing Real Estate
       Investment Fund (WHC-REIT). WHC-REIT was licensed in 2015 by the Capital Market Securities
       Agency (CMSA), as the first real estate investment fund to be established in Tanzania and East Africa.


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Housing Finance (P117242)



       The mandate of WHC-REIT was to mobilize resources for constructing houses for low and medium
       income earners.

Outcomes.

Mortgage financing.

      The outstanding volume of eligible housing loans financed by the TMRC increased from a baseline of
       zero to approximately 146 billion TZS at project closure in mid 2019. This represented a 51%
       increase, relative to the target of 95.9 billion TZS.
      The number of financial institutions offering mortgage products increased from four at the baseline to
       33 financial institutions, exceeding the target of 31 financial institutions.
      The cumulative mortgage loan volume increased from 76.72 billion TZS in 2011, to 421.0 TZS billion
       and the number of household mortgage beneficiaries increased from 579 to nearly 5,200 beneficiaries
       during the same time period. According to the gender-disaggregated data provided by TMRC, about
       28% of the beneficiaries were women and in an additional seven percent, women were listed as joint
       beneficiaries.
      While TMRC initially relied on the IDA credit line, it was expected to mobilize private sector financing
       through multiple issuance of bonds, during the lifetime of the project for expanding its business. The
       outstanding loan volume of bond issued by TMRC increased from a baseline of zero to 25.7 billion
       TZS in mid 2019. This represented 65% of the target of 39.5 billion TZS. The ICR (paragraph 54)
       notes that although bond issuance by TMRC was conceived from early years of operation, the first
       bond issuance did not take place until 2017, due to the deteriorating macroeconomic condition in
       2011-2012 (doubling of inflation between 2011 and 2012, which made the banks reluctant to extend
       credit, including for mortgages), and again in 2016-2017, due to the credit crunch. The two public
       bond issuances (one in 2018 and another in 2019) took place successfully and both were
       oversubscribed, raising the total to 25.7 billion TZS, as compared to the target of 39.5 billion TZS.

Housing Microfinance loans.

      The outstanding volume of housing microfinance loans financed by the project, increased from a
       baseline of 0.35 billion TZS in 2015, to 30.0 billion TZS financed by the project by mid-2019, as
       targeted.
      The cumulative loan volume provided by HMFF increased from one billion TZS in 2015, to 29.billion
       TZS, and the number of household beneficiaries increased from 83 in 2015 to 1,575 beneficiaries in
       mid 2019. 34% of the beneficiaries were women, with male and female beneficiaries accounting for an
       additional two percent of the portfolio.

Given that outcomes of the PDO indicators were either exceeded or realized and that in one case, the
indicator was partly realized owing to the deteriorating macroeconomic conditions, outcome is rated as
substantial.



Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                 Page 7 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                TZ-Housing Finance (P117242)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                            The outcomes were for the most part realized. This review concludes that the project substantially contributed
                            to increasing the number and volume of mortgage financing, and housing microfinance loans to the low and
                            medium income segment of the population.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency


   Economic analysis. The project activities aimed at providing financial resources to boost housing market
   finance to catalyze growth of the financial sector. The project benefits were assumed to come from, expansion
   of the mortgage market and expansion of the financial and construction sectors. These in turn were expected to
   contribute to GDP growth. A simple economic analysis of project benefits conducted at appraisal, showed that
   the incremental GDP attributed to the product, ranged from 0.5 percent in the first year of project
   implementation, to almost one percent in the last year (PAD, paragraph 65). The ICR (paragraph 79) notes that
   given that the project was extended twice, comparisons were not made to those conducted at design, given that
   those analyses were conducted with different parameters. An economic analysis was conducted at closure for
   activities associated with development of the mortgage market. This component accounted for 73% of the total
   project cost at closure. The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was estimated at 49% and the Net Present
   Value (NPV) was US$6.2 million at 15% discount rate.

   Administrative and Operational issues. The project effectiveness condition - establishing the TMRC - was
   only met in January 2011, about ten months after the IDA credit was approved. There were delays in delays in
   disbursements for HMFF, due to the strict conditions imposed by the Bank of Tanzania for participating Micro
   Finance Institutions. The project's long project period of nine years resulted in staff turnover both at the Project
   Implementation Unit (PIU) and the Bank team.

   Further, the outcome targets were revised downwards, even as the project's lifetime and cost allocation
   increased with AF. The ICR (paragraph 86) notes that, the number of microfinance loans was initially targeted at
   8,000, and revised downwards to 600 in 2013. This indicator was reformulated into a loan volume indicator.
   Although the loan volume was met, the number of loans did not meet the original target set in 2010, indicating
   that the outcomes were not efficiently achieved. Likewise, while the number of mortgages exceeded the 2010
   targets by 50%, the cost allocation for component one activity had more than doubled with AF (from US$30.0
   million to US$73.8 million).



                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Housing Finance (P117242)



In sum, despite the high EIRR for component one activity at closure, given that the targets were not scaled up,
even as the project's lifetime was extended to 2019, and the funding for the project more than doubled with AF,
efficiency is rated as modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   73.00
 ICR Estimate                                             49.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



Relevance of the revised PDO for both the government and the Bank strategy for Tanzania is rated as High.
Efficacy of the revised PDO - to facilitate the development of the housing finance market through the provision
of medium and long-term liquidity to lenders - is rated as substantial, as the outcomes were realized for the
most part. Efficiency is rated as modest. Despite the high EIRR at closure, given that the targets were not
scaled up, despite the extension to the project closing date and more than doubling of the credit. Taking these
ratings into account, outcome is rated as moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



Financial risk. Due to the small equity base, TMRC has to rely on bond issuance for financial sustainability,
and its ability to expand refinancing mortgages (ICR, paragraph 120). While the bond issuance had been
delayed, given that the two bonds issued since then were oversubscribed, the risk to development outcome



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Housing Finance (P117242)



is modest. Likewise, the future prospects for the HMFF are unclear, given that there was no agreement when
the project closed.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  This project was the first of its kind in countries with nascent capital markets and relatively
  underdeveloped financial markets. The analytical underpinnings of the project drew on the work done by
  the Bank of Tanzania and the government, with the support of the Bank-financed Financial Sector
  Support project. The project was prepared based on the Bank-finance mortgage projects in Mexico,
  Egypt and Jordan. Lessons incorporated at design included, the notion that in emerging mortgage
  finance systems, it would be better to set up second-tier financial institutions with basic financial products,
  in order for them to better manage risks in relatively new and untested product markets. Several risks
  were identified at appraisal, including substantial fiduciary risks, given the lack of staff with experience in
  addressing fiduciary issues. With mitigation measures, the project risk was rated as modest at appraisal
  (PAD, page 16). The implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the Bank of Tanzania (BOT)
  overall in charge of project management, and a Project Administration Team, in charge of day-to-day
  implementation. The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were
  appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  There were significant shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in section 9). Further, while the PDO
  change from "mortgage financing" to housing finance market with AF was in the right direction, it could
  have been made even more precise if the PDO had been further refined to state " to develop housing
  finance in the targeted beneficiary financial institutions", instead of the market.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


 Eighteen Implementation Status Results Reports were archived over the project lifetime of nine years, and
 twice a year supervision missions were held as per the norm. The supervision team included in addition to
 the Task Team Leader, technical experts and financial management, procurement and social development
 specialists. The supervision worked proactively and closely with the Bank of Tanzania (BOT) and the
 Project Implementation unit to restructure the project when faced with slow demand from the financial
 institutions, and with the BOT in developing an action plan to accelerate implementation of HMFF.




                                                                                                      Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Housing Finance (P117242)



 The knowledge transfer of the project was undermined, with as many as four Task Team Leaders (TTLs)
 over the project lifetime of nine years.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 Although the results framework was logical, the original key outcome indicator (such as mortgage to GDP
 ratio, the mortgage interest rate and the number of new housing units approved), were market wide, rather
 than project-specific indicators. The M&E indicators changed extensively between 2010 and 2019.
 However, the indicators, whether original or revised, still lacked indicators on portfolio quality for TMRC and
 HMFF. Likewise, as discussed in section five, the targets for the indicators were low - to modest, in terms
 of the level of ambition, especially so given that IDA credit for the project more than doubled with AF.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 108) notes that data was collected systematically by the PIU is standard formats and
  guidelines for data collection. The ICR (paragraph 37) acknowledges that the extensive changes to the
  indicators, made the tracking of outcomes throughout the project more difficult than necessary and
  especially given that the scope of activities did not alter extensively.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data collected was used to inform decision makers on the status of activities. This aided in addressing
  the slower progress and limited results in the early years of the project. The ICR (paragraph 109) notes
  that an in-depth assessment of the impact, effectiveness and value for money of the mortgage financing
  facility is now underway for internal government review.



  In sum, given that the M&E indicators at design were not project specific and that targets for the
  indicators were low-to-modest in terms of the level of ambition, overall M&E is rated as Modest.




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Housing Finance (P117242)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B project, under World Bank Safeguard policies. Three safeguard
   policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Physical Cultural Resources
   (OP/BP 4.11): and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   The PAD (paragraph 82) notes that although component one activities were not subject to any safeguards,
   component two and three activities could involve resettlement and land acquisition. An Environmental and
   Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and
   publicly-disclosed at appraisal to address safeguard issues. The ESMF and RPF were revised in December
   2014 to reflect the activities added with the AF for the project. The ICR (paragraph 111) notes that
   compliance with safeguards was deemed to be satisfactory. The ICR however provides no details on
   whether there were environmental issues, physical cultural resources or involuntary resettlement issues
   during implementation. The ICR (paragraph 111) notes that although the Grievance Redress Mechanism
   was introduced to all World Bank / IDA financed projects under the project's AF period, the mechanism was
   not in place when the project closed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


   Financial management. A financial management assessment was conducted at appraisal to assess the
   ability of the Bank of Tanzania's (BOT) ability to address financial issues (PAD, paragraph 71). The
   assessment concluded that the financial management arrangements of the BOT, were adequate. The
   financial management risk was however, rated as substantial, in view of the lack of staff with financial
   management expertise. Mitigation measures incorporated at design, included adequate financial
   supervision during implementation (PAD, paragraph 74). The ICR (paragraph 76) notes that there was
   compliance with financial management during implementation. The final audit was submitted in time and
   with a clean opinion by the National Audit Office, the statutory auditor of all government resources and
   projects in Tanzania.

   Procurement. As assessment of the BOT's capacity to conduct procurement was conducted at appraisal
   (PAD, paragraph 77). The procurement risk was rated as substantial at appraisal. Mitigation measures
   incorporated at design, included training procurement staff during implementation. The ICR (paragraph
   112) notes there was compliance with procurement. The ICR (paragraph 113) however notes that there
   were considerable delays in processing procurement activities, during implementation.




                                                                                                Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Housing Finance (P117242)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons



The ICR draws the following three lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. There could be great benefits to taking on relatively riskier projects aimed at creating
financial markets, by combining judicious public investments, and catalyzing private
investments, to reach new market segments. While the government does have a strategic role in
creating financial markets, for sustainable development of these markets, they must leverage private
finance and investment, as was the case in this project. The lesson from this project is that private
capital even in countries with less developed financial markets, can be mobilized through judicious
public investments.

2. Developing microfinance for low and medium segment of the population, requires
dedicated efforts, especially in new markets. While this project applied microfinance
development in Tanzania at a time while the government tended to play a large role in the market, it
took a while for the financial sector to align incentives for market development through injecting
liquidity in the market. The lesson is that extensive efforts may be required with government
stakeholders for developing housing microfinance projects.

3. Various options need to be considered for financial sustainability of mortgage finance
companies. In this project, this aspect was addressed through issuance of bonds by TMRC. An
alternative method would have been to allocate part of the project fund to inject Tier II capital to
TMRC at an early stage of the project, and enable issuance of bonds later on. The ICR notes that
this was an important lesson reflected in subsequent housing finance projects in other countries.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TZ-Housing Finance (P117242)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR does a commendable job of explaining financial concepts. The ICR candidly discusses the problems
associated with monitoring indicators (both at design and during implementation), and the value for money
(efficiency) aspects of the project. The ICR is consistent with the guidelines, and draws good lessons from the
experience of implementing this project.

The ICR is however excessively long (the main body of the text at 49 pages is more than three times the
recommended length of 15 pages) and would have benefitted through better editing and eschewing repetitions
throughout the text.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 14
