     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CCARDESA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND (P113629)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0021933

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P113629                                    CCARDESA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Africa                                     Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-17028                                   31-Dec-2018                                           3,877,609.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 28-May-2014                                31-Dec-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             5,093,000.00                                    5,093,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              5,093,000.00                                    3,877,609.00

 Actual                                          3,877,609.00                                    3,877,609.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Songporne                  Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Tongruksawattana




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the CCARDESA MDTF as stated in the Grant Agreement dated
   June 5, 2014 (p 6) was "to facilitate integrated agricultural research for development within the SADC Region
   with the aim of contributing to increased productivity of smallholder crop, forestry, fish and livestock
   enterprises in the region". The PDO formulation was identical in the PAD (para 26), with additional indication
   "…, as outlined in the CCARDESA Medium Term Operational Plan (MTOP)". The PDO remained unchanged
   throughout the project period.


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CCARDESA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND (P113629)



   This review will assess this project’s achievements against the PDO as stated in the Grant Agreement.

   “To contribute to increased productivity of smallholder crop, forestry, fish and livestock enterprises in the
   SADC region” is the main objective, and – as stated in the PDO - this was to be achieved by “facilitation of
   integrated agricultural research for development within the SADC Region”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1 – CCARDESA Thematic Programs

   (Estimated cost at appraisal US$13.43 million including US$0.43 million price and physical contingencies,
   actual cost US$1.15 million.)

   This component addressed four priority thematic areas developed out of regional challenges identified
   through a stakeholder consultation process. These themes included: 1) Farmer empowerment and market
   access to build the capacity of farmer groups and their national/regional associations, particularly those
   promoting youth and gender, to participate more effectively in the formulation of the regional research and
   development (R&D) agenda and to generate knowledge and evidence around enhancing farmer access to
   markets and key technical/business management services; 2) Research, technology generation, and
   farmer demand driven advisory services to generate technologies responding to the identified priority
   needs of farmers through CCARDESA-financing of competitive sub-grants awarded to partnerships or
   consortia of sub-regional institutions (e.g. national agricultural research systems (NARS), universities and
   international agricultural research centers (IARCs)), thereby promoting the principle of subsidiarity in R&D
   and building capacity of weaker research institutions; 3) Knowledge, information and communication to
   increase and improve knowledge and information sharing through more effective use of communication
   methods, media channels and processes; 4) Institutional development and capacity building to
   undertake institutional reform and change processes, to improve R&D planning and programming, and to
   enable NARS scientists and extension agents to effectively participate in regional research and extension
   activities through the competitive grants.

   Component 2 – CCARDESA Management and Governance

   (Estimated cost at appraisal US$11.52 million, actual cost US$2.72 million.)

   This component focused its support on the management functions (through a small Secretariat) and
   governance functions of CCARDESA (through a Board of Directors). Component activities included:
   (a) Operational costs including CCARDESA staff salaries and CCARDESA Headquarters costs; (b)
   Program management costs including cost of steering committees, meeting-related expenses, consultant
   fees, technical staff of CCARDESA Secretariat, indirect costs, travel expenses and other cost related to the
   implementation of programs; (c) Capacity building in administration, financial management/accounting,
   procurement, and safeguards; (d) Establishment and maintenance of an M&E system; and (e)

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CCARDESA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND (P113629)



  Governance costs for CCARDESA including the General Assembly, and the activities of the CCARDESA
  Board and its associated committees.

  Component 3: Management, Administration and Supervision of the MDTF

  (Estimated cost at appraisal US$1.09 million, actual cost US$0.3 million.)

  In addition to the two core components of CCARDESA, this MDTF also provided a full cost recovery
  component in the management, administration and supervision of the trust fund incurred by the World Bank.
  These included staff costs and other variable costs such as travel expenses, indirect costs, consultant fees
  and meeting-related expenses and other cost items as agreed between the World Bank and contributing
  MDTF donors.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost

  The estimated total cost at appraisal was US$26.04 million. The actual cost reported in the ICR (Annex 3)
  was US$4.18 million, equivalent to 16 percent of the appraisal cost this was due to significantly lower levels
  of financing than expected at appraisal. No formal changes or restructuring to the PDO and outcome targets
  were made.

  Financing

  Out of the US$42.13 million five-year CCARDESA MTOP total budget, US$26.04 million (approximately
  62%) was to be financed by the MDTF to cover the operational costs during its establishment phase while
  allowing CCARDESA to leverage resources from other donors or external partners. At appraisal, a core
  group of development partners (the World Bank, CIDA, DfID, EC and USAID) were funding a range of
  initiatives in supporting CAADP Pillar IV at the sub-regional and continental levels in Eastern and
  Western/Central Africa and discussions were held on the perspective of MDTF funding.

  The European Commission (EC) was the first to make a firm commitment with EUR 5 million, with an
  indication of a possible funding increase in subsequent years. Out of this envelope, the MDTF received a
  total grant of US$5.093 million.

  Despite the substantial financing gap, the MTDF was approved with the anticipation of additional funding
  over time. No additional funding was granted, partly due to several (and some lengthy) fiduciary
  investigations as there were suspicion of financial irregularities. At closing, a total of US$3.88 million was
  disbursed, approximately 76% of the Grant Agreement allocation.

  Borrower Contribution

  To build financial sustainability beyond MDTF, 15 SADC Member States agreed in the CCARDESA Charter
  to create a US$1.5 million reserve fund financed out of Member State contributions (with an exception for
  Seychelles). At closing, the commitments were largely completed although the amount was not reported
  (ICR para.79).



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CCARDESA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND (P113629)



   Dates

   The MDTF was approved on May 28, 2014 and became effective on June 05, 2014. The MDTF came to
   close on Dec 31, 2018 as originally proposed at appraisal. A mid-term review (MTR) was initially planned in
   2016 but was cancelled as it coincided with the fiduciary investigation between 2016-2018 (see below on
   Fiduciary Mismanagement and Deficient Internal Control).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
With 20 percent contribution to the regional GDP (US$721 billion in 2018), agriculture is the largest private
sector and the backbone of the economy for Southern Africa for its primary source of food, employment and
income for most of the 345 million people across 16 countries). However, despite the region’s abundant
land and water resources, agricultural productivity remains below its full intensification potential which is
needed to curb the recurring incidence of periodic food deficits and food price crises. Putting in place an
institutional mechanism to support agricultural technology generation and dissemination through targeted
and integrated agricultural research and development for the region was seen as an effective strategic
approach to foster investment, increase efficiency of agricultural R&D, create synergy, leverage spillovers
and raise capacity among small and fragmented national systems.

Throughout the MDTF period from appraisal to closing, the PDO of CCARDESA MDTF – to facilitate
integrated agricultural research for development (IAR4D) with the aim of contributing to increased
productivity of smallholder farm enterprises in the SADC region – was highly relevant to Africa’s continental
strategic priorities in boosting investment to stimulate agricultural growth and transformation, as reflected in
the African Union Malabo Declaration on CAADP in June 2014. The PDO was precisely conceived to
support the first five years of the MTOP operation (2014-2018) to implement the Framework for African
Agricultural Productivity (FAAP) which was developed as the strategy for CAADP Pillar IV that aimed to
revitalize, expand and reform Africa’s agricultural productivity and innovation across countries. The PDO
was furthermore well aligned to SADC’s 15-year Regional Indicative Strategic Development Plan (2005-
2020), Regional Agricultural Policy (2014), and the Regional Agricultural Investment Plan (2017-2022), all
focusing on deepening the regional coordination and harmonization of agricultural policies and programs for
sustainable agricultural growth and food security.

In the context of World Bank’s strategy, the CCARDESA MDTF was developed as one of the Bank’s MDTF
operations with a core group of development partners (CIDA, DFID, USAID and EC) to support CAADP
Pillar IV in Africa. The CCARDESA MDTF PDO t complemented the Bank’s on-going continental and sub-
regional efforts to facilitate IAR4D and contribute to increased smallholder farm productivity with a specific
focus on Southern African region. The PDO was well aligned to the Strategic Framework for Regional
Integration and Cooperation Pillar III of the Bank’s Regional Integration Assistance Strategy for Sub-
Saharan Africa (2008). This Pillar aimed to coordinate interventions to provide regional public goods for
raising agricultural productivity (including research and knowledge-sharing) and regional rationalization of
research to strengthen regional knowledge assets and technical capacity. The PDO furthermore responded
to the Bank’s Africa Strategy (2011) that identified agriculture and regional integration as one of the key
directions to create opportunity for growth, target the poor and vulnerable, and create global public goods
over its 10-year vision. At closing, the PDO remained relevant to the Bank’s Regional Integration and

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CCARDESA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND (P113629)



               Cooperation Assistance Strategy for Africa (2017-2023) that emphasized regional approaches to
               agricultural R&D and innovations across two strategic priorities, namely, to develop functioning regional
               markets in priority sectors (agriculture, energy, digital and telecom markets, finance, technical skilled labor),
               and to scale up access to quality public services and entrepreneurship through complementary regional
               solutions.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             The Project Development Objective was to "Contribute to increased productivity of smallholder crop, forestry,
                             fish and livestock enterprises in the SADC region”.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change:

                             The objective was to contribute to increased productivity of smallholder crop, forestry, fish and livestock
                             enterprises in the SADC region. The project’s Theory of Change to achieve this looks as follows: The
                             activities and inputs were facilitation of regional research and development projects; collaborative research
                             and development sub-projects; institutional capacity building; knowledge sharing activities and regional
                             events; operational and institutional support for CCARDESA including a staffed and operational secretariat
                             and governing bodies; Quality control and M&E. These inputs were to lead to the following outputs: research
                             and development technologies tested; knowledge products and platforms established; regional networks
                             established; and regional research and development programs implemented. These outputs were expected to
                             lead to i outcomes such as improved access to and greater uptake of new technologies by farmers in the
                             region; regional alignment of policies and research standards; and integrated agricultural research for
                             development within the SADC region. These were to lead to achievement of the objective; increased
                             productivity of smallholder crop, forestry, fish and livestock enterprises in the region.

                             Outputs:

                                        6 Collaborative research/extension sub‐ projects under implementation (none of them completed by
                                         project closure), compared to a target of 25. Target not achieved.
                                        In terms of beneficiaries, 4,280 people participated in MDTF training facilitated by CCARDESA, of
                                         which 43 percent female (no target number provided), and an estimated 2,232,088 beneficiaries
                                         based on outreach of all regional R&D programs, compared to a target of 500,000 beneficiaries.
                                         Target achieved, but it is unclear how this has been estimated.



                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CCARDESA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND (P113629)




      18,542 of stakeholders were accessing CCARDESA’s information management tool, compared to a
         target of 9,000 stakeholders. Target achieved. This figure was supposed to be disaggregated by
         gender, but no figures for female beneficiaries were provided. The number of countries participating
         were 12, reaching the target of 12.
        7 SADC countries practicing the principle of inclusiveness in the planning and execution of research
         projects as a result of CCARDESA’s interventions, compared to a target of 12. Target not achieved.
        Number of research proposals written by people trained under CCARDESA increases by at least 50%,
         by Year 5 (disaggregated by gender). This indicator was not measured. Target not achieved.
        5 empowerment strategies and policy opportunity that promote development of farmer organizations
         identified by yr1, compared to a target of 15. Target not achieved.
        7 non‐state actors and private sector organizations involved in the implementation of CCARDESA
         supported projects, compared to a target of 15. Target not achieved.
        12 ICT based tools developed and made available to NARS and stakeholders for supporting
         agricultural production and productivity, compared to a target of 6. Target exceeded.
        14 user facts sheets/brochures/technical bulletins developed, compared to a target of 25. Target not
         achieved.
        7 training programs for researchers, service providers and farmers in the region, drawn‐up and
         implemented, by Year 2 of CCARDESA’s operation, compared to a target of 10. Target not achieved.
        23 project partnerships/ networks identified and developed, compared to a target of 12. Target
         exceeded.
        18 CAADP backstopping missions undertaken annually, compared to a target of 20. Target almost
         achieved.
        20 consultative workshops on partnerships in year 2, compared to a target of 14. Target exceeded.

Intermediate outcomes:

Integrated agricultural research for development within the SADC region:

      40 percent of projects funded by CCARDESA generated technologies judged by NARS to have
       potential for dissemination to farmers (disaggregated by type of technology), compared to a target og
       70 percent (in absolute terms, 7 technologies were attributed to the MDTF). Target not achieved.
      15 percent of validated technologies were made available to NARS and other stakeholders in the
       region, compared to a target of 90 percent. The ICR states on top of page 30 that in absolute terms, 3
       out of 554 technologies generated in regional programs could be directly attributed to MDTF, which is
       less than 1 percent. Target not achieved.
      Farmers uptake of new technologies – not measured
      Enhanced adaptation of pluralistic approaches – not measured

The ICR provides information regarding the number and percentage of technologies generated through
CCARDESA (see above) but has not measured farmer uptake and adaptation of the technologies. The
Results Framework lacked relevant indicators to measure this.

Outcome:

The project did not measure or report on the project’s main objective of increased productivity of smallholder
crop, forestry, fish and livestock enterprises in the region. The Results Framework lacked indicators to

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CCARDESA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND (P113629)



                            measure increased agricultural productivity. It is therefore not possible to assess the degree of achievement
                            of the project’s objective.




                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy is rated Modest both due to low achievement (most targets not met) and due to insufficient evidence,
                            as theproject's intermediate outcomes, outcomes and the PDO lacked relevant indicators and their
                            achievements were not measured or reported. Despite the significant setbacks caused by fiduciary
                            irregularities and the subsequent investigations and funding halt, the project managed to produce and deliver
                            some of the planned outputs, and it is plausible that the technologies developed under the MDTF will have
                            the potential to contribute to increased agricultural production in the region. Efficacy is therefore rated
                            Modest, although it is bordering on Negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                 Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                  Insufficient evidence


   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis

   At MDTF appraisal: In place of conducting a specific ex-ante economic and financial analysis of MDTF
   financing for CCARDESA, the PAD (para.78-79) drew on IFPRI/RESAKSS ex-ante economic analysis
   undertaken in 2011 that demonstrated generally high rates of return for investments in agricultural research in
   Southern Africa. This analysis was commissioned by SADC and served as the basis for determining a prioritized
   list of the most attractive agricultural R&D commodity types, ranked by opportunities to contribute to agricultural
   growth and generate technology spillovers in the SADC region. The PAD (para.81) further cited a meta-analysis
   study by Alston et al. (2000) that reviewed 294 studies and concluded an average return of 50 percent to
   agricultural R&D in Africa; and another study by Abdulai et al. (2005) that showed three to four times the
   regional spillover benefits of investments in African agriculture above the direct benefits in the country of origin.
   Based on these studies, the PAD then concluded that similar rates could likely apply to the MDTF funded efforts
   in agricultural research and adoption. In addition, the PAD (para.82) justified the engagement of public sector
   financing of agricultural R&D as an appropriate vehicle in relation to its nature of public goods.



                                                                                                                             Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CCARDESA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND (P113629)



At MDTF closing: No specific ex-post economic and financial analysis of MDTF were performed at closing
either. Instead, the ICR referred to various studies on agricultural R&D investments and technology transfer.
These general studies cannot be used to report on the economic and financial efficiency of this project,
however.

Given the lack of available information on the ex-ante expected return and the ex-post actual return to the MDTF
investments on the generation, dissemination, adoption and farm productivity as a result of CCARDESA

Administrative Efficiency

For the first half of the MDTF, the administrative efficiency suffered from the misuse of funds and deficient
internal control. The further expected EC funding was halted due to ongoing fiduciary investigations in the period
of 2016-18. As a response to the EC funding halt during the second half of the MDTF and persisting funding
challenges in securing pledges from other donors. This led to a significant downscale of the execution of project
activities and the MDTF budget for staff salaries was exhausted in March 2017 Of the 22 positions in the
organigram, only 6 were filled at the time of ICR mission due to funding constraints.



Conclusion

No MDTF-specific economic and financial efficiency estimations were undertaken at appraisal nor at closing.
The MDTF efficiency in administration showed a mixed result, while the misappropriation of fund and internal
control flaws posed fundamental problems to the functioning of CCARDESA with limited financing, staffing and
implementation of activities. The MDTF’s overall efficiency is therefore rated Modest, bordering on Negligible.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO Relevance is rated Substantial as it was well aligned to regional strategies and priorities as well as to
the World Bank’s strategy for the region. Efficacy is rated Modest due to both a failure to achieve the targets as

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CCARDESA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND (P113629)



well as lack of sufficient evidence. Efficiency is rated Modest as no estimation of the financial viability of the
project was done either at appraisal or at closing, and the administrative efficiency was low (fiduciary
irregularities led to a halt in funding and subsequent downscaling of activities and a failure to reach targets.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (para.96-97) identified two risks to development outcome as follows:

Financial risk: The outlook for CCARDESA sustainability is essentially determined by its financial viability to
secure, raise and maintain resources from SADC Member States, donors and partners not only as pledges
but as confirmed commitments. At the same time, CCARDESA needs to increase its financial autonomy and
build its own financial reserve with a realistic action plan to fill the financing gaps. The first step in this
direction was made in 2017, when MDTF financing of staff salaries was depleted and CCARDESA has since
relied on its own resources to manage the payroll and reduced the number of staff. In the same year,
CCARDESA received increased funding with the SADC Council’s decision to raise the contributions from
Member States.

SADC commitment risk: As an official subsidiary organization of SADC, the continuation of supportive
strategies and institutional priorities from SADC Member States is the key to allow CCARDESA to build on its
achievements and generate impact. As the first five-year MTOP (2014‐2018) came to an end with the MDTF,
the drafting of the next five-year MTOP (2019-2023) took place in March 2019 with the aim to re-focus
CCARDESA activities and priorities.

The following two additional risks were identified by IEG:

Governance risk: Following the adjustment of policies and procedures in response to the misuse of funds,
the CCARDESA Board has improved the governance and compliance of the Secretariat. The capacity for
CCARDESA to continue its mandate beyond MDTF and to regain confidence among the stakeholders
therefore depends on the continuous effort to strengthen the internal control systems and governance
mechanism to enhance oversight, monitoring, accountability and transparency. This is crucial not only for the
strategic level related to decision-making, budgeting and planning, but also for day-to-day operation.

Institutional capacity risk: In supporting the mitigation of financial and governance risks, the functioning of
CCARDESA for the next five-year MTOP relies on a prudent HR strategy that considers the financial
resource constraint on the one hand, and fills key functions (especially Finance Manager, Finance Officer
and Accounting Officer) with qualified and experienced staffs on the other. At present, CCARDESA adopted
a lean organigram and multi-tasking of staffs, for example, the Finance Manager took over Human Resource
functions, Procurement and Administration responsibilities (ICR para.56). However, this approach
contributed to high turnover rate of financial management staff since mid-2016 (ICR Annex 5 p.47).
Therefore, the ability of CCARDESA to recruit and retain core staffs albeit financial constraint is very
important to ensure the institutional capacity and to preserve institutional memory.



                                                                                                         Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CCARDESA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND (P113629)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of CCARDESA MDTF incorporated experiences and lessons from similar operations in the
  region such as the West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program (WAAPP), the East Africa Agricultural
  Productivity Program (EAAPP), ASARECA MDTF and CORAF MDTF. These included, for example,
  competitive research grant systems and sub-grant model, regional program implementation, support to
  demand-driven agricultural technologies, and partnerships between different stakeholders within the
  value chain.

  The structure of CCARDESA MDTF was also adopted from ASARECA and CORAF MDTFs where the
  funding gap at appraisal was expected to be filled over time after the approval, in an optimistic
  expectation of commitment from donors. Although the risk of dependency on national programs and
  donor support was rated moderate in the PAD (Annex 4 p.90), a range of scenarios was not prepared at
  appraisal to allow for adjustment based on a decreasing level of financing and no reassessment of
  funding situation was planned until at MTR in 2016. This optimistic expectation of funding and lack of
  proactive measures negatively affected the sustainability of the MDTF.

  The project design was overambitious and unrealistic in its expectation of sufficient funding. In terms of
  Theory of Change, the first result chain that link technology generation to dissemination through
  CCARDESA MDTF activities was logical and plausible, but the following chain that link technology
  dissemination to adoption and ultimately to farm productivity was weak. The Results Framework was
  weak, ambiguous and lacked relevant indicators to assess achievement of the PDO.

  At appraisal, low fiduciary capacity within CCARDESA to manage and increase the volume of funds was
  flagged as a high operational risk (PAD Annex 4 p.89). However, the proposed mitigation measure to hire
  a Procurement Officer, a possible hiring of a Finance Manager including provision of training, and a
  planned biannual fiduciary implementation support mission were inadequate. In addition, no measures for
  independent and periodic oversight were proposed to improve the fiduciary capacity

  The choice of CCARDESA accounting system at appraisal to use and customize the newly acquired
  comprehensive software package (ORACLE) did not fully consider the small size of the organization
  leading to underutilization of the package and low value for money.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CCARDESA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND (P113629)



 The Bank undertook biannual Implementation Support Mission (ISM) on a regular basis during the first half
 of the MDTF, before substantially reducing the ISM from 2017 due to de facto halt in activities and
 uncertainty about the future of the MDTF itself. As the investigation on fiduciary mismanagement and
 funding halt took place in mid-2016, the MTR was not carried out as planned. This was unfortunate, as a
 restructuring of the project would have been beneficial given the lack of funding to implement the project as
 planned.

 Despite regular monitoring support and ISM missions during the first half of the MDTF, the misappropriate
 of funds and the violation of internal control procedures were not detected before they were picked up by
 the external financial audits in 2015.tThe ICR (para.94) indicated that the Bank’s team underestimated the
 risks associated with the level of autonomy and oversight within the CCARDESA Secretariat structure and
 the challenges that this could cause by even relatively small funding size.

 The Bank responded to the 2015 audit report with additional resources on financial management and
 supervision and launched the Bank’s financial management review mission in the fall of 2016. The ICR
 (para.93) reported that lessons learned from one of the MDTFs in were incorporated in recommendations
 for CCARDESA to increase oversight in shifting the audit reporting line from the Executive Director to the
 Board

 The uncertainty of funding from mid-2016 put the future existence and direction of MDTF in question).
 Although it was decided to substantially downscale CCARDESA MDTF activities and to shift the focus from
 implementation to facilitation, these adjustments were never formalized through a restructuring and the
 Results Framework was never updated to streamline activities around a more concrete set of realistic
 results given the reduced donor funding and the changing MDTF implementation environment.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Results Framework lacked relevant Intermediate Results indicators to measure achievement of the
 objective “increased productivity of smallholder farm enterprises in the SADC region”. Furthermore, the two
 PDO-level indicators primarily focused on the generation and dissemination of improved technologies
 through NARS and were not adequate to measure the achievement of the objective. Although two
 supplementary indicators were developed to track the rate of technology adoption and accessibility, they
 were vaguely defined and not disaggregated by type of farm enterprise.

 The definitions of several indicators were unclear (e.g. the "policy opportunity" of empowerment strategies,
 the "principle of inclusiveness" in the planning and execution of research projects) or incoherent (the target
 number of stakeholders accessing regional management information system was set as list of SADC


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CCARDESA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND (P113629)



 countries, the target timeline for number of regional centers of leadership in agricultural education and
 training identified was set by end of 2014 instead of 2018).

 As the ICR (para.80) noted, "many indicators in the MDTF framework were difficult to measure and
 attribute – such as contributions to adoption of IAR4D principles and access to technologies". This was one
 of the major shortcomings of the Results Framework that made the attribution of MDTF’s achievements
 ambiguous as they were inseparable from the partners’ interventions through the co-financing and joint
 implementation of activities.

 Besides the M&E framework for MDTF, additional M&E frameworks were developed for individual sub-
 projects financed through MDTF sub-grants and other donor financing. However, the individual sub-grant
 frameworks were never completed (ICR para.84).



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was to a large extent impaired by inadequate recruitment and retainment of core
  staff with appropriate skills and experiences to perform planned M&E activities since the beginning of
  MDTF and the M&E staffing issue was aggravated by the financial constraint from mid-2016 until closing.
  Following the Bank’s recommendations, CCARDESA M&E tasks were distributed among other core staff
  members with occasional technical support from consultants or other regional programs such as
  ASARECA and GIZ.

  Due to weak implementation capacity, some indicators were not consistently monitored and measured as
  outlined in the Results Framework. The tracking of MDTF achievements often relied on the access to
  M&E system of co-financed partners developed for their respective purposes. This made the
  CCARDESA-specific M&E data collection and attribution of MDTF achievements difficult or impossible.
  Furthermore, the project lacked baseline and endline surveys.



c. M&E Utilization
  Despite substantial limitation of the availability and quality of M&E data, they were used in reporting to
  SADC Council of Ministers in the annual meetings as part of CCARDESA accountability.

  M&E frameworks from sub-projects were also used to report on results of technology generation and
  dissemination in MDTF.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CCARDESA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND (P113629)



  At appraisal, CCARDESA MDTF was classified as Category ‘B’ (partial assessment) as no large-scale,
  significant, or irreversible environmental impacts were anticipated with any activities associated with the
  MDTF implementation. However, the implementation of sub-grants financed by the MDTF that aimed to
  support the generation and dissemination of agricultural technologies might result in potential risks or
  negative impacts including potentially increased use of fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides (PAD para.99).
  Two safeguard policies were triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and Pest Management (OP
  4.09), and the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was developed and disclosed in
  combination with the Pest Management Plan (PMP) to provide guidance on environmental and social
  screening of sub-projects (PAD para.100). Although the ESMF and PMP at appraisal were expected to be
  further elaborated into the Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and Integrated Pest
  Management Plans (IPMPs) during implementation as part of sub-grant funding proposals to document any
  likely impacts and provide mitigation measures, neither ESMPs nor IPMPs were materialized as planned for
  all sub-grants.

  The ICR reported that no major safeguard issues were identified during the implementation and both the
  screening and field monitoring of sub-grantees were undertaken with the participation of the Bank’s
  environmental safeguard specialists (ICR para.87). Overall, CCARDESA MDTF safeguard implementation
  was rated Satisfactory throughout the period in the Implementation Status and Results reports.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The MDTF implementation faced a major disruption around the mid-point as a result of the fiduciary
  misconduct and CCARDESA fund misappropriation. Following the flag of potential misappropriation of
  CCARDESA reserve funds raised by the 2015 financial audits of CCARDESA Secretariat, the CCARDESA
  Board initiated a forensic audit in May 2016. Up to June 2016, only the first half of the EUR 5 million
  commitment was released from the EC and the Bank’s request for the release of the second tranche,
  submitted in April 2016, was held under consideration.

  The World Bank launched a Financial Management Review (FMR) mission in September/October of 2016
  and declared a total of US$136,519.71 as ineligible expenditures to be refunded by CCARDESAThis
  amount comprised ineligible expenditures from activities not covered under the MDTF, double claim,
  irregular payments for staff, and disbursement of one of the seven sub-grantees which was cancelled. The
  FMR also identified weaknesses in the financial management including undisciplined planning and
  budgeting, insufficient oversight and due diligence of sub-grant management, inadequate accounting staff,
  and lack of internal audit. Despite the Bank’s expressed commitment to ensure CCARDESA organizational
  capacity and action plan reforms, the planned second tranche from the EC was never released during the
  remaining implementation period.

  Following the EU commissioned independent Results Oriented Monitoring (ROM) mission completed in
  September 2017, a relatively positive institutional development outcome to the MDTF investments was
  reported despite some deficiencies (ICR para.77). However, since the ROM report did not conduct any
  fiduciary assessment, the EU commissioned a separate verification mission to review the executed MDTF
  expenditures by the World Bank and CCARDESA. The mission was concluded in December 2018 and
  found ineligible expenditures and inadequacies in CCARDESA’s accounting system. A specific Audit,
  Risk and Compliance Committee was established in December 2017.


                                                                                                 Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CCARDESA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND (P113629)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   CCARDESA’s contribution to the operationalization of the SADC Harmonized Seed Policy and the
   development of its operational modalities has stimulated interest among the private seed companies to
   utilize the facility of regional variety release and created a potential to leverage greater private sector
   financing in the seed sector (ICR para.65). CCARDESA partnership with the African Agribusiness
   Incubation Network (AAIN) in supporting the implementation of AAIN’s business incubation project also
   fostered initiatives that promote agribusiness and job creation in the agricultural sector (ICR para.66).
   Furthermore, CCARDESA and its partners contributed to a robust regional response to the Fall Armyworm
   outbreak in Southern Africa in 2017 through the diffusion of information and networking of researchers to
   identify solutions and report outbreaks on its ICT platforms (ICR para.69).



d. Other
   Gender. At appraisal, the MDTF recognized gender specific roles in agricultural production and marketing
   among smallholders within the SADC region and aimed to (a) promote services and interventions that ease
   farm drudgery, improve labor productivity and enhance generating capacity for women; and (b) strengthen
   knowledge and skills of the NARS in determining gender specific needs, services and opportunities in order
   to develop relevant gender-responsive technologies (PAD para.62-63). In particular, the PAD (para.64)
   proposed gender-specific approaches and activities for implementation. These included a review of the
   gender situation in agriculture in the SADC Member States, advocacy and capacity building programs on
   gender awareness within the NARS, and information dissemination on best practices in addressing gender
   issues in technology generation and service provision. Gender mainstreaming criteria was also integrated in
   sub-project development and screening, in collaboration with the Gender Unit of the SADC Secretariat
   (PAD para.65-66). However, no information was available on the actual implementation of these planned
   activities. In terms of Results Framework, only a few PDO-level and Intermediate Results indicators with
   explicit focus on gender were included, and the lack of a robust M&E system substantially limited the
   standardized and consistent gender-disaggregated data collection which was essential to systematically
   measure the impact of MDTF interventions on gender development.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Relevance of Objectives were
                                                                                 Substantial. Achievement of
                                                                                 objectives (Efficacy) was low
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Unsatisfactory              and rated Modest, and Efficiency
                               Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 was Modest (bordering on
                                                                                 negligible). Overall Outcome is
                                                                                 thus Unsatisfactory.
                               Moderately                                        Significant shortcomings in
Bank Performance                                     Unsatisfactory
                               Unsatisfactory                                    design and appraisal given


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CCARDESA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND (P113629)



                                                                                  uncertainty in donor funding, and
                                                                                  significant shortcomings in
                                                                                  proactive identification of threats
                                                                                  related to fiduciary
                                                                                  mismanagement. Although
                                                                                  restructuring was recommended
                                                                                  and activities were substantially
                                                                                  downscaled, no formal
                                                                                  restructuring was undertaken.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Modest


12. Lessons

The following lessons were drawn based on those in the ICR (p.26-27) with some modification of
language:

Robust financial management systems, competent staffing for key management and
operational functions, and rigorous internal control measures are crucial to minimize the risk
of fiduciary misconduct in an organization with a high level of autonomy. The misappropriation
of CCARDESA’s own funds during the first half of the MDTF emerged from the inefficient internal
check and balance system contributed by the weak recruitment and retaining of key finance staff
with suitable experience and leadership, ill-adapted and outdated accounting software, insufficient
Board oversight, lack of independent audit review, inadequate due diligence of sub-grant
management, absence of risk register, and lack of a fraud and irregularities policy.

 Leveraging partnerships and co‐financing can be an effective means to contribute to
regional R&D capacity building and knowledge sharing. In response to the MDTF financing gap
at approval and the funding cut during the second half of its operation, CCARDESA adjusted its
position from implementation towards facilitation through partnership formation and co-financing of
regional programs and projects through the facilitation of its core staff. This strategic shift not only
allowed CCARDESA to leverage additional sources of financing but also strengthened the
coordination of agricultural R&D, thereby enhancing the outreach of capacity building and
dissemination of knowledge in the region.

Robust governance of regional institutions requires sufficient engagement, capacity and freq
uency to be effective. Although the CCARDESA Board largely fulfilled its functions, it was
dispersed across 15 Member States and its leel of engagement did not allow Board Members to fully
understand the operations and to exercise sufficiently robust oversight. Stronger governance
practices in terms of Board tenure, frequency of meetings, board orientation and recruitment
practices would have been useful to allow Board members to understand the organization and make
stronger contributions.



13. Assessment Recommended?

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CCARDESA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND (P113629)




  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a candid and useful elaboration of important factors, especially those related to the
governance, staffing and internal control, that affected the implementation and led to a substantial downscale.
The ICR also underlined shortcomings in the project design and implementation, in particular the Results
Framework and M&E, that imposed constraints on the measurement and attribution of MDTF achievements.
Nonetheless, the review noted some shortcomings including internal inconsistencies in the presentation of
Theory of Change, inadequate description and analysis of supplemental indicators, lack of relevant evidence in
the efficiency analysis which made the rating justification weak. The ICR did not fully comply with the OPCS
Guideline in assigning ratings for the Relevance of PDOs, the achievement of each PDO and the Overall
Efficacy. This review therefore rates the quality of the ICR as Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                  Page 16 of 16
