     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN Productive Social Safety Net Project (P123900)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022117

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P123900                                     GN Productive Social Safety Net Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Guinea                                      Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1210,IDA-H7820,TF-18255,TF-           02-Oct-2017                                         41,457,906.57
 A2454

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Jun-2012                                30-Sep-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             25,000,000.00                                   6,215,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              43,204,228.89                                   6,204,228.89

 Actual                                          41,457,906.57                                   6,204,228.58




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Salim J. Habayeb             Joy Behrens                    IEGHC (Unit 2)




 P145117_TBL
 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P145117                                     GN Additiional Financing to PSSNP ( P145117 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                                 0

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN Productive Social Safety Net Project (P123900)



 11-Mar-2014

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                        0.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                                         0.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                                     0.00                                                0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as set out in the Financing Agreement was to provide income
   support to vulnerable groups and to lay the foundations of a social safety net strategy by testing some of the
   building blocks necessary for a larger system.

   The Project Appraisal Report (PAD) had the same formulation for the PDO.

   The ICR (p. 8) defines building blocks for a safety net strategy as operational tools to improve beneficiary
   identification and registration; monitor the [safety net] program; and ensure that cash is transferred to eligible
   beneficiaries in a secure, transparent and timely manner. In fact, these are essential components of a
   functioning safety net scheme.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Project originally had three components:

   Component 1: Labor-intensive public works program (LIPW) in urban areas with a focus on youth
   and life skills development (estimated cost at appraisal US$16.5 million; actual cost US$12.05
   million). The component had two sub-components:

   Sub-component 1.1: Temporary employment opportunities. It was to temporarily increase revenues of
   the underemployed and unemployed by providing employment opportunities through labor intensive public

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 14
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  GN Productive Social Safety Net Project (P123900)



works (LIPW) to about 24,000 unskilled/semi-skilled workers in the five communes of the special zone of
Conakry and seven regional capitals. Projects were to be drawn from local municipal development plans
and selected in consultation with the local populations. In order to promote the participation of women, 30
percent of all LIPW participants were to be women. An estimated 2.4 million person-days of labor (or 100
days of work per beneficiary) were to be created through the project. Local contractors were to be recruited
to execute projects and facilitate payments to beneficiaries. Eligible neighborhoods were to be selected by
the Project Coordinating Unit (PCU) in consultation with municipal authorities based on poverty and
vulnerability criteria that will be specified in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). Beneficiary selection
was to be conducted by neighborhood leaders in consultation with local authorities and local contractors
under the supervision of the PCU.

Sub-component 1.2: Life skills development for youth. This sub-component was to provide 5,000
youths with trainings in non-cognitive skills. The youth were to be selected from the LIPW beneficiaries
based on demand, a minimum educational level, and regular attendance at the LIPW programs. Training
content was to focus on topics such as civic education, the rights and responsibilities of workers, conflict
prevention and resolution, HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment, entrepreneurship, etc. A total of 100
training sessions were to be offered over the five years of project implementation.

Component 2: Pilot cash transfer program to protect human capital (estimated cost at appraisal
US$4.5 million; actual cost US$4.5 million). The component had three sub-components:

Sub-component 2.1: Design of the pilot project. UNICEF, as the only agency with a national network of
local infrastructure and the technical capacity to rapidly facilitate one of the first cash transfer interventions
for nutrition and education in the country, was to be contracted to implement this sub-component. The sub-
component included the elaboration of a technical annex on targeting, beneficiary selection, registration,
and payment methods for the pilot cash transfer as a first step towards the establishment of cash transfer
systems.

Sub-component 2.2: Cash transfer for nutrition. This sub-component was to test the effectiveness of
cash transfers in reducing the malnutrition rate of targeted children. It was to benefit at least 5,000 children
aged 0-24 months that were affected by chronic malnutrition in at least two of the regions with some of the
highest chronic malnutrition rates in the country. Beneficiary selection was to be based on poverty and
chronic malnutrition levels of children and will involve community participation. Cash transfers to the
beneficiaries were to be made by payment agencies based on a list of selected beneficiaries. The transfers
were to be provided publicly to the mothers of the malnourished children, once they present their beneficiary
IDs. The payments were to be made once every two months to reduce the transaction cost but at the same
time, to allow beneficiary households to purchase food as needed. The amount of transfer per child was
determined based on household consumption levels and best international practice. Training on health,
nutrition, and sanitation have been included in the package to maximize the impact of the cash transfer on
nutrition.

Sub-component 2.3: Cash transfer for girls’ education. This component aimed at testing the efficiency
of cash transfers in increasing the primary school completion rate among beneficiaries. The intervention
was to target at least 5,000 girls in the fifth and sixth grade in at least three regions where the girls‘
completion rate is among the lowest. A committee including representatives from the Parent–Teacher
Association (PTA), the Ministry of Primary Education, and the Rural Development Communities was to be
established to select the schools that were to benefit from the project based on the highest ratio of girls‘
dropout. Beneficiary households were to be selected at the community level by the community based on


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  GN Productive Social Safety Net Project (P123900)



poverty criteria. The amount of transfer per child was to be determined based on household consumption
levels; and all households in the targeted villages were to be sensitized to the importance of girls’
education.

Component 3: Project coordination and institutional capacity building (estimated cost at appraisal
US$4.0 million; actual cost US$4.32 million). The component was to ensure that the unit coordinating
project implementation, the CFS (Cellule Filets Sociaux, Safety Net Unit) was operational, managing
contracts with partners involved in implementation, and conducting supervision. The component also was to
finance institutional capacity building, to support the development of the social protection strategy.

Significant Changes During Implementation

The Project was restructured five times. Significant changes included the following:

During a first restructuring, undertaken in June 2014, US$ 2.00 million of (joint) co-financing from the United
Nations Peace Building Fund (UNPBF) was provided to scale up the LIPW scheme, and the design of the
cash transfer program was expanded to include a school feeding program.

A second project restructuring, in October 2014, coincided with a first Additional Financing. A new project
component – Response to the Ebola Epidemic – was introduced, supported by a reallocation of US$6.00
million of LIPW funds to the new component. The component was to provide logistical support to the
treatment teams on the ground, support community mobilization, and provide training for teachers and
officials in emergency responses to the epidemic. Additional Financing of US$1.865 million was also
provided by UNPBF, raising total spending on this component to US$7.87 million.

A third project restructuring in May 2016, included a second Additional Financing of US$16.35 million. It
included an IDA grant of US$12.00 million and an Ebola Recovery and Reconstruction Trust Fund Grant of
US$4.35 million.

A fourth and fifth restructuring were undertaken in October 2017 and May 2018, including marginal changes
in project design and an extension in the Closing Date.

The first four restructurings were accompanied by changes in the results framework, notably several
revisions to the PDO indicators – by project closing all eight key indicators introduced at project approval
had either been dropped or revised, eventually being replaced by six key indicators. All of the revisions to
key indicators were either modifications of targets or elaboration of the original indicators to more
appropriately reflect sought-for results (for instance, from “beneficiaries of safety net programs” to “direct
project beneficiaries of which female”).

Other changes included several changes in implementation arrangements as authority over the project
coordinating unit CPS shifted, cash transfer design changed from unconditional to conditional and back to
unconditional, allocations between disbursement categories were modified, with the introduction of the
Ebola component; and extension of closing dates.

None of the changes were of a kind to justify a split evaluation.




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN Productive Social Safety Net Project (P123900)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. At appraisal, the total cost of the project was estimated at US$25 million. Actual project cost
   at Closing (funds disbursed) was US$43.22 million.



   Financing. The project was initially financed by a US$25.00 million IDA credit of which US$23.23 million
   was disbursed over the project period. A second IDA credit of US$12.00 million was approved in May 2016
   and was fully disbursed. At the same time, US$4.35 million was drawn from the Ebola Recovery and
   Reconstruction Trust Fund and fully disbursed. In addition, joint financing from the United Nations Peace
   Building Fund (UNPBF) of US$3.87 million was provided in June 2014 and October 2014 (US$3.85
   disbursed). Differences between amounts awarded and disbursed reflect exchange rate changes.



   Borrower contribution. There was no Borrower contribution.



   Dates. The project was approved on June 19, 2012 and became effective on February 14, 2013. The
   original Closing Date, October 2, 2017, was extended on May 9, 2016, to September 30, 2019, at which
   time it closed




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO was relevant to country needs, government policy and Bank strategy. With over half the
population living in poverty, and a broader segment vulnerable to economic and environmental shocks, risk
coping strategies had been taking the form of informal family and community safety nets and discrete crisis
interventions by donors. The international economic crises towards the end of the last decade, and the
return to civil government at around the same time, provided an opportunity for introducing pro-poor
economic and social policies as part of the public policy toolbox. These were guided by the government’s
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper and an accompanying Interim Strategy Note (ISN) for 2011-2012. The
documents advocated a two-stage approach towards social protection: in the short term assisting the
poorest and most vulnerable, while at the same time moving towards developing a comprehensive longer-
term safety net. The approach is reflected in the Project objectives; it is consistent with the main themes in
the Bank’s Social Protection Strategy for the period 2012-2022 developed at the time; and with the Bank’s
Africa Social Protection Strategy, which emphasizes the productive aspects of safety nets. The approach is
also reflected in the government’s National Policy on Social Protection, developed under the Project and
approved by the government in 2017. It is consistent with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
FY2018-2022. A distinctive feature of that CPF is that it continues the focus on strengthening resilience to
shocks by maintaining the Bank’s support for the further development of social protection systems and
labor-intensive technologies. Human development, including improved basic education, health, and social
protection, forms a second pillar in the thee-pillar CPF, and the focus in social protection is on continued

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GN Productive Social Safety Net Project (P123900)



               strengthening of the main safety net institutions, introduced under the Productive Social Safety Net
               Project. .

               While the operation’s objectives are consistent with country strategy at project start-up and remain in the
               post-project period, the ICR raises the concern that the Project may have been too complex for a country
               with the limited administrative capacity of Guinea, and that may be reflected in the numerous restructurings
               that took place. At the same time the situation on the ground was likely to be such that a project that
               introduced essential building blocks necessary to operate a cash transfer system was appropriate,
               while recognizing the risks of doing so in a fragile environment.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To provide income support to vulnerable groups

                             Rationale
                             The objective was to be achieved by the provision of LIPW and direct cash transfers – either conditional or
                             unconditional (CCT, UCT), and by linking them to accompanying measures intended to leverage the effects of
                             the LIPW and cash transfers in improving consumption and asset holding as well as human capital among
                             beneficiary families. Accompanying measures included learning sessions on financial education, productive
                             activities, hygiene practices, nutrition, and early childhood development.



                             Outputs (baselines and targets are provided in parentheses):

                                        The Project provided 1.75 million (0; 1.78 million) person days of LIPW benefiting 61,112 people (0;
                                          41,118), including 36,668 women (0; 25,000).

                                        9.33 million Guinean Francs (GNF) in wages were distributed to LIPW workers (0; 7.24)

                                        408 microprojects implemented under LIPW schemes were completed and registered with local
                                          authorities (0; 322).




                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GN Productive Social Safety Net Project (P123900)




      1,800 households benefited from the CCT program, with 69 percent of beneficiaries complying with
       the conditions – attending school and seeking regular check-ups at health centers (0;9,000; 90); and
       6,900 households benefited from UCTs

      Nutrition, parenting, early learning, stimulation education was provided to 25,000 beneficiaries.



Outcomes

Altogether 75,338 households (0: 84,000) benefited from LIPW and cash transfers. An ex-post evaluation of
the programs indicated high poverty targeting with an estimated 80 percent of beneficiary households
classified as poor. While there is no information on changes in household wellbeing (consumption, asset
holding), the ICR (p. 15), drawing on field observations and evidence gathered by the project coordinating unit
(CFS), suggested that beneficiaries spent their additional income on food and investments in productive
assets (animals, land).

The impact evaluation also assessed the effects of the cash transfers on school attendance, notably the CCT
phase where conditional cash was distributed to 1,800 households. According to the ICR (p. 16), the effects
were positive, with school enrollment 11 percent higher in treated villages and households. In terms of
learning outcomes, the results were not significantly different between treated and control villages. It is worth
noting that only 69 percent of beneficiary families actually complied with the conditionalities: the pilot found
that application of the CCTs was constrained by the lack of services, as well as by reluctance to monitor
compliance (not unusual in CCTs at local levels). The Project did not measure the impact of the
accompanying measures. However, the ICR noted that anecdotally many beneficiaries appreciated the value
of saving and reinvesting.

In the absence of stronger, more results-oriented indicators – indicators were essentially output-oriented -
Objective 1 is rated modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To lay the foundations of a social safety net strategy

Rationale
The objective was to be achieved by developing a national policy document and testing key building blocks
for a safety net, including beneficiary identification and registration (targeting), a payment system, a grievance
redress mechanism, and a management information system (MIS).




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GN Productive Social Safety Net Project (P123900)



                            A National Policy on Social Protection providing the context for developing a broad social protection strategy
                            was approved by the Council of Ministers in 2017. Key building blocks for a safety net system were tested:

                                  Systems for beneficiary identification using geographical targeting and proxy means testing were
                                    successfully tested (based on targeting accuracy of 82 percent and community verification);
                                  An electronic beneficiary registration system (applying a new MIS designed for the safety net) was
                                   successfully used in registering beneficiaries of LIPW and transfer programs;
                                  Payment mechanisms were tested – cash in hand through a bank, and digital payments in urban
                                   areas;
                                  A grievance redress mechanism was developed, and grievances were tracked through the MIS from
                                   2017 onward. By late 2019, all complaints registered in the system had been addressed.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The Project introduced a framework for a national social protection policy, as well as key building blocks of a
                            safety net system in addition to addressing immediate poverty needs by the introduction of LIPW and cash
                            transfers. The strong output orientation of the project – impact evaluations did not allow for assessing the
                            changes among beneficiaries of measures introduced under the Project – specifically under Objective 1 –
                            should not detract from the otherwise relatively successful performance, especially under Objective 2.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The efficiency analysis in the ICR built on the one in the PAD. The analysis covered the LIPW and cash transfer
   components and was based on reasonable assumptions about beneficiary identification and registration, and
   costs and benefit levels. The analysis indicated that the LIPW was cost effective compared to similar programs
   in the region, primarily due to high labor intensity and targeting efficiency: 60 percent of program costs went to
   wage transfers, while targeting efficiency was estimated at 82 percent. In terms of cost effectiveness, it cost
   US$1 to deliver US$2.87 to beneficiaries. A similar calculation for cash transfers indicated that it cost US$1 to
   deliver US$2.56 to beneficiaries.




                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GN Productive Social Safety Net Project (P123900)



The ICR cautions against reading too much into the analysis. There were inconsistencies in monitoring during
implementation because of frequent changes in project indicators, and logistical challenges due to difficult field-
level data gathering.

Additional factors that adversely influenced efficiency were implementation difficulties requiring project
restructurings and extending the project period, low administrative capacity in Guinea, as well as frequent
changes in the Bank team.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?               Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         0
 Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         0
 ICR Estimate                                                  0
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives was rated substantial but did not align well with absorptive capacity. Efficacy was
rated substantial, consistent with almost fully achieving project objectives. Efficiency was rated modest
reflecting concerns about the economic analysis due to data inconsistencies.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

At project start-up, overall risk was rated high, reflecting a still uncertain political environment, as well as low
administrative capacity, and modest experience with safety nets. While administrative capacity remains
modest, the situation has improved – the political environment is more stable, the project has helped build
safety net institutions, and administrative responsibilities are better defined. Moreover, the Bank has a
continuing engagement with the country in the social sectors, including safety nets.




                                                                                                          Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN Productive Social Safety Net Project (P123900)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically relevant, addressing both government and Bank concerns about the
  absence of a permanent safety net in Guinea. Preparation was based on analytical work, field-level
  consultations, and policy dialogue with the new government and its development partners. Design drew
  on Bank experience in addressing social safety net issues in other countries in the region and addressed
  immediate welfare concerns as well as longer-term planning of a safety net. Environmental and social
  safeguards were appropriate; and a fiduciary team was hired to ensure adequate financial management
  and procurement practices. While the team recognized overall project risks, including risks relating to
  governance and absorptive capacity, the project would still turn out to be complex and result in several
  restructurings: implementation would be affected by a dearth of local sector experience and lessons that
  would influence CCT application; by an awkwardly formulated PDO that would result in several changes
  in project indicators and an emphasis on output-related indicators rather than outcomes (Section 9); and
  implementation arrangements that were to require several adjustments in project oversight.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
  Implementation placed significant challenges on the supervision effort as the project adapted to the
 implementation challenges: project scope, structure, and contents were changed several times connection
 with the restructurings and accompanied by adjustments in the formulation of key indicators and
 targets. The introduction of an Ebola crisis component added to the challenges. Moreover, task team
 leaders changed five times on a project that by its nature – piloting and testing unfamiliar approaches in a
 weak environment – could have benefited from greater attention to continuity. To address the changing
 circumstances, the team undertook 17 supervision missions accompanied by telecommunications and
 correspondence. As a result, the major elements of the project came to be tested and later adapted to
 circumstances, and the findings now form a basis for building a national safety net.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN Productive Social Safety Net Project (P123900)




a. M&E Design
 M&E as well as an impact evaluation was to be coordinated by the CFS with the assistance of a contracted
 M&E specialist. An M&E database was to be established for each component to collect information on all
 beneficiaries, and subsequently a more in-depth survey was to be undertaken of a sample of
 participants. A results monitoring framework was to assess progress towards the PDO using key
 indicators. An evaluation was to be undertaken to further inform the establishment of a safety net system.



 The ICR (p. 26-27) points to several weaknesses in project design that influenced M&E design. The ICR
 found the wording of the PDO, especially the second objective, ambiguous: did it relate to testing, or to
 institutional development? The IEG found it less ambiguous than the ICR, interpreting it as an elaboration
 of a social protection strategy (of which safety nets were an element); and development of the key
 components of a safety net system. It did find that the outcome-oriented indicators could have been
 strengthened with more focus on changes in household well-being. However, this may be due to the
 nature of the activities – introducing new and complex concepts into an unfamiliar environment where
 outcomes may have been difficult to define. Beyond the question of indicators, the ICR noted that CFS
 capacity, even with the assigned technical assistance, was insufficient for the extensive geographic area it
 was to cover.



b. M&E Implementation
  With indicators and targets changing several times, and with the introduction of the Ebola component,
  tracking progress was difficult. Combined with the project’s complexity, this resulted in fluctuations in
  reporting and uncertainty over what progress was being made.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data was used to monitor progress on components and better focus interventions and recognize
  revisions when needed.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project’s environmental assessment category was rated B given small-scale and localized public
   works. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and applied to assess
   the impact of the LIPW on the environment. Assessments involved consultations with key stakeholders and
   informed the design of specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) and Environmental and Social
   Management Plans (ESMP) when necessary. Public consultations were held on action plans, and

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN Productive Social Safety Net Project (P123900)



   community systems were established to handle grievances. All key stakeholders were sensitized and
   trained on the mitigation measures. At project closing, safeguard risk was rated moderate.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The CFS hired a fiduciary team including a financial management specialist, an accountant, and a
   procurement specialist. It set up adequate mechanisms to verify payments to beneficiaries and manage
   complaints. Throughout implementation, FM performance was rated as Satisfactory and Procurement
   performance was rated as Moderately Satisfactory, except in the initial period due to the effectiveness
   delay. Given the volatility of the exchange rate, the fiduciary risk rating was increased from Moderate to
   High. No waivers were required of the World Bank’s fiduciary policies, no ineligible expenditures were
   presented, interim unaudited financial reports were presented in a timely fashion and the final annual audit
   report for the period ended January 31, 2020 provided an unqualified/clean opinion.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted



d. Other
   Gender. The LIPW activities sought participation of women by targeting poor female-headed households,
   emphasizing female participation and sensitivity to cultural aspects of female spaces. The number of
   female participants exceeded original targets, and meaningful participation of women in public works
   activities was achieved through: (a) training the selection committees on female empowerment; (b)
   introducing informal nurseries for mothers to drop off their children; (c) identifying appropriate work for
   women, including in setting work norms; (d) working hours that took into account women’s household
   obligations; and € separate toilets for female and male beneficiaries.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                  Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                         Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                   Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                      Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN Productive Social Safety Net Project (P123900)



12. Lessons

The following lessons are drawn from the ICR:



Projects in low capacity environments are best kept simple. With a complex design, project
implementation faced institutional challenges that could have been reduced with greater attention to
administrative capacity and the pacing in the introduction of new systems. In the project, that pacing
was only introduced as challenges were encountered. While the urgency of implementation may
have been well-founded, the reality on the ground ultimately sets the pace.



Continuity in Bank teams can facilitate implementation. Closing of the project was delayed by
two years. While the delay may reflect a more realistic timetable for the establishment of a social
protection strategy or a functioning safety net system, a high turn-over of team leaders is also likely
to have contributed, and the ICR (p. 33) points to the possibility of consequent misunderstandings
and modifications as factors contributing to slowing down implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The Project put in place key elements of a needed and functioning social protection system in a very weak
  environment. While there will be follow-up operations, it would be useful to look at some results – because of
  both the challenge of the environment and the absence of bona fide outcome measures in the project.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The project provided enough information to allow the project to be evaluated. The evidence drew on project
documentation – ISRs and field visits, as well as CFS documentation. The analysis was able to bring out
salient features of implementation and allowed drawing of links between implementation and results. To some
extent this was affected by the absence of strong outcome indicators and, more generally, by several changes
in indicators. The ICR presented a clear theory of change which guided the analysis, which was internally
consistent. The analysis was internally consistent and responded to guidelines. At 33 pages, it was on the
longer side.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
GN Productive Social Safety Net Project (P123900)



Substantial




                                                                                 Page 14 of 14
