     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022118

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P118783                                    VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                    Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51390                                  31-Mar-2019                                         124,939,352.46

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jul-2012                                30-Sep-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            150,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             150,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         127,073,332.38                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Katharina Ferl              John R. Eriksson             Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. vi) and the Financing Agreement of September 13,
   2012 (p. 5) the objective of the project was “to increase the resilience of the people and economic assets to
   natural hazards in selected river basins of the project provinces within the overall framework of Vietnam’s
   National Disaster Prevention, Response and Mitigation Strategy Towards 2020”.




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included five components:

   Component 1: Strengthening Disaster Risk Management (DRM) institutions, information systems
   and planning (appraisal estimate US$5.50 million, actual US$4.77 million): This component included
   three sub-components.

   a) Strengthening DRM institutions including: i) facilitation of inter-ministerial coordination, policy dialogue
   and knowledge-sharing mechanisms; ii) establishment of provincial disaster management centers in project
   provinces where such centers are needed; and iii) provision of technical assistance for government
   agencies at different levels.

   b) Improvement of DRM information systems including: i) harmonizing and integrating existing DRM
   databases and information systems; ii) development of an inventory of existing medium and small scale
   reservoirs in project provinces, their safety standards, safety guidelines, and operational procedures; iii)
   development of software for the management of reservoirs to be used at national and provincial levels; and
   iv) provision of technical assistance on the use of the databases and software and the implementation of
   safety guidelines.

   c) Support for the integration of DRM in river basin planning including: i) provision of support for data
   collection and assessment of exposure, risks and vulnerability at the basin scale; ii) provision of support for
   identification of vulnerable areas, and possible structural and non-structural measures to mitigate natural
   hazard risks; and iii) provision of capacity building on the use of hydrological models and geographic
   information systems to DRM staff at provincial level.

   Component 2: Strengthening weather forecasting and early warning systems (appraisal estimate
   US$30.0 million, actual US$24.69 million): This component included three sub-components:

   a) Technical Assistance for development and implementation of an integrated national hydromet (an
   integrated approach to weather, water and climate issues) forecasting and early warning systems and end-
   to-end applications including: i) the preparation of hydromet implementation plan at the national level and
   for central region; ii) the design of a nation-wide communication system; and iii) strengthening end-to-end
   communication system through provision of support for the training on interpretation of early warning
   products for relevant staff and communities, improvement of products and services and communication
   between hydromet services and users, application of forecast interpretation tools, and development of user-
   tailored products in areas such as agriculture, tourism, energy, transport and water resource management.

   b) Strengthening hydromet observation and monitoring networks, computer hardware and information and
   communication technology infrastructure including: i) installation of automated hydromet observing networks
   and communication systems; and ii) relevant capacity building activities.




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783)



  c) Monitoring and Evaluation. Establishment and implementation of a monitoring and evaluation system for
  component 2 of the project.

  Component 3: Community-Based Disaster Risk Management (CBDRM) (appraisal estimate US$19.50
  million, actual US$16.16 million): This component was to finance the implementation of the government’s
  national CBDRM strategy in approximately 100 communes through:

  a) Commune institutional strengthening through i) improving commune-level flood and storm risks
  management procedures; ii) capacity building for commune-based institution leaders; iii) the development of
  inter-communal support platforms; iv) development of community resilient planning; and v) enhancement of
  private sector commune partnerships.

  b) CBDRM Investments for: i) non-structural measures such as evacuation drills, public awareness raising,
  communication and early warning systems, relevant equipment, and participatory workshops; and ii)
  structural measures, including small-scale multi-purpose shelters and evacuation roads, and the preparation
  of plans and designs for the management, operation and maintenance of each structural unit.

  Component 4: Priority disaster risk mitigation investments (appraisal estimate US$117.0 million,
  actual US$98.75 million):

  This component was to finance the identification, prioritization, and implementation of major DRM
  investments (sub-projects) within the four selected river basins to mitigate risks posed by natural hazards.
  These structural measures were to respond to agreed prioritization criteria. Six project provinces covering
  four major river basins were each to receive US$8-12 million for eligible investments, while the other four
  provinces were to receive US$4-6 million each. According to the ICR (p. 26) the Ministry of Agriculture and
  Rural Development (MARD) suggested to focus on nine river basins and ten provinces. A phased approach
  including this number of provinces and river basins was eventually agreed on. Investments were to be
  implemented in two phases and include rehabilitation of selected dams and reservoirs to improve their
  safety, rescue roads and bridges, riverbank protection, and safe harbors at river mouths for fishing boats.

  Component 5: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (appraisal estimate US$8.0 million,
  actual US$3.6 million. The ICR did not state why the actual costs of this component were substantially
  lower than the appraisal estimate): This component was to finance:

  a) Project Management: providing support for the Project Steering Committee (PSC), the Central Project
  Management Office (CPMO), the Project Management Office (PMO), the Provincial Project Management
  Units (PPMUs) and other implementing agencies for effective project management, implementation, and
  supervision.

  b) Monitoring and Evaluation: providing support for the establishment and implementation of an effective
  monitoring and evaluation system.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$167.6 million. The actual cost was US$150.01 million.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 16
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783)



                       Financing: The project was to be financed by a US$150.0 million IDA loan of which US$127.07 million
                       disbursed.

                       Borrower contributions: The Borrower was to contribute US$17.6 million. Actual contribution was
                       US$22.94 million.

                       Dates: The project was restructured twice:

                             On May 28, 2016 the project was restructured to remove the project’s results framework from the
                              Financing Agreement and place said indicators in the relevant project manual. This amendment was
                              part of the one-time amendment for 13 projects in order to assist the facilitation of timely and
                              successful implementation activities and results of all 13 projects.
                             On March 27, 2019 the project was restructured to extend the credit closing date by six months from
                              March 31, 2019 to September 30, 2019 to facilitate the implementation of the remaining project
                              activities and enhance achievement of the objective.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 1) Vietnam is one of the countries most exposed to natural hazards, given its
geography, topography, economic structure, and population distribution. Vietnam is vulnerable to droughts,
landslides and seawater intrusion with floods and typhoons being the dominant hazards. At the time of
appraisal, almost 60 percent of Vietnam’s total land area and over 70 percent of its population were at risk
to these natural hazards. The potential for losses from natural hazards were particularly high in Vietnam’s
Central Region (the targeted area of the proposed project). Approximately 65 percent of all recorded storms
and an even higher proportion of storm-related damage and loss of life occurred in this region. The Central
Region experienced higher than average poverty rates and the recurrent extreme weather events posed a
constraint for economic growth.

In 2007, the government approved a National Strategy for Natural Disaster Prevention, Response and
Mitigation towards 2020 (NSNDPRM) and in 2009 the government approved the strategy’s Implementation
Plan. These documents emphasized a shift from ex-post disaster relief and response to ex-ante risk
reduction through preparedness and resilience.

The project’s objective was in line with the government’s Socio-Economic Development Plan (SEDP)
(2016-2020) which emphasizes the importance of climate adaptation and DRM. Also, the project’s objective
was aligned with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework (FY18- FY22) and its focus area 3
“ensure environmental sustainability and resilience”. The project also supported the CPS’s objective 10,
which aims to increase climate resilience and strengthen disaster risk management and objective 11, which
aims to strengthen natural resources management and improve water security.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating

                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783)



               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To increase the resilience of the people and economic assets to natural hazards in selected river basins of
                the project provinces within the overall framework of Vietnam’s National Disaster Prevention, Response and
                Mitigation Strategy Towards 2020:

                Rationale
                Rather than dividing the PDO into sub-objectives, the ICR assessed the project outcomes through four
                outcome areas that define the concept of resilience. The ICRR will also apply this concept.

                The project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as the upgrading of weather/hydrological
                stations, developing and installing national hydromet forecasting and early warning systems, trainings staff on
                observation systems, forecasting/early warning systems, preparing Operations & Maintenance (O&M) plans,
                developing four Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) as well as enhancing systems were to result in the
                enhancement of hydromet services and Early Warning Systems (EWS) which was to ultimately contribute to
                the achievement of the PDO.

                Also, the project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as training of government technical
                staff and commune members in CBDRM, preparing communal flood and storm risk management plans
                annually, holding joint evacuation exercises among clustered communities, as well as upgrading and newly
                constructing small structures were to result in the enhancement of preparedness at the community level
                which was to ultimately contribute to the achievement of the PDO.

                Furthermore, the project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as upgrading/rehabilitating
                project infrastructure such as dykes, weirs, roads, and bridges as well as upgrading reservoirs with higher
                safety levels was to result in the enhancement of resilience of communities through natural hazard mitigation
                which was to ultimately contribute to the achievement of the PDO.

                Finally, the project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as updating DRM laws, strategies,
                guidelines as well as databases, training staff in database management, and satellite maps usage as well as
                preparing DRM integrated river basins plans were to result in the strengthening of the enabling environment
                for DRM which was to ultimately contribute to the achievement of the PDO.

                The PAD did not make any assumptions but the ICR (p. 8) assumed the following: i) implementing agencies
                were to strengthen capacity to manage complex operations involving structural and non-structural activities; ii)
                hydromet systems were to be installed and used by the national hydromet agency; iii) communities were to
                participate in DRM planning and response exercises; iv) flood control infrastructures were to be adequate for
                most storms and to be maintained; and v) successes from project were to be maintained, replicated, and
                scaled up.


                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783)



Outputs:

1. Enhancing hydromet services and early warning systems:

      150 additional hydromet stations were installed and connected to the national system, surpassing the
         target of 73 additional hydromet stations.
      An Integrated National Early Warning System and Operations Plan for Hydromet Sector was prepared
         and endorsed, surpassing the target of the plan being prepared.

2. Enhanced preparedness at the community level:

      100 Communes had emergency preparedness plans in place, achieving the target of 100 communes.
      The project conducted trainings for commune-based institution leaders to strengthen their ability to
         mobilize people according to the motto “four on the spot” for disaster prevention in localities in line
         with the NSNDPRM. According to the ICR (p. 16) “four on the spot” means that each household or
         locality should prepare all essential items to prevent or respond to natural disasters, which may occur
         at the locality at any time. The prepared items should meet the emergency relief demands of the
         household or its locality, and ensure that they are ready to provide support to other households or
         localities before external entities are asked to provide support.
        100 disaster prone communes participated in evacuation drills, achieving the target of 100 communes.
        The project prepared several trainings (see Enabling Environment Area below for number of trainees
         and target):
        213 training classes on strengthening Community-based Disaster Risk Management (CBDRM)
         capacity for DRM staff at the provincial, district, and commune levels.
              o 719 trainings on disaster management and response skill, first aid, and house protection for
                  task forces and people in villages and communes.
              o 20 classes on M&E community disaster prevention.
              o 79 training classes for teachers and 756 communication sessions for teachers and students.
        100 commune-level Socio-Economic Development Plans (SEDP) were revised to integrate DRM and
         were also approved, surpassing the target of 90 plans. SEDPs are an essential development tool for
         budgeting and implementing priority actions within the communes.
        The project supported 129 small-scale disaster mitigation works such as disaster evacuation centers,
         flood evacuation roads, pools for children to learn swimming etc.

3. Enhanced resilience of communities through natural hazard mitigation infrastructure:

      The project rehabilitated 84.9 kilometers of evacuation roads, surpassing the target of 25 kilometers.
      42.4 kilometers of dyke and river embankment improvements were made. This output did not have a
         target.
        19 dams were strengthened/rehabilitated, surpassing the target of nine dams.
        29 kilometers of rural road were rehabilitated, achieving the target of 29 kilometers.
        Four storm shelters for fishing boats were completed. This output did not have a target.
        Seven reservoirs were upgraded and restored which were at the risk of falling apart. This output did
         not have a target.



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783)



4. Strengthened enabling environment for DRM:

      Three DRM-related databases were improved including: i) database on dam safety; ii) database,
       management software, and DRM maps for all ten project provinces; and iii) dyke management in the
       central region, achieving the target of three databases being established and maintained.
      Technical assistance was provided to 10 provinces to strengthen the capacity of dam operators for
       reservoir safety, develop technical standards, guidelines, handbooks, budgetary mechanisms, and
       strengthen the process of technical inspections for dam safety.
      642 government staff at the national and provincial levels was trained, surpassing the target of 410
       staff. The aim of the training was to improve the knowledge on DRM to build capacity and raise
       awareness of stakeholders, central and local agencies, and local communities.

Outcomes:

1. Enhancing hydromet services and early warning systems:

      All 100 communes were covered by storm and flood early warning services and with increased
       awareness about emergency response, achieving the target of 100 communes.

2. Enhanced preparedness at the community level:

According to the ICR (p. 15) communes increased their response capacity by improving the quality of
forecasts and provide impact-based forecasting. This allowed communes to better anticipate the effects of
natural hazards and actions that should be taken to be prepared. Also, preparedness was improved through
all communes being covered by storm and flood early warning services as stated above.

Furthermore, the ICR stated that in September 2017, when Typhoon Doksuri struck Vietnam, in project-
supported communes in Quang Binh province, people actively prepared for the arrival of the Typhoon. For
example, communes used the project’s flood risk maps to identify evacuation routes to higher elevation
areas, rescue equipment to evacuate vulnerable people to storm shelters, and actively protected their
houses. This had a positive impact on reducing the risk.

3. Enhanced resilience of communities through natural hazard mitigation infrastructure:

      551,902 people were protected by enhanced priority infrastructure built by the project, achieving the
       target of 550,000 people. According to the Bank team (June 1, 2020) construction was delayed due to
       bad weather resulting in its completion during the last implementation phase.
      62,061 hectares of land protected by enhanced flood protection measures, surpassing the target of
       50,000 people. These works included strengthening of river and reservoir embankments,
       improvements to critical dyke infrastructure and pumping stations, construction of emergency
       evacuation roads, which reduced the risk of floods and enhanced the resilience of people with life-
       saving evacuation infrastructure.

4. Strengthened enabling environment for DRM:




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783)



                            10 provincial river basin plans were prepared or updated with DRM factors and approved by the PPC,
                            achieving the target of 10 plans.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved significant results under all four resilience areas. However, according to the ICR (p. 22)
                            some of the project outcomes were only achieved in the last phase of implementation. Therefore, the project’s
                            overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   The PAD (p. 9) conducted an Economic analysis for six sub-projects of Component 4 and considered Economic
   benefits of Components 2 and 3. The main economic benefits were reduced likelihood of flood events and
   associated damages through infrastructure investment, capacity building, and early warning. Net incomes per
   crop/activity were estimated to be higher by 17 to 75 percent in the ‘with’ project scenario due to reduced
   production losses. Household models showed that the project increased family incomes by 8 to 25 percent. In
   addition, the models also confirmed significant project benefits for poor households.

   Applying a discount rate of 10 percent, the overall economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated at 15.8 percent,
   and the net present value (NPV) at VND 648 billion (US$32.4 million). The ERR for the individual sub-projects
   varied between 11.8 and 24.6 percent, all showing positive NPVs.

   The ICR (p. 21) conducted an ex post Economic analysis for component 3 and 4 sub-projects and the
   development of the forecasting and early warning system strengthening under component 2 (99.8 percent of the
   actual total project cost). The analysis also used a discount rate of 10 percent and calculated an ERR of 18.8
   percent and a financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of 29.9 percent with an anticipated NPV of VND 1,362
   billion (US$ 58,584,121 million).




                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783)



According to the ICR (p. 21) the calculations at project appraisal were lower since it included a smaller amount
of project activities and information on costs was limited. However, both analyses indicate that the project was a
worthwhile investment.

Operational efficiency:

According to the ICR (p. 22) the project experienced implementation delays due to: i) limitations of Bank IDA
allocations and access to counterpart funds; ii) delays in the implementation of component 2 and in streamlining
the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE) approval process; and iii) lack of technical
capacity at provincial and commune levels due to high staff turnover. This resulted in the need to extend the
project duration by six months.

However, taking everything together, the project’s efficiency is rated Substantial


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Given the project's alignment to the relevant strategies and its designated response to a specific and required
development challenge, relevance of the objective is High. Efficacy and Efficiency are Substantial, resulting in
an overall outcome rating of Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks can be grouped in the following categories:


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783)



Financial: The project’s investments will require adequate funding for operation and maintenance (O&M)
activities. According to the ICR (p. 32) small-scale structures, which were implemented under component 3,
will be maintained and funded at the government’s community level and supported by volunteers benefiting
from DRM measures. The Department of Agriculture and Rural Development (DARD) will train commune
committees in the maintenance of DRM structures. Infrastructure, which was rehabilitated or upgraded under
component 4, will be maintained by respective entities through their annual maintenance budget. Also, the
ICR (p. 31) states that MONRE is committed to making the necessary budget allocations for the modernized
hydromet and forecasting system as part of its Vietnam Meteorological and Hydrological Administration
(VNMHA) annual business plan.

Technical: Additional qualified staff to manage and operate the monitoring network and systems will be
required and training of staff at the Vietnam Meteorological and Hydrological Administration as well as at the
provincial, district, and commune government level will be necessary to keep up with the technical
requirements for the modernization of hydromet systems. According to the ICR (p. 32) MONRE will need to
finalize the remaining SOPs, which were identified during project implementation, to ensure a functioning
operation of the modernized system.

Political and Administrative: The project-built capacity and provided institutional strengthening at the
national, provincial, and commune level through training, and development of SOPs for the operation of the
hydromet system. Also, the project supported commune resilience and resilient infrastructure. The project
contributed to the establishment of new planning and assessment processes. However, these will require to
be integrated into normal government planning processes and routines to ensure their sustainability.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was built on lessons learned from the implementation of the Bank-supported Natural Disaster
  Risk Management Project (NDRMP). According to the ICR (p. 26) these lessons included: i) DRM
  decisions should be made based on perceived risk reduction, benefits and through a strategic
  combination of structural (or physical) or non-structural (or non-physical) solutions in the context of a
  larger river basin scale and integrated management approach; ii) strong institutional reform and
  leadership of the coordination agency is essential for project success, sustainability and clear institutional
  arrangements and responsibilities should be determined before project start; iv) appropriate operations &
  maintenance funds at local levels need to be allocated; and iv) comprehensive M&E frameworks should
  be developed and implemented before project start.

  According to the ICR (p. 30) the NDRMP project had conducted several feasibility studies for priority
  infrastructure sub-projects, allowing for a solid implementation start.

  During project preparation the Bank identified relevant risks. These included weak capacity at the
  implementing agency and high level of complexity and ambitiousness of introducing a river basin
  approach and developing river basins plans across eight river basins and ten provinces.




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783)



  According to the PAD (p. 9) the Bank mitigation measures were to include: a) training on procurement
  and safeguards; b) engagement of independent technical auditors for construction quality; c)
  engagement of

  independent monitoring consultants for safeguard measures; and d) preparation and implementation of a
  project specific Governance and Transparency Action Plan (GTAP). However, the risk of limited capacity
  for implementing a river basin approach was underestimated. Since there was no functioning river basin
  authority in Vietnam, extensive coordination with provincial authorities within each selected river basin
  was challenging. Also, the risk of availability of counterpart financing was not identified resulting in
  delays in the completion of construction works, payment of compensation, and resettlement for relocating
  households.

  According to the ICR (p. 25) the project’s complexity resulted in challenges in areas such as
  procurement, supervision, and institutional coordination ranging from national to communal level and
  across the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) and MONRE. Furthermore, the river
  basin approach to DRM planning was innovative and had not been implemented before. Finally, while the
  Bank had planned to include three to five highest priority provinces, MARD suggested including ten
  provinces. Therefore, developing river basin plans for eight river basins and ten provinces was ambitious.

  Finally, the project’s Results Framework had shortcomings in regards to the selection of PDO indicators
  and their ability to measure progress towards the achievement of the PDO (see section 9a for more
  details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 31) the Bank team proactively identified implementation bottlenecks such as
 delays in procurement and allocation in counterpart funding. When the implementation of component 2
 experienced challenges due to the significant delay in hiring the System Integrator (SI) team, the Bank
 team increased technical assistance and support a close cooperation between the PMO and the System
 Integrator team. Also, the Bank team supported the project’s financial management and procurement. The
 ICR (p. 31) stated that Implementation Status and Results Reports and Aide-Memoires were consistent
 and candid. Furthermore, the ICR stated that even though the project had a high turnover of Task Team
 Leaders (a total of six) it did not negatively affect project implementation.

 However, the Bank team did not revise the project’s Results Framework despite its shortcomings (see
 section 9 for more details).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory



                                                                                                 Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s objective was clearly specified and the theory of change and how key activities and outputs
 were to lead to the intended outcomes was reflected in the Results Framework. The selected indicators
 were sufficiently specific, measurable and relevant. However, the M&E design had several shortcomings.
 First, PDO indicator 1 (“number of provincial river basin plans prepared or updated with DRM factors and
 approved by the PPC”) and PDO indicator 2 (“hectares of land protected by enhanced flood protection”)
 tried to measure similar outputs focusing on improving resilience. Second, PDO indicator 3 (“number of
 people protected by enhanced priority infrastructure built by the project”) tried to measure outputs
 implemented under two different components (components 2 and 3). Third, the selected indicators mainly
 focused on outputs rather than outcomes. And fourth, the project’s activities under component 2, related to
 the improvement in the quality of storm and flood forecasts, was not adequately reflected in the project’s
 PDO indicators.

 The Central Project Management Office (CPMO) and the Project Management Office (PMO) were to be
 responsible for monitoring and evaluation of implementation progress and the project components for
 which they were to be responsible. According to the PAD (p. 8) an independent baseline survey, a mid-
 term review timed to assess results from phase I sub-project investments, and an independent final
 evaluation were to be conducted covering both phase I and II investments.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 27) an M&E consultant was hired by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
  Development (MARD) to coordinate and consolidate reporting from MARD, provincial PPMUs and PMO.
  Furthermore, standardized reporting frameworks were developed to support the monitoring of indicators
  as well as progress towards achieving the PDO.

  The ICR (p. 28) stated that the quality of the M&E reporting conducted by the CPMO was inconsistent
  due to weak data collection of PDO indicators and lack of capacity in data collection, verification, and
  validation at PPMUs. In order to address these shortcomings, MARD and the Provincial People’s
  Committees (PPCs) hired more staff and built technical capacities at central and provincial levels. As a
  result, M&E activities improved throughout project implementation.

  According to the Bank team (June 1, 2020) baseline data was collected by an M&E consultant and
  updated on an ongoing basis. The M&E consultant conducted an independent survey twice, at the mid-
  term review and closing stage. Survey results of the independent safeguard monitoring were also used
  for project M&E.




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783)



  The ICR (p. 28) stated that the project experienced challenges to measure activities under component 3.
  Even though activities were implemented, the indicator showed zero progress since it was dependent on
  the progress of one consultancy, which was delayed.

  According to the Bank team (June 1, 2020) the project enabled significant learning in terms of developing
  and using an enhanced M&E system. Also, the project supported the move from manual to web based
  M&E, which may have a positive impact on the M&E processes’ and functions’ sustainability.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 28) M&E data was used for tracking results against monitoring indicators,
  identify implementation bottlenecks and inform-decision making. However, the ICR did not provide any
  concrete examples. The CPMO, PMO, and PPMUs thoroughly monitored indicators and outputs.
  However, some provincial agencies did not always provide data on a regular basis.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), OP/BP 4.37 (Safety of Dams),
   OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement), OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous People) and OP/BP 7.50 (International
   waterways).

   The project prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Dam Safety
   Framework (DSF), a Resettlement Policy Framework and an Ethnic Minority Development Framework.
   Also, an Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOP) was developed and applied to construction of sub-
   projects under components 2 and 3. ESMPs were prepared for construction of sub-projects under
   component 4. Also, a sub-project under component 4 resulted in the relocation of a burial ground, which
   was addressed through a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). For sub-projects involving dam rehabilitation, for
   large dams a Dam Safety Report (DSR) and for small dams a Dam Safety Inspection Report (DSIR) were
   prepared. Both types of reports were reviewed by a panel of experts, which was appointed by the
   government.

   According to the ICR (p. 29) the ESMPs and ECOP provided mitigation measures for the triggered OP/BP
   4.11 (Physical and Cultural Resources).

   The project provided full compensation and assistance to all 3,193 households who were affected by land
   acquisition. The ICR (p. 30) stated that the Provincial Project Management Unit (PPMU) and Resettlement
   Committees followed the resettlement procedures as defined in the Resettlement Policy Framework. The
   project experienced two cases where compensation payments were delayed, which was resolved.



                                                                                                 Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783)



   The Bank team stated (June 1, 2020) that the project also complied with OP/BP 7.50 (International
   waterways) and that the project’s safeguard ratings were satisfactory throughout implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (p. 30) the project complied with the Bank’s financial management policies and
   procedures. The CPMO and PPMUs provided the interim financial reports, which were of acceptable
   quality in a timely manner. However, throughout implementation, the project experienced delays in regards
   to internal financial audit reports as well as late and insufficient budget allocations to the provinces by the
   Bank and the government. This negatively impacted payments to resettlement stakeholders, contractors,
   and suppliers and resulted in project implementation delays.

   Procurement:

   The project experienced procurement delays during the initial phase of project implementation due to lack
   of capacity, inefficient approval processes, and procurement planning issues. The Bank addressed this by
   providing training in procurement, financial management, and contract management. These measures
   resulted in the improvement of the project’s procurement performance and the ICR (p. 30) stated that 298
   out of 300 procurement packages were closed. Also, the project did not declare any mis-procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783)



12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 32-33) provided several lessons learned, of which the following are selected for their
relevance for similar future operations:

        Long-term engagement for building resilience facilitates learning. This project was part
         of a multi-phased programmatic approach and built on activities initiated under the previous
         project, the NDRMP. Successful activities were scaled up under this project, allowing for
         learning and innovation.
        Introducing new approaches such as an integrated river basin approach can be
         challenging and complex but will have long-term impacts. This project introduced eight
         river basins plans which were supported by MARD and the Vietnam Disaster Management
         Authority (VNDMA), resulting in this approach being continued to be supported by two new
         World Bank projects (the “Emergency Reconstruction Project” and the “Dam Safety and
         Rehabilitation Project”).
        Bringing a System Integrator on board at an early stage is critical for hydromet
         projects. In this project, the System Integrator was based in the country and was available
         for technical support and system integration, allowing for the identification of technical,
         administrative, and capacity bottlenecks and providing the opportunity to address them in a
         timely manner.
        Increasing resilience through a three-ponged approach which includes investments in
         infrastructure, CBDRM, and early warning systems are complex and challenging.
         However, such an approach is innovative and effective and has the potential to be
         scaled up. This project’s design strengthened resilience through improving weather
         forecasting and early warning systems, which complemented community-based disaster
         preparedness and small-scale infrastructure activities with investments in large high-priority
         infrastructure activities.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a detailed overview of project preparation and implementation. The ICR was sufficiently
candid, internally consistent, complied with the guidelines and included an adequate Economic Analysis.
Furthermore, the evidence provided appeared to be reliable and of adequate quality, but the ICR could have
benefited from more results orientation by providing additional outcome driven data. Taking everything together,
the ICR quality is rated Substantial.




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                               Page 16 of 16
