     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW Public Sector Governance P4R (P149095)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0021791

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Program Name
 P149095                                   RW Public Sector Governance P4R

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Rwanda                                    Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Program Cost (USD)
 IDA-55470                                 31-Dec-2018                                           93,375,355.99

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Oct-2014                               31-Dec-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                        93,375,355.99                                                0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Yumeka Hirano              Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller               IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) of this Program-For-Results (PforR) is to enhance Rwanda’s Public
   Financial Management and statistics systems to improve transparency and accountability in the use of public
   funds, revenue mobilization and the quality and accessibility of development data for decision making (Project
   Appraisal Document [PAD], p.7 & 23 and Financing Agreement [FA], p. 4).

   The Program aims to achieve the following results (PAD, p. 23):


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW Public Sector Governance P4R (P149095)



         Increased efficiency in national and subnational revenue collection;
         Improved national and subnational transparency and accountability in the use of public funds; and
         Improved use of development data for decision-making.

   The three PDO results indicators were:

         the tax to GDP ratio, which measures national and subnational revenue collection
         the percent of [public] entities submitting monthly statements by the due date and making them
          publicly available
         the share of ministries, districts, and agencies (MDAs) using official statistics for both analysis of
          current developments for short-term decision making and analysis of trends for longer-term policy
          formulation.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  11-Mar-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Program encompassed three results areas under the two overarching areas: public financial
   management (PFM) and statistics (PAD, pp. 18-25 and pp. 53-79; FA, p.4). In addition, the Program
   focused on supporting the government’s efforts in capability building and system strengthening across the
   areas.

   Public Financial Management

   The Program supported a subset of the government’s programs, articulated in the Public Finance
   Management Sector Strategic Plan (PFM SSP) for 2013–2018, which consists of 7 programs (as mentioned
   under Results Area 2) and 23 subprograms. The Program covers all but two of the government’s 23 PFM
   subprograms. Not included were the Government PFM subprograms of IPPIS (under the main program of
   electronic service delivery and IFMIS) and legislative oversight (under the main program of external
   oversight and accountability).

   Results Area 1: Enhanced national and subnational revenue collection

   The Program supported adopting the automated government revenue management system.



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW Public Sector Governance P4R (P149095)



   Results Area 2: Improved national and subnational transparency and accountability in the use of
   public funds

   The Program supported the following governmental functions: i) economic planning and budgeting, ii)
   resource mobilization, iii) budget execution, internal control, accounting, and reporting, iv) external oversight
   and accountability, v) electronic service delivery and Integrated Financial Management System (IFMIS), vi)
   fiscal decentralization, and vii) PFM sector coordination and management across seven key PFM areas.

   Statistics

   The Program supported a subset of the National Strategy for Development of Statistics 2 (NSDS 2) for
   2014–2019, which includes six strategic objectives. The Program covered four strategic objectives.

   Results Area 3: Improved use of public data for decision making

   The Program supported: i) strengthening the civil registration system, administrative records, surveys,
   censuses, and other sources of data, ii) improved quality and dissemination of statistics and public
   statistical literacy, iii) improved statistical advocacy and integrate use of statistics in decision making, and iv)
   developing capacities within the national statistical system (NSS).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Program Cost: At appraisal, the estimated cost of the Program was $US172 million over four years. The
   actual cost was US$ 136 million (ICR, Annex 3).

   Financing: The Program was financed by an IDA loan of XDR 65.9 million (US$ 100 million equivalent). It
   was fully disbursed. The disbursement amount in the ICR (p.2) was US$ 93 million due to exchange rate
   differences.

   Borrower Contribution. The borrower contribution estimated at appraisal was US$ 42 million (PAD, p.6).
   The actual contribution was US$ 20 million (ICR, Annex 3). In addition, there was parallel financing from
   other donors, estimated at appraisal to be US$ 30 million. Actual contribution was US$ 23 million.

   Dates and Revisions: The Program was approved by the Board on October 3, 2014 and became effective
   on December 11, 2014. There was a Level 2 restructuring on March 11, 2017 to correct the baseline and
   the target values for PDO Indicator 3 and the baseline for DLI 6. The credit closed on December 31, 2018,
   as scheduled.




3. Relevance    TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives     New




  Rationale


                                                                                                         Page 3 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RW Public Sector Governance P4R (P149095)



At appraisal, Rwanda was making significant progress in PFM reforms. However, certain areas of the PFM
reform, notably revenue mobilization, use of new technology, and capacity development, had lagged and
continued to challenge overall transparency and accountability. The Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability (PEFA) report documented that the scores in five out of six categories improved between 2007
and 2010. Among 82 countries for which country data on the County Policy Institutional Assessment (CPIA)
Indicator 13 (quality of budgetary and financial management rating) were available, Rwanda ranked 4th in
2013, with a score exceeding the average for middle-income countries (3.3), (PAD, p.13). On the other hand,
Rwanda’s tax revenue to GDP ratio (14.2 percent in FY2012/13) was lower than the average for East African
countries. Inadequate resource mobilization had resulted in aid dependency at the national level and lack of
discretionary revenues at the subnational level. As the central government budget represents a large share
of GDP (29 percent in FY2012/13), it was critical for Rwanda to have more effective, accountable and
transparent PFM. Statistics were important for facilitating evidence-based policy making and more efficient
and effective use of public resources (PAD, para.15 and ICR, para.5). Furthermore, with the significant
increase in fiscal transfers to districts, there was a need to strengthen local government’ capacity for core
PFM, including accounting, auditing, budgeting, and reporting.

The PDO was highly relevant to the government strategies and programs. The second Economic
Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS 2; 2013-2018) identified PFM as a platform for
efficient management of the nation’s resources to achieve the strategy’s goals. It focused on: (i) increasing
resource mobilization from domestic and alternative sources of finance, (ii) scaling up the implementation of
the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS), (iii) strengthening PFM systems at the
subnational level, and (iv) enhancing training, professionalization, and capacity building access all PFM. The
PforR supported the government’s two national programs: the Public Financial Management Sector Strategic
Plan (PFM SSP) 2013-2018 and the National Strategy for Development of Statistics 2 (NSDS 2) 2014–2019.
Both programs were regarded as essential to achieve EDPRS 2. The PDO remained highly relevant to the
new PFM SSP 2018-2024, which aims to support Rwanda’s socioeconomic transformation, articulated in its
long-term Vision 2025, through effective and accountable PFM. In addition, the Rwanda Country Program
Evaluation (IEG 2018) concluded that the outcomes and objectives of Bank support for improved public
resource management were aligned with the country’s broad goals.

The PDO was well aligned with one of the strategic goals set out in the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
for 2014–2018 (revised and extended until 2020). The CPS’s third theme focused on supporting accountable
governance though PFM and decentralization (CPS FY14-18, pp.29-30) and in particular to the CPS
objectives of: (i) improving national and subnational transparency, efficiency, value for money and
accountability in the use of public funds; and (ii) enhancing local government tax generation and
administration (PLR for CPS FY14-18, paras.38-39). The CPS also highlighted the importance of improving
statistical systems and capacity to track results against government strategies and enforce accountability
(CPS 14-18, p.30, p.35 & Annex 5). The PDO remained centrally relevant to a key constraint/reform area
identified in the World Bank’s Systematic Country Diagnostic for Rwanda of May 2019: to improve alignment
of spending with the government strategy and service delivery objectives, while improving control of
expenditures to increase value for money.

With its strong results system, Rwanda was an ideal country for development policy operations. Yet in this
case, a PforR instrument was used because of concern over predictability of policy financing due to shifting
political views in Bank constituency capitals, as evidenced in stoppage of budget support in 2012 following a
Rwandan military incursion in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo. This and other PforRs were adopted




                                                                                                 Page 4 of 17
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              RW Public Sector Governance P4R (P149095)



                       as alternative forms of budget support, providing a more stable form of financing, and still allowing the Bank
                       and development partners to have a seat at the table for key policy discussions.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                          New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                Number of pilot ministries submitting investment plans in which feasibility studies are conducted for new projects
                exceeding US$1 million as per instructions in budget call circular (Number)

                Rationale
                This DLI was critical to increase accountability of the budget and improved transparency in the use of national
                public funds.



                Rating
                High

                DLI 2
                DLI
                DLI 2: Number of districts using automated local government revenue management system (Number)

                Rationale
                This DLI was well linked to two Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs): the time spent in paying tax and the e-
                tax declaration ratio. Use of automated local government revenue management systems was critical for
                reducing time for paying tax and increasing share of active small and micro taxpayers filing tax declarations
                using the e-tax internet portal for increasing national and subnational revenue collection. While the DLI and
                two IRIs were aligned with the PDO indicator 1 (tax to GDP ratio), there were other influences on the indicator
                beyond those supported by the project (see Sections 4 and 8a).



                Rating
                Substantial

                DLI 3
                DLI
                Implementation of e-procurement (Text)


                                                                                                                         Page 5 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RW Public Sector Governance P4R (P149095)




Rationale
There was no e-procurement system in the country at appraisal. Implementation of e-procurement was critical
to modernize public procurement for improved national transparency in the use of public funds. The
interventions and outputs were clearly defined in the PAD.



Rating
High

DLI 4
DLI
Percent of MDAs receiving unqualified audit opinion (Percentage)

Rationale
Improving MDA’s compliance with financial management requirements was sought to improve quality of
external audit. This DLI directly contributes to the second results area of improved national and subnational
transparency and accountability in the use of public funds.



Rating
High

DLI 5
DLI
Percent of sub-districts using simplified accounting and financial reporting application (Percentage)

Rationale
This DLI sought to improve reporting capacity at the subnational level for enhancing transparency and
accountability in the use of public funds. This DLI was designed to provide triggers for PFM reforms at the
subnational level, but the target was achieved in year 1 suggesting that level of ambition could have been
higher for greater impact.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 6
DLI
Number of Government PFM staff with at least foundation-level professional finance qualifications (Number)


Rationale



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
                            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                            RW Public Sector Governance P4R (P149095)



            This DLI aimed at improving staff capacity in PFM by increasing the number of staff with professional
            accounting qualifications. Capacity development was critical to improve use of public data for decision making
            and sustain achievements of the Program.



            Rating
            High

            DLI 7
            DLI
            Increased production of economic statistics and dissemination in time for strategic planning and decision
            making (Text)

            Rationale
            Production and dissemination of vital economic statistics and surveys were necessary to enhance use of data
            for decision making. While the DLIs and IRIs were aligned with the outcome indicator, these indicators under
            the Results Area 3 did not sufficiently measure the quality of development data for decision making.



            Rating
            Modest

            DLI 8
            DLI
            Open Data initiative extended to progressively include more surveys and administrative sources of data (Text)

            Rationale
            Together with DLI 7, this DLI was designed to improve data availability and dissemination, which is critical to
            enhance use of public data for decision making. While the DLIs and IRIs were aligned with the outcome
            indicator, these indicators under the Results Area 3 did not sufficiently measure the quality of development
            data for decision making.



            Rating
            Modest


OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




            OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
            Rationale
            The PDO was highly relevant with the country context, the government strategies and programs, and the
            CPS at appraisal and remained so throughout the project.



                                                                                                               Page 7 of 17
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   RW Public Sector Governance P4R (P149095)



               The DLIs were clearly defined, measurable and had detailed protocols for verification and monitoring (PAD,
               p.33 & Annex D). All DLIs related to PDO indicators 1 and 2 (PFM), except one, were numerical with
               achievements clearly measured by the number of MDA, districts, sectors (local governments), and staff who
               were beneficiaries of the operation’s interventions. The measurement of the remaining two DLIs for Results
               Area 3 laid out clearly the milestones necessary to produce selected economic data and to increase
               availability of statistical information in National Archive Data.

               The results framework was generally adequate; however, there were some deficiencies. There was a
               plausible link in most cases between the activities supported by the Program and the expected intermediate
               and final outcomes. Eight DLIs were either outputs or intermediate outcomes of the Program interventions
               necessary to achieve the PDO. The DLI also focused on strengthening capacity, which was critical to
               implement the project and sustain achievements of the Program. Under the Results Area 1, there was a
               shortcoming in targeting the outcome (tax to GDP ratio). Under Results Area 3, the indicators primarily
               focused on the use and dissemination of development data and did not sufficiently measure the quality of
               development data produced.

               The results framework shows the clear evolution of activities over time, incentivizing beneficiaries to meet the
               targets, which enabled reforms to expand. Financing allocated to DLIs during the course of the Program was
               approximately US$12.5 million for each of the eight DLIs. The allocation of financing was frontloaded with a
               gradual decrease in the second and third years to spur momentum for achieving results early and carrying
               progress through the entire Program implementation (ICR, para.28). Given the fact that three DLIs exceeded
               the intended targets in the first two years, the Bank could have set the bar higher and sought to achieve
               greater impact.



               Rating
               Substantial



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Improved Efficiency in National and Subnational Revenue Mobilization

               Rationale
               Use of automated local government revenue management system was expected to reduce time for paying tax
               and increase share of active small and micro taxpayers filing tax declarations using e-tax internet portal. This
               in turn was expected to increase national and subnational revenue collection.

               The Program supported the movement to electric platforms and reduced the time required to pay taxes. All
               three IRIs were exceeded (ICR, para.35 & p.33). By the end of the project, all 30 districts (exceeding the
               original target of 11) were using the automated revenue collection system. The share of active small and
               micro-taxpayers, who filed their declarations using the e-tax internet portal, increased from 69.3 percent in

                                                                                                                  Page 8 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RW Public Sector Governance P4R (P149095)



2014 to 99.6 percent in 2018 (exceeding the original target of 87). The time spent paying taxes (the IRI 1-1)
reduced from 113 hours per year in 2014, 95 hours in 2016 (Doing Business 2018), and 91 hours in 2018
(Doing Business 2020). The IRI 1-1 was designed to measure the efficiency of tax administration from the
taxpayers’ viewpoint and hence taxpayers’ voluntary compliance (PAD, p.23). In line with the IRIs, the DLI for
revenue performance was achieved: all 30 districts adopted the automated local government revenue
management system (exceeding the original target of 11).

Despite the substantial results, the outcome, as measured by a tax to GDP ratio, was partially achieved due
to problems on attribution. Tax to GDP ratio grew by 10.5 percent (or 1.5 percentage points), from 14.2
percent in 2012/13 to 15.7 percent in 2017/18 (less than half way to the original target of 17.4 percent). Many
factors influenced the tax to GDP ratio which could not be controlled by Program interventions. The original
target was set in line with the target in the IMF’s Policy Support Instrument (PSI). That level was subsequently
downgraded by the IMF to 15.9 percent in 2017, based on changing economic conditions and as a result of
the rebasing of past year revenue to GDP calculations in line with an analysis done by the National Institute of
Statistics of Rwanda (NISR). Rwanda achieved a tax to GDP ratio of 16.3 percent in 2015/16, which
exceeded the revised PSI target but was under the PDO indicator target (ICR, paras.36-37). PDO Indicator 1
was on track to meet the PSI target but not the 17.4 percent target set by the PAD.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improved Transparency and Accountability in the Use of Public Funds

Rationale
Rwanda faced challenges in enhancing transparency and accountability, as certain areas of the public
financial management had lagged. Increasing credibility of budget, modernizing public procurement,
improving external audit, and improving reporting capacity at the subnational level were essential to achieve
the objective. Activities for this objective focused on capacity development of government financial
management staff in the key areas.

There was a significant improvement in transparency and accountability as a result of the achievements in
implementation of reforms to planning, budgeting, and reporting of spending across all government entities
(ICR, pp.18-19). All of the IRIs were exceeded. The share of MDAs receiving unqualified audits increased
significantly from 32 percent in 2014 to 60 percent (exceeding the original target of 47 percent),
demonstrating a substantial improvement in compliance and accountability. The roll out and adoption of a
simplified accounting and financial reporting system (Subsidiary Entity Accounting System) in subsidiary
entities of districts was completed with the aim of ensuring that districts’ accounting and reporting through the
IFMIS adequately captured their subsidiary entities’ (that is, sectors’) financial information. By the end of the
project, the share of sectors using a simplified accounting and financial application reached 100 percent
(exceeding the original target of 80 percent). The gap between the annual budget and the budget predicted in
the second year of the MTEF was reduced from 20 percent in 2014 to 5 percent in 2018 (exceeding the
original target of 11 percent).


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RW Public Sector Governance P4R (P149095)



Five DLIs (DLIs 1, 3, 4, 5, and 6) were all obtained, reflecting systemic improvement in financial management
practices (ICR, para.43). DLIs 4 and 5 tracked the IRI relating to the increase in unqualified audits obtained
by MDA and improved financial reporting by subdistricts. There was significant advancement in e-
procurement. DLI 3 supported the adoption and rollout of e-Procurement not only in five piloting entities, but
also in all procuring entities. The increased use of feasibility studies in proposals for new large investment
projects in five pilot ministries (DLI 2) was also an important step in achieving value for money in public
procurement. The Program contributed to capacity development through increasing the number of
government PFM staff (including subnational governments) with at least foundation-level professional finance
qualifications from 294 (baseline), 665 in 2016/17 (exceeding the original target of 450), and 1,257 in 2017/18
(DLI 6).

Despite the significant progress in enhancing transparency and accountability, one target was only partially
achieved. The share of entities submitting monthly financial statements increased from 40 percent in 2014 to
98 percent in 2018 (exceeding the original target of 80 percent), however, they were not made public (ICR,
para.44 and p.31). It was agreed with the government of Rwanda and the supervision task team that
disclosure of monthly reports was not an appropriate measure of transparency or accountability since no
other country, including Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development countries, publicly issue
monthly budget reports. The government does publish an audited annual financial statement. Furthermore,
the achievements in e-procurement reforms enabled the e-Procurement system to provide information to the
public in searchable and machine-readable format; procurement bids and winners; and all advertisements.

*an “unqualified” audit opinion implies that financial statements presented are a true and fair reflection of the
transactions of the entity audited and that such transactions were in all material respects executed in
accordance with the relevant laws and regulations (Office of the Auditor General, Rwanda, 2012).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improved Quality and Accessibility of Development Data for Decision Making

Rationale
Timely production and dissemination of economic statistics and industrial surveys was a foundation to
enhance use of public data for decision making. In addition, capacity development of PFM staff was expected
to enhance use of data and surveys for decision making.

There was significant progress in enhancing production and accessibility of development data and surveys.
Two IRIs were achieved. The full 2014, 2015, and 2016 Seasonal Agriculture Surveys were conducted, the
reports were produced and disseminated. The NISR continued to conduct the survey on an annual basis and
publish on their website: https://www.statistics.gov.rw/datasource/seasonal-agricultural-survey. The first
national Labor Force Survey (LFS) 2016: August 2016 was conducted and disseminated in October 2017.
The government capacity to produce the LFS on a regular basis has been established, as evidenced by the



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW Public Sector Governance P4R (P149095)



  completion and publication of the LFS on NISR’s website: https://www.statistics.gov.rw/datasource/labour-
  force-survey-0. The LFS was conducted and published twice in 2017 and 2018 and four times in 2019.

  The Program supported increasing production and dissemination of economic statistics and extending the
  Open Data initiative to publish more surveys and administrative sources of National Archive Data. The
  Program also supported improving organizational development and statistical skills at NISR, as publishing the
  major surveys required to improve data quality and meet the methodological standards. The quantity of
  economic statistics produced and made available to policy makers and the public dramatically increased and
  fully met the target set out in DLI 7. By 2017/18, Rwanda produced essential indicators of economic
  performance, including quarterly GDP figures, trade statistics and Producer Price Indexes, and monthly
  Consumer Price Index measures (ICR, para.49). An increasing number of surveys and official data, including
  health indicators and micro-data on tracking poverty, became available as part of the Open Data Initiative, as
  per DLI 8.

  The objective was achieved. The share of MDAs using official statistics for analysis and current developments
  increased from 39 percent in 2012 (baseline) to 62.3 percent in 2016/17 (exceeding the formally revised
  target of 48 percent) (NISR User Satisfactio Survey Report 2016-2017, p.13). The Program promoted the
  data-driven approach and led to a greater reliance on evidence-based data during policy formulation at the
  Ministry of Agriculture (ICR, para.51). Similarly, statistical data were regularly utilized by the Ministry of
  Finance and Economic Planning when determining transfer formulas for block grants based on socio-
  economic indicators. Availability of the data in the government website and utilization of data for long and
  short term policy formulation as shown in the survey result and ICR indicate quality and accessibility of
  development data for decision making has been enhanced.



  Rating
  High




 OVERALL EFFICACY
 Rationale
 Given that the targets for all the DLIs were realized or exceeded, all IRIs were achieved exceeding their end
 targets, PDO Indicators 1 and 2 were rated Substantial, and PDO Indicator 3 was rated High, the ICR rates
 the overall efficacy as Substantial.



 Rating
 Substantial


5. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO for the government strategies and programs and the Bank strategy was High. Relevance
of DLIs was rated as Substantial. The results framework was generally adequate albeit with some deficiencies.

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW Public Sector Governance P4R (P149095)



There was a plausible link in most cases between outputs supported by the program and intended outcomes.
Overall relevance is rated as Substantial. Given the PDO was mostly achieved with minor shortcomings mainly
due to issues related to selection of indicators and attribution, efficacy is rated as Substantial.


    Outcome Rating
    Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

Risk is rated as Low. The Program’s achievements, which are linked to the government’s ongoing multiyear
strategic vision, are to be sustained due to the government strong ownership and substantial achievement of
outcomes and the DLIs exceeding expected targets in most cases. None of the fiduciary and technical risks
identified at appraisal seemed to have affected any stakeholder in achieving the expected targets (ICR,
paras. 82 &83). The government demonstrated strong ownership, commitment, and leadership in
implementing reforms before, during, and after the operation. Political stability and the strong endorsement
from the highest echelons of the government will most likely continue. While internal risks remain low, there
is concern over risks from the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated global economic recession.
Economic slowdown and fiscal management in responding to the crisis could risk some of the progress
made in increasing tax revenue collection and enhancing transparency and accountability in the use of public
funds.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This Program was one of the first Bank operations using the PforR lending instrument. The selection of
  instrument was appropriate, given that the government showed strong leadership and commitment to
  implement the PFM SSP, NSDS 2, and EDPRS 2. The Bank team was able to align the Program with
  Rwanda’s strategic priorities. At the same time, fluctuation in aid from development partners constrained
  the implementation of government expenditure programs. Therefore, the PforR instrument was expected
  to contribute to the predictability of budget financing, while anchoring disbursement against results
  achieved (ICR para.7).

  The operation's design built on experiences and lessons from the Bank’s engagement in public sector
  reforms in Rwanda for two decades. The Program built especially on the Bank’s 2013 Quality of
  Decentralized Service Delivery budget support operation, which focused on national/subnational PFM
  issues, including capacity building at the subnational level (PAD, paras.26-27). The Bank has also been
  one of the leading development partners in PFM and statistics, co-chairing the PFM Coordination Forum
  and serving as a core member of the Statistics Steering Committee. Consolidating the Bank’s
  engagements into the Program was expected to achieve greater results.

  The Program was also prepared to complement other ongoing and planned Bank operations, particularly
  on the fiduciary aspects of a planned development operation. Improved PFM, especially at the

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW Public Sector Governance P4R (P149095)



  subnational level, was sought to contribute to the Transformation of Agriculture Sector Program Phase 3
  PforR.

  The team carried out the detailed assessments on technical issues (PAD, Section 4), government
  programs (PAD, Annex B). These quality assessments provided the basis for the design of the program
  scope, interventions types, and the program action plan (PAP).

  The operation’s risks were adequately assessed, and overall the risks (technical and fiduciary) during
  implementation proved manageable.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team provided solid and constant support for the government to facilitate activities and resolve
 issues that arose. This PforR is the first governance PforR in Rwanda, and the Bank team justifiably went
 through a period of “learning by doing" (ICR, para. 80). The Program’s implementation arrangements were
 well thought out, and the Bank team worked closely with the key counterpart, the Ministry of Finance and
 Economic Planning, which played the coordination and monitoring roles during implementation. The Bank
 team paid close attention during supervision missions to the risks and most of the mitigation measures.
 Where relevant, the team made appropriate adjustments on risk ratings. The Bank helped the government
 ensure the successful implementation of the Program by adjusting DLI baseline/targets (except those
 related to revising PDO Indicators 1 and 2) during the restructuring to reflect the evolution of the
 government’s reform needs. However, the Bank team noted an important area in which they could have
 done more during the restructurings, which was adjustment in PDO Indicators 1 and 2. This review notes
 there was room to target the outcome that the Bank could influence and attribute through the interventions
 it undertook.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PforR chose to use the government M&E mechanism already established through EDPRS 2 and PFM
 SSP to the greatest extent possible and to augment the government’s effort to strengthen results-based
 development management (ICR para.72). The Program helped sharpen the results framework for the PFM
 SSP 2013–2018, strengthen statistical capacity in NISR and capacity of PFM staff at the national and

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW Public Sector Governance P4R (P149095)



 subnational levels, and supported the adoption of the planning and M&E policy and the manual and results-
 based management policy (PAP 1).

 Key areas the program supported were generally well-aligned with the PDO. The PAD presented the
 results framework and monitoring arrangements, with detailed indicators and target values, and
 identified the parties responsible for data collection. This review notes that the results framework (with
 three PDO indicators, eight IRIs, and eight DLIs covering two key areas of engagement) was appropriate
 and realistic and made it easy to monitor results. Nevertheless, as mentioned above, the PDO results
 indicators could have been better designed to monitor the progress in key activities (e.g., adopting the
 automated government revenue management system and submitting monthly financial statements) and
 results to achieve the project objectives.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E data of the Program were collected and analyzed in a consistent and regular fashion (ICR, para.75).
  This process could be further institutionalized by establishing a common methodology and periodic
  evaluations and a more robust arrangement with MDA to share M&E results.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E was data-driven and informed the decision-making process during implementation (ICR, para.76).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The PAD rates the Environmental and Social risks as Low. It was consistently rated as low during the entire
   project implementation. In November 2016, risk in Environment and Social issues was identified as
   Moderate (from Low in all previous years), but the ICR (para.77) does not provide any explicit justification
   for this change.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The PAD rates the Fiduciary risks as Substantial (PAD, p.46). As of July 2017, the overall risk rating of the
   Program was reduced from Substantial to Moderate primarily because of the reduction of fiduciary risks.
   As fiduciary risks became moderate over time, the ICR did not identify any compliance issues that had
   posed a threat to Program implementation (ICR, para.78).



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW Public Sector Governance P4R (P149095)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Poverty and shared prosperity. The Program did not directly impact poverty reduction and shared
   prosperity. Nonetheless, improvements contributed to the goals envisioned in EDPRS 2, i.e., accelerating
   private sector-led growth and reducing poverty (ICR, para.59). Rolling out IFMIS at the sector level made
   easier the consolidation of financial information at the district level, data security, and sector financial
   accountability. The PAD (p. 41) cited research by the Overseas Development Institute pointing to the
   eventual economic impact of PFM reforms: macroeconomic stability, service delivery enhanced by regular
   payment of salaries, and state building. However, the PforR results framework was not set up to measure
   these impacts since they go beyond the scope of the PDO.



d. Other
   None.



10. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


11. Lessons

The following are the key lessons from the ICR (pp.28-30) with some adjustment in language:

The prerequisite for the success of the PforR instrument is a well-developed reform program
that has been defined and is fully owned by the government. The national program shaped the
Program’s design by identifying areas in need of additional support with the World Bank’s value-
added engagement. The existence of a clear national program of work clearly delineated the
Program boundary.

The involvement of the Supreme Audit Institution in the verification protocol of DLIs can
increase accountability of the Program as long as the Supreme Audit Institution is
independent and the strong commitment to results is shared at the highest level of the
government. For Rwanda, the Office of the Auditor General conducted verification of all DLIs
except for one, which was related to an unqualified audit opinion. A dedicated team within the Office
of the Auditor General was established and conducted verification for the entire Program

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW Public Sector Governance P4R (P149095)



implementation period. This team had sufficient competence, institutional and behavioral
independence in relation to the executing agencies to carry out independent verification of DLI
results. Learning by doing served to strengthen ownership of Program results, provided added
clarity in the accountability for achieving results, and built institutional capacity.

PDO results indicators need to be closely connected to intermediate indicators and DLIs
through a robust Theory of Change. A well-structured results chain based on a set of logical and
achievable steps reflecting the PDO indicators and DLIs is essential to the success of the PforR.
Clear linkages between the PDO indicators, intermediate indicators, supporting DLIs, operation
interventions should be established and incorporated into the Program’s results framework as well
as operation interventions.

The success of the Program requires close and frequent monitoring and engagement and
greater supervision by the task team. The nature of the PforR enabled the Government of
Rwanda and World Bank to focus on technical issues rather than ICT procurement processes, which
typically consumes supervision of Investment Project Financing. The Program required enhanced
supervision in terms of the depth of technical expertise and the rigor of monitoring to support
achievement of the DLIs and PAPs.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  This Program was one of the first Bank operations using the PforR lending instrument and the first governance
  PforR in Rwanda. The Program achieved significant results in enhancing transparency and accountability. An
  assessment could also take a comparative look at Rwanda’s Agriculture PforR, approved in 2015. The lessons
  from the ground would be useful for other countries which may be considering use PforR.



13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a good description of key achievements and effectively highlights the shortcomings, or areas
that the Bank could do better, such as better linking the DLIs to the PDO indicators, and assesses the extent of
achieving outcomes in most cases.

The ICR could have suggested a higher level of ambition for DLI 5. In assessing the achievement of Objective
3, the ICR could have explained activities supported by the Program more clearly in improving “quality” of
development data for decision making. The ICR also has some discrepancies between data provided in the
main text and in the Annex tables (e.g., IRI 2.3 actual percentage achieved at completion, the unit of DLI2, and
the baseline of DLI6). In another example, the ICR (para. 58) mentions “There were no specific interventions
under the Program to foster gender issues…,” while later on (para. 79) it states that the Program did support



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW Public Sector Governance P4R (P149095)



gender initiatives. However, IEG notes that these discrepancies are relatively minor, and did not prevent IEG’s
validation of achievement of objectives.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 17
