     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESDP (P148560)



                                                                             Report Number: ICRR0022095

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P148560                                 ESDP

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Micronesia, Federated States of         Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H9570                               31-Jul-2018                                        12,480,007.28

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 29-May-2014                             30-Sep-2019

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         14,400,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                          13,849,107.05                                             0.00

 Actual                                      12,478,166.19                                             0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Ranga Rajan               Fernando Manibog            Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5)
   and the Project Appraisal Document (page 6) were:

   " To increase the available generation capacity and efficiency of electricity supply in the state power
   utilities, and to strengthen the planning and technical capacities of the recipient and the state power
   utilities in the energy sector "


                                                                                              Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESDP (P148560)



   This assessment is based on the three sub-objectives: (1) to increase the available generation capacity in the
   state power utilities: (2) to increase the efficiency of electricity supply in the state power utilities: and, (3) to
   strengthen the planning and the technical capacities of the national government and the state power utilities in
   the energy sector.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   There were three components (PAD, pages 6 -7).

   1. Increasing available generation capacity and efficiency of electricity supply in the state power
   utilities. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$9.2 million. The actual cost was US$9.1 million. This
   component aimed at financing activities to increase the available generation capacity and improve the
   efficiency of electricity supply in the state power utilities. There were two subcomponents. Sub-component
   One activities included: (i) acquisition and installation of new fuel-efficient gensets for the Pohenpei Utilities
   Corporation (PUC), the Kosrae Utility Authority (KUA) and the Yap State Public Service Corporation
   (YSPSC): (ii) acquisition and installation of equipment (capacitor banks, temperature compensated digital
   fuel meters and prepaid meters) for YSPSC: (iii) acquisition and installation of grid connected photovoltaic
   generators and upgrading the public street lighting system for the Chuuk Public Utility Corporation
   (CPUC). Sub-component Two activities aimed at capacity-building activities to improve the technical
   performance of the state utilities.

   Some new activities were added during implementation. These activities were: (i) transformer and
   switchgear upgrades for YSPSC: (ii) a new transformer, streetlighting, cash power meters and Supervisory
   Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) for KUA: (iii) rehabilitation of a diesel genset, energy assessments,
   maintenance for two gensets and SCADA for PUC: and, (iv) additional street lighting, cash power meters
   and photovoltaic system for CPUC.

   2. National and state energy planning. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$3.4 million. The actual
   cost was US$1.4 million. Activities in this component included: (i) preparing energy master plans for each
   state of the Federated States of micronesia (FSM) identifying and prioritizing energy sector infrastructure
   investments, (ii) undertaking feasibility studies and environmental and social impact assessments; and (iii)
   developing a national energy sector master plan to build on the master plans developed by each state.

   3. Technical assistance and project management. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.5 million.
   The actual cost was US$1.9 million. This component aimed at capacity building of the Energy Division of
   the National Department of Resources and Development (NDRD), and the Association of Micronesian
   Utilities for data collection, developing the Information Management System, implementing the national




                                                                                                        Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESDP (P148560)



   energy policy, broadening dialogue on sector reforms, and capacity building of the Energy Division for
   project coordination, management and monitoring.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


   Project cost. The estimated project cost at appraisal was US$14.4 million (including a contingency
   allowance of US$0.2 million). The actual cost was US$12.5 million.

   Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA grant of US$14.4 million. The amount disbursed at
   closure was US$12.5 million. The difference between the grant and the amount disbursed was partly due to
   exchange rate changes during implementation. US$550,000 of the grant could not be utilized, as delivery of
   new equipment in few cases could not be made by the closing date. The unspent funds were reallocated for
   another project within the IDA portfolio. There was parallel financing for complementary sector activities
   from the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the European Union (EU), Japan International Cooperation
   Agency (JICA), the United Nations Development Program (UNDP), and the European Investment Bank
   (EIB).

   Borrower contribution. None was planned at appraisal. There was no borrower contribution during
   implementation.

   Dates. The project was approved on May 29, 2014, and scheduled to close on July 31, 2018. After one
   extension, the project closed fourteen months behind schedule on September 30, 2019.

   Other changes. There were two Level 2 restructurings. The following changes were made through the first
   restructuring on July 19, 2018.

         The closing date was extended by fourteen months from July 31, 2018 to Sept 30,
          2019 to reallocate over US$1.5 million of unspent funds from Component Two activities to revised
          Component One activities, in view of the slow start to implementation in two state power utilities
          (CPUC and KVA).

   The unspent amount of US$550,000 was reallocated to another project under the IDA portfolio at the
   Government's request, through the second restructuring on September 24, 2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


Country context. The Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) in the Pacific Islands, is a federation of four
semi-autonomous states (Chuuk, Kosrae, Pohnpei and Yap), with each state having its own development
strategy, and the national government providing national vision. Economic activity in FSM was constrained

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ESDP (P148560)



               due to the extreme geographic dispersion and remoteness to markets. As in other Pacific Island countries,
               petroleum fuels are used in FSM mainly for electricity generation, and heavy dependence on imported fuel
               made the country highly vulnerable to petroleum price volatility and price shocks. The key issues of
               the FSM's electricity sector at appraisal included the following: (i) over-dependence of the sector on
               imported fuel; (ii) insufficient firm generation capacity to cover peak demand; (iii) unscheduled generation
               shutdowns causing widespread outages and rotational load shedding; (iv) limited use of renewable energy
               sources and financing constraints for investments in such sources; (v) outdated power infrastructure assets;
               (vi) tariffs that did not fully cover costs; and (vii) weak technical capacity to manage operations and plan
               new investments.

               Government strategy. Developing the energy sector was an important component of the government's
               Strategic Development Plan (SDP), that provided a road map for the country's social and economic
               development over twenty years (2004-2023). The National Energy Policy (NEP) adopted in 2012, had four
               primary components: policy and planning; conventional energy (fossil fuel); energy efficiency and
               conservation; and the development of renewable energy sources. The NEP aimed at increasing the share
               of renewable energy to 30% of energy supply by 2020. Each state had their own action plan for meeting the
               NEP goals.

               Bank strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2014-
               2017. The second theme of the CPS explicitly stated the need for improving energy sector
               infrastructure. The PDOs were consistent with the Bank's regional engagement strategy in the Pacific
               Islands. This strategy highlighted the need for strengthening capacities for improving service delivery and
               building resilience to external shocks. The PDOs were also in line with the Bank's corporate goals to end
               extreme poverty and shared prosperity, by facilitating FSM's efforts to improve power generation
               efficiency in the short run and providing cleaner and less expensive electricity in the medium term. The
               PDOs remain consistent with the Bank's current Regional Partnership Framework (RPF) for 2017-2021, for
               nine Pacific Island countries, including FSM. The framework prioritized areas of engagement including "
               improving electricity supply and efficiency, and setting the stage for increasing renewable energy".

               This was the first energy sector project financed by the Bank in FSM. The ICR (paragraph 28) states
               that although the PDOs were relevant, the PDOs could have been even more relevant, had the project
               activities included demand-side measures, rather than being limited to supply-side measures of increasing
               generation capacity. This review concludes that, given the weak implementation capacity of both the
               national government and the states,and given that this was the first energy sector project financed by the
               Bank in FSM, the overall level of ambition of the project was appropriate. The relevance of PDOs is rated
               as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ESDP (P148560)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective

To increase the available generation capacity in the state power utilities

Rationale
Theory of Change. The causal links between the project activities, their outputs and outcomes were logical,
and the intended outcomes were measurable. Installing new fuel-efficient gensets in the three state utilities
(KUA, PUC and YSPSC) would increase the capacity of new diesel-based generation, and this in turn can be
expected to increase the reserve margin generation required for reducing the duration and frequency of
power outages in the FSM states.

Outputs

        New gensets were installed in PUC, KUA and YSPSC.
        Conventional generation equipment was commissioned as targeted.
        Solar energy generation equipment was commissioned as targeted.
        Program to improve performance of the utilities, including capacity building and Operation and
         Maintenance (O$M) plans, was completed as targeted.

Outcomes

      Generation capacity from conventional sources in the four states, increased to 6.2 megawatts in 2019,
         relative to the baseline. This represented a 32% increase, compared to the target of 4.7 megawatts.
      Generation capacity from renewable energy (solar) sources, increased to 0.4 megawatts in 2019,
       relative to the baseline. This represented a 50% increase, compared to the target of 0.2 megawatts.
      62,632 electricity consumers in the residential, commercial, service and the government sectors,
       directly benefited from project activities. This represented a 25% increase, relative to the target of
       50,000 beneficiaries. 50% of the beneficiaries were women.

The ICR (paragraph 30) reports that the amount of additional capacity, which exceeded the original target for
two utilities (PUC ad CPUC), was lower than the original estimate for KUA, and was the same as the original
estimate for YPSC. The lower than expected cost of solar photovoltaic (PV) installation allowed for additional
capacity at the original budgeted cost. Each state met the generation N-1 criterion, with the increased reserve
margin of generation, which reduces the duration and frequency of power outages. Reliability of services
improved, most notably at PUC. In the PUC system, the System Average Interruption Duration Index
(SAIDI) was reduced from approximately 8,600 minutes per year to approximately 4,000 minutes per year.
The ICR notes that the benefits were the most evident in the case of PUC, where the new firm capacity
provided by the project was essential in helping solve a power supply crisis on Pohnpei island, which resulted
from a failure of all four of the previously operational gensets.

The outcomes exceeded the targets. Given that the outcomes could be directly attributable to the project, the
project's efficacy in achieving this objective is rated as High.



Rating

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ESDP (P148560)



High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the efficiency of electricity supply in the state power utilities.

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between the project activities, their outputs and outcomes were logical
and the intended outcomes were measurable. Installation of new gensets in the states, together with
installing capacitors, temperature compensated digital fuel meters and prepaid meters for YSPSC, and grid-
connected solar photovoltaic plants and upgrading street lighting for CPUC, were likely to improve the quality
and efficiency of the electric supply system and thereby aid in the long-term outcome of reducing the cost of
electricity through reduced fuel consumption and more efficient operations.

Outputs

        In addition to the three new gensets for the three utilities described above, other equipment such as
         capacitor banks, digital fuel meters and prepaid meters were installed in YSPSC, and grid-connected
         photovoltaic meters were installed in CPUC.
        2,733 energy-efficient streetlights were installed by the utilities. This represented 742% of the original
         target of 368 streetlights.

Outcomes

The efficiency improvements were expected to come from network efficiency benefits associated with new
diesel generation, increase in capacity for solar energy, and energy savings resulting from the installation and
operation of more efficient street lighting. The outputs described above were expected to generate a project
lifetime savings of 124 megajoules. The projected savings substantially exceeded the original target, with an
updated estimate of 915 megajoules over a ten-year time, using initial operational results.

Another criterion for measuring the efficiency of electric supply, due to the improvement in the system-level
fuel intensity, is Kilowatt generated per gallon (KW/gallon). Data generated by PUC showed a 25.8%
improvement (from 11.48 KW/gallon in 2014 to 14.45 KW/gallon in 2019), and data provided by YSPSC
showed a 11.4% improvement (from 14.46 KW/gallon in 2014 to 16.44 KW/gallon in 2019). The ICR notes
that updated operational data are still awaited from the other two utilities, as the relevant generating plans
were just commissioned recently.

The outcomes far exceeded the targets and given the likely attribution of outcomes to the project's activities,
the project's efficacy in achieving this objective is rated as High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ESDP (P148560)




Objective
To strengthen the planning and the technical capacities of the national government and the state power
utilities in the energy sector.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The links between the project activities, their outputs, and their outcomes were logical
and the causal chain was clear. Capacity building of the national government and each state for preparing
master plans, of the Energy Division of the National Department of Resources and Development and the
Association of Micronesian Utilities (AMU) for data collection, utility bench-marking, and the program to
improve technical performance, were all aimed at strengthening the planning capability of the national
government and the state utilities. The combination of the investment activities described above, and the
capacity building activities were likely to contribute to the long-term development objective, of improving
the delivery of electricity services that is reliable, affordable and less vulnerable to the volatility in fossil fuel
prices.

Outputs.

The following outputs were completed as targeted.

      Energy sector master plans were approved in each state, and the national sector master plan
        that would build on the state energy plans was developed.
      The energy sector information system was completed. The master plans are now being used by the
       utilities, the National Department of Resources and Development (NDRD), and the various donors for
       planning future investments. The models, inputs and calculations that have been provided to the FSM
       counterparts are designed to be regularly updated. The modelling exercise showed that the needed
       transformation would be achieved mainly by adding a large amount of solar PV capacity (plus storage)
       to reduce reliance on diesel and providing increased access (including mini-grids on outlying islands).
      Technical assistance was provided for capacity building of the Energy Division of the National
       Department of Resources and Development and the Association of Micronesian Utilities for data
       collection, utility bench-marking and conducting policy dialogue, as targeted.

Outcomes.

      The sustainability program was agreed with each power utility as targeted.

The key outcome indicator was reported as realized, but there was no beneficiary survey or other
measurement instrument when the project closed in September 30, 2019, that could provide tangible and
credible evidence on the extent to which the technical assistance provided by the project, did contribute to
strengthening the planning and technical capacities of the national government and the state power utilities.

According to the information provided subsequently by the team, the Bank conducted an interview-style
survey at the end of June 2020, with the leaders of the four state utilities, to evaluate the planning and
technical capacities of the national government and the power utilities. The main conclusions of the survey
were: (i) The planning capacities of the national government and utilities were strengthened and the
government and utilities were promoting the implementation of the Master Plan, prepared under the project in
a coordinated and effective manner: (ii) The facilities constructed under the project are now being operated
and maintained by the strengthened technical capacities of the utilities: and (iii) The government and the


                                                                                                          Page 7 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                ESDP (P148560)



                            utilities had made the necessary effort to maintain and improve capacity through providing continuous
                            opportunities for training staff.

                            In light of the additional evidence provided by the team through the survey with utility leaders, the project's
                            efficacy in achieving this objective is rated as High.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy of the three sub objectives were rated as High. The overall efficacy is rated as High.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



          5. Efficiency


   Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted for activities associated with Component One
   activities, which accounted for 76% and 49% of the costs at appraisal and at closure respectively. The economic
   benefits were assumed to come from better and more economic delivery of electricity services, reducing
   petroleum fuel imports, and reducing FSM's vulnerability to volatile fuel price and supply risks. The methodology
   used at closure used updated operational data reflective of the utility system as a whole. The updated Net
   Present Value (NPV) at 12% percent discount rate was US$5.93 million at closure, as compared to the NPV of
   US$5.03 million at appraisal. The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 28.8%, compared to the
   ex ante EIRR of 25.5%.

   Financial analysis. A financial analysis was conducted to determine the financial viability of the investments.
   The investments were expected to have a significant positive impact on the financial position of the four utilities
   through reducing operating costs. The financial NPV at closure was US$5.34 million, as compared to the NPV of
   US$5.16 million at appraisal, and the ex post Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) was 27.5%, as compared
   to the ex ante FIRR of 25.8%.

   Administrative and operational issues. There was a slow start to project implementation, with regard
   installing new generating capacities at KUA and the CPUC. There were implementation delays, due
   to inadequate staffing of the implementing agency during much of the implementation period, due partly to the
   extreme remoteness of the locations and challenges associated with recruiting qualified personnel. These

                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ESDP (P148560)



delays contributed to the 14-month extension of the closing date (while noting positively the additional time was
also used to apply the cost savings from Component Two activities to provide additional equipment for the
utilities).

Efficiency is rated as substantial given the achieved rates of return, while noting the administrative and
operational shortcomings during implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?               Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         76.00
 Appraisal                                                   25.50
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         49.00
 ICR Estimate                                                28.80
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



The relevance of the PDOs to the government and Bank strategy is rated as High. With efficacy ratings for the
three sub objectives rated as High, overall efficacy is High. Efficiency is rated as substantial. In line with the
Bank's ICR preparation guidelines, these sub-ratings lead to an overall project outcome rating of Highly
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



Financial risk. There is financial risk to the long-term viability of the power sector, given that the electricity
tariffs do not fully cover costs in the four state utilities.



                                                                                                          Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESDP (P148560)



Technical risk. The ICR (paragraph 63) notes that high-speed mobile gensets provided under the project
are not designed for long-duration prime mover demands, and would need to be replaced quickly. The ICR
notes that a follow-on project aims to address this issue by providing 7.5 megawatts of medium speed
gensets for PUC, that would help ensure reliable long-term operation.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  As the first energy sector project financed by the Bank in FSM, the project was based on the Bank's
  experience of designing energy sector projects in other Pacific Island countries. Lessons incorporated at
  design included responding to the national and state priorities of improving the performance of power
  utilities in the short term and diversifying the energy mix in the medium run to reduce reliance on
  petroleum imports, deliberately keeping the design simple in view of the weak implementation capacity,
  and funding key operational and technical positions for supporting the implementing agency. The
  implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the Energy Division of the National Department of
  Resources and Development (NDRD) responsible for project implementation, and a Centralized
  Implementation Unit in NDRD responsible for addressing fiduciary and safeguards issues. Several risks
  were identified at appraisal, including a high risk associated with lack of technical capacity. Mitigation
  measures included a technical assistance component. With mitigation measures, the project risk was
  rated as substantial at appraisal. (PAD, paragraph 35). The arrangements made at appraisal for
  safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10). There
  were shortcomings in M&E (discussed in section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Twelve Implementation Status and Results Reports were archived during the project lifetime, implying
 twice a year supervision missions. Given the cost savings realized during implementation, the supervision
 team aided by adding additional components for Component One, and allocated the unspent amount of
 this loan at closure to another project in the IDA portfolio at the Government's request. The support
 provided by the team aided in safeguards compliance (discussed in section 10).

 The ICR provides no details on the continuity of leadership during implementation. According to the
 Borrower's ICR provided in the Annex, there were deficiencies in the Bank performance with respect to
 procurement of several goods and consulting services, which contributed to delays during implementation.




                                                                                                  Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESDP (P148560)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Energy Division of the National Department of Resources and Development (NDRD) was in charge of
 monitoring project performance. The results framework was clear and the key outcome indicators (increase
 in generation capacity with increased reserve margin of generation, project lifetime savings, and the
 number of electricity consumers benefiting from the project activities) were appropriate for monitoring
 performance Component One activities. The targets were clearly specified.

 Given that technical assistance was an important component of the project, the M&E framework could have
 included a beneficiary survey, to assess the extent and the specific ways in which the institutional
 strengthening and capacity building benefited the project stakeholders.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR notes that the required data for monitoring performance was simple to collect and generally
  coincided with milestones (such as the installation of key equipment).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was utilized for monitoring project performance. The first restructuring was based on
  M&E data. This provided stakeholders with a timely picture of the progress of the project on the ground.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


   The project was classified as a Category B project under the World Bank's safeguard policies.
   Six safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural




                                                                                                 Page 11 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ESDP (P148560)



  Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Involuntary
  Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), and Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37).

  The PAD (page 28) notes that the expected environmental impacts of investments that were known at
  appraisal, were expected to be minor. An Environment Management Plan (EMP) was prepared and publicly
  disclosed at appraisal for these activities. Although Component Two activities of preparing the national plan
  did not entail infrastructure investments, an Environmental and Social Impact Framework (ESIF), an EMP
  and a Resettlement Plan were to be prepared during implementation. The ICR (paragraph 56) notes that an
  ESIF and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared during implementation.

  The ICR (paragraph 56) notes that there was overall safeguards compliance, and that there were no issues
  associated with environmental safeguards and safeguards on natural habitats, physical cultural resources,
  forests, involuntary resettlement and safety of dams during implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


  Financial management. Financial management arrangements were centralized in the National
  Department of Resources and Development (NDRD). A financial assessment conducted at appraisal
  concluded that the arrangements were satisfactory. Financial management risk was rated as substantial at
  appraisal, in view of the weak implementation capacity (PAD, paragraph 25). The ICR (paragraph 57)
  notes that there was overall compliance with financial management. However, the ICR provides no details
  on the quality of audits.

  Procurement. A procurement assessment was conducted at appraisal. The procurement risks identified at
  appraisal included, lack of procurement and technical capacity, possibility of low participation by bidders,
  and lack of proper cost estimates. The mitigation measures adopted at design included hiring a qualified
  procurement advisor and technical consultants, and developing a packaging strategy to attract participation
  from international bidders. A procurement plan was prepared at appraisal to address procurement issues
  (PAD, page 25).

  The ICR does not report any cases of mis-procurement. However, there were procurement issues (such as
  delays in the hiring of advisors) during implementation and a full-time procurement manager was never
  hired as envisioned at appraisal.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---



                                                                                                 Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ESDP (P148560)



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language:

1. A targeted holistic package of support can be beneficial in small island contexts.
The concept note of this project identified issues in the power sector in FSM, which seemed to be
common to small island states such as high cost of imported fuel, tariffs not reflective of costs, and
inadequate technical and managerial capacity. The lesson is that providing support for purchase of
critical equipment linked to improving efficiency of electric supply and capacity building for key
institutions, can be useful in small island states.

2. A centralized implementation unit for addressing fiduciary and safeguards issues, can be
useful in countries with limited capacity for implementing Bank-financed projects. A
centralized unit set up during implementation of this project aided in working effectively to address
such issues.

3. Demand-side issues need to be included for an effective sustainable energy strategy. The
activities in this project addressed supply side and institutional strengthening issues, given the weak
implementation capacity. As the first energy sector project in FSM, a lesson is that future projects
should also consider incorporating demand-side issues in the energy sector.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and provides a convincing account of the implementation challenges. It candidly
discusses the issues associated with staffing key positions. The ICR gives adequate evidence for efficacy and
draws reasonably good lessons from the experience of implementing this project.



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESDP (P148560)



The ICR's original evidence was inadequate to support a High rating for PDO3. For both accountability and
lesson-learning purposes, it would have useful to include in the ICR all the necessary supporting evidence,
instead of providing it separately after the ICR had already been widely reviewed. The information provided in
the ICR on Bank supervision is sparse. It is not clear whether there was continuity of team leadership on the
part of the Bank. The ICR also does not provide enough information on the quality of audits.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
