     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Volta Basin SAP Implementation (P149969)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0022113

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P149969                                   Volta Basin SAP Implementation

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Western Africa                            Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)             Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16611,TF-A0184                         31-Aug-2019                                         4,338,063.85

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 21-May-2015                               31-Aug-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            10,700,000.00                                10,700,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              8,070,405.00                                 4,338,063.85

 Actual                                          4,338,063.85                                 4,338,063.85




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Katharina Ferl             Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 16) and the Financing Agreement of August 17, 2015
   (p.6) the objective of the project was “to improve the capacity of the Volta Basin Authority (VBA) for
   transboundary water resources management”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                               Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Volta Basin SAP Implementation (P149969)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component 1: Water Charter Development for Volta River Basin (appraisal estimate US$1.99 million,
   actual US$1.97 million): This component was to finance the development of a Water Charter which was to
   specify roles and responsibilities of riparian countries with regard to water resources use, strengthen the
   underpinning of VBA to promote coordinated and harmonized water policies in the Basin and define guiding
   principles for improved water resources development and management for the basin such as better
   integration of Integrated Water Resource Management (IWRM) where trans-boundary resources are
   concerned. The Water Charter’s objectives were to: (i) facilitate dialogue and cooperation among member
   States in the planning and implementation of programs and projects that affect water resources; (ii)
   strengthen solidarity and promote sub-regional integration and economic cooperation among Member
   States; (iii) specify the regulations for utilization of water resources of the basin; (iv) specify the regulations
   on the preservation and protection of the environment, especially those relating to water quality; (v)
   strengthen collaboration on flood management and defining the modalities for exchanging hydro-
   meteorological data and flood information; and (vi) define the modalities for participation of water users in
   decision making on management of the water resources of the Volta basin.

   Component 2: Facilitating Dialogue, Communication and Project Monitoring (appraisal estimate
   US$1.26 million, actual US$0.52 million): This component was to finance the development of a
   Communications Strategy and Plan which was to serve as the guiding document for improving coordination
   and collaboration among all relevant stakeholders; and on information sharing on current and planned
   projects in the Basin. A stakeholder assessment was to be conducted as part of the development of the
   Communications Strategy and Plan. The component was also to support activities related to participation in
   the International Waters Learning Exchange and Resource Network (IW-Learn).

   Component 3: Implementation of Strategic Action Program of Priority Actions (SAP) (appraisal
   estimate US$6.9 million, actual US$1.22 million): This component was to finance the development of
   projects that were to lead to improvements in water quality, flows and ecosystem services. Priority actions
   were to include restoration of flows through river bank rehabilitation, reversal of vegetation degradation
   through reforestation and enhancing of agricultural practices through water-conserving techniques.
   Furthermore, priority actions were also to include funding for feasibility studies, consultations, capacity
   building and awareness-raising at the national and local levels and M&E.

   This component consisted of three sub-components:

   Sub-component 3.1: Reforestation: This sub-component was to finance reforestation in Benin, Cote
   d’Ivoire, Ghana and Togo, building priority actions based on SAP Actions B.4 (to design and implement a
   regional program for the protection and restoration of the river banks and gallery forests upstream of Lake
   Volta) and B.7 (preserve and restore ecosystems of the Pendjari-Oti region), which highlighted the
   degraded forest ecosystems in these countries.




                                                                                                        Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Volta Basin SAP Implementation (P149969)



   Sub-component 3.2: River Bank Protection: This sub-component was to finance river bank protection
   in Burkina Faso, corresponding to SAP Action A.2 (protect all the springs that contribute to the permanent
   flow of the Mouhoun River), which were to address challenges to the water levels of the tributaries of the
   Mouhoun River, one of the key streams of the Volta, and situated in the western region of Burkina Faso.

   Sub-component 3.3. Development of Market Gardens: This sub-component was to correspond to Action A.3
   (develop irrigation infrastructure in the Sourou Basin) and was to be implemented in Mali. Small market
   gardens were to be developed using water conserving techniques showcasing alternate forms of irrigation
   applicable for the Sahel.

   Component 4: Project Management (appraisal estimate US$0.79 million, actual US$0.53 million): This
   component was to finance the strengthening of the management and internal processes of the VBA. Also,
   this component was to provide support to the Project Coordinating Unit (PCU) to implement the project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$10.94 million at appraisal; the actual cost was
   US$4.42 million. US$2.63 million was cancelled and US$3.34 million was undisbursed.

   Financing: The project was financed by a Trust Fund in the amount of US$7.2 million of which US$2.36
   million was disbursed and a Trust Fund of US$3.5 million of which US$1.98 million was disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$240,000 of which US$78,446 was disbursed.

   Dates: The project was restructured on January 15, 2019 to: (i) reduce the number of direct beneficiaries
   from 50,000 to 6,000; (ii) revise the second intermediate indicator from “surface area forested” to “surface
   area reforested” and increase the target from 150 hectares to 200 hectares; (iii) reduce the river protection
   in Burkina Faso from 10 kilometers to five kilometers, finance the provision of material supplies and training
   to 90 farmers to improve productivity instead of developing 50 hectares of irrigation and change from
   financing reforestation to the protection of trees; and (iv) reduce the project cost by US$2.63 million, which
   was cancelled.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 1) the Volta is a shared river basin connecting the West African countries of
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, Mali and Togo, covering a surface area of about 400,000 km2
and extending 1,850 km north-south. The riparian countries of the Volta are characterized by economic
differences and disparities of growth that are influenced by several factors such as climate and its impact on
natural resources. Burkina Faso and Ghana have the largest share of the basin, with 43 percent and 42
percent respectively, followed by Togo with six percent. Benin, Cote d’Ivoire and Mali have smaller shares.
At the time of project appraisal, the total riparian population was estimated at 91 million inhabitants, of
which 20 million live in the basin itself. Also, the Volta River basin has substantial economic importance for
the diverse countries that share the water resource. However, the riparian countries have not taken

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Volta Basin SAP Implementation (P149969)



               advantage of the Volta River basin to meet their demands for reducing poverty and increasing economic
               growth. For example, the riparian countries are all facing energy shortages and growing power demand,
               which is hampering their economic performance. While an important portion of the energy that fuels the
               economy in some of the riparian countries came from hydroelectric dams within the basin, the remaining
               hydropower potential of the river was underdeveloped. Agriculture was the main economic activity, the main
               employer, and a key engine for growth in the basin. However, it was estimated that at the time of appraisal
               less than 50 percent of the potential irrigable lands of the basin (estimated at 1,487,000 ha) were utilized.

               Given the importance of coordinated management of the shared resources of the Volta and the need to
               harmonize policies across the many institutions that were mandated with management of trans-boundary
               water resources, the six riparian countries established the Volta Basin Authority (VBA) in 2009. Adopting
               the principles of integrated water resources management (IWRM) was one of the overarching goals of all
               riparian countries as well as of the VBA as a basin-wide organization. However, the current institutional
               arrangements did not adequately allow members states to honor their commitments to the ABV on time. It
               was critical to address the VBA’s many capacity needs at the regional, national and sub-national level such
               as insufficient knowledge, unreliable data and absence of tools to support decision-making.

               The project supported the Cooperation in International Waters in Africa (CIWA)’s objective of strengthening
               cooperative water resources management and development to enable sustainable, climate resilient
               economic growth in the region. Also, since the project aimed to strengthen the institutional capacity of the
               VBA it was aligned with the objectives of the International Waters Learning Exchange and Resource
               Network (IW-Learn).

               Furthermore, the objective of the project was in line with the Bank’s most recent Benin Country Partnership
               Framework (FY2019-FY2023), the Systematic Country Diagnostic Development priority 3 “building
               resilience to economic and climatic shocks”, Togo’s Country Partnership Framework (FY2017-FY2020) and
               its focus area 3 “environmental sustainability and resilience” and focus area 4 “promoting sustainable
               management of territory, the environment, and living standards.” The objective also supported strategic
               priorities of the Bank’s Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy (FY2018-FY2023), which
               included collective action on: (i) public goods and externalities from the management of transnational
               resources; (ii) natural disasters and adapting to climate change; (iii) resilience to shocks; (iv) strengthening
               the continent’s resilience to climate change impacts on its natural and physical capital and human and
               social capital; and (v) sustainable management of trans-boundary waters.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the capacity of the Volta Basin Authority (VBA) for trans-boundary water resources management:

                                                                                                                          Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Volta Basin SAP Implementation (P149969)




Rationale
The project’s theory of change linked the delivery of outputs--such as the drafting and validating of the water
draft by member states, the endorsement of the water charter by council of ministers, the consultation with
500 stakeholders during the development of the communications plan and the validation of the
communication plan--with the outcome of improving the capacity of the VBA for trans-boundary water
resources management. Also, the project’s theory of change linked the same outcome with input activities
including the implementation of SAP priority actions in trans-boundary zones, such as the reforestation of 150
hectares to conserve ecosystem functioning, the protection of riverbank and development of infrastructure
irrigation as well as improving the capacity to deliver the VBA’s mandate.

The project assumed that Bank-executed Institutional Assessment activity would be completed by the start of
the project to effectively influence design of Component 1 and 2. Also, the project assumed that the
successful implementation of SAP priority actions would demonstrate an improvement of VBA capacity.

Outputs:

      An action plan to implement findings of institutional assessment was developed and validated by
         member countries, achieving the original target. According to the ICR (p. 17) as part of this
         assessment a legal and institutional diagnostic analysis was conducted. Also, workshops were held to
         validate the analysis.
        Water charter was drafted and validated by member states, achieving the original target. Officials
         were trained to support the water charter ratification process and developed three appendices for the
         implementation of the water charter. These appendices included: (i) duties, composition, organization,
         and functioning of the organs created by the water charter; (ii) the prior notification of planned
         measures; and (iii) the procedure for producing, collecting, exchanging, and utilizing data and
         information.
        Communications strategy and plan were developed and validated by member countries, achieving the
         original target. Also, the project established National Focal Structures (NFSs), and implemented a
         VBA human resources capacity study. According to the ICR (p. 19) NFSs are formal channels
         between the VBA and the line ministries responsible for water in the countries. The NFSs will facilitate
         VBA interventions.
        500 stakeholders were consulted during the development of the communications plan, achieving the
         target of 500.
        Priority actions were not implemented in the trans-boundary areas of the Volta River basin, not
         achieving the target of six priority actions being implemented.
        No area was reforested, not achieving the target of 200 hectares being reforested.
        200 Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) in the basin countries were trained on ecosystem
         management.

Outcomes:

The ICR did not mention any outcomes.




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 13
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Volta Basin SAP Implementation (P149969)




                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of the objective was rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                              Primary Reason
                            Modest                                               Insufficient evidence


   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   The PAD (p. 95) conducted a cost-benefit analysis. The PAD stated that several benefits could not be quantified
   because of lack of usable data. As a result, these were not taken into account in the determination of the
   project’s economic rate of return. These benefits included mainly environmental (such as carbon credits), non-
   timber benefits such as hunting and biodiversity/ecological protection benefits, which represented returns of
   significant value for the project. The economic analysis included priority actions under component 3.

   The analyses covered 25 years, including four years of project implementation and only considered quantifiable
   benefit and cost streams. The financial viability of productive investments and the economic attractiveness of the
   project at the basin level were verified through the computation of Net Present Values (NPVs) and Economic
   Internal Rates of Return (EIRR) and their comparison with the associated capital investment and the opportunity
   cost of World Bank funds, estimated at 12 percent.

   The analysis calculated a NPV of about US$2,279,000 and an overall EIRR estimated at 21 percent indicating
   that the investments under component 3 were to be worthwhile.

   However, the activities were ultimately not implemented and activities under component 1 and 2 were
   not included in the PAD’s analysis. The ICR did not include an economic analysis.

   Operational efficiency:

   The ICR (p. 20) stated that the activities under components 1 and 2 were implemented efficiently and within the
   planned budget. The communication strategy and plans in addition to the action plan were delivered at 41
   percent of the approved budget. However, out of the original project cost of US$10.9 million only US$4.42
   million was disbursed. Also, the project experienced several implementation delays due to the security situation
   in Burkina Faso, a lengthy restructuring process of 15 months (from November 2017 to January 2019), and




                                                                                                                         Page 6 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Volta Basin SAP Implementation (P149969)



weak procurement and financial management capacity, which all resulted in the reduction of the scope of
component 3.

The overall efficiency rating is Negligible.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?          Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objective was High given its alignment with several Bank Country Partnership Frameworks for
riparian countries. Efficacy was Modest. Efficiency was Negligible. The project’s overall outcome
is Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional: According to the ICR (p. 32) the project design aimed to strengthen the capacity of the
VBA. However, this was not fully achieved since the activities under component 3 were not
implemented. Capacity that was built will need to be sustained after project closure.

Financial: Also, member countries have been investing into the VBA since 2007 and are awaiting tangible
outcomes for their investments. Since activities under component 3 were not implemented, no tangible
outcomes were produced. The project successfully developed the water charter, thus making it essential to
maintain multi-country collaboration among the six member countries in order to implement and achieve the
expected impacts of the water charter following its ratification. Additional budget support by member
countries will be critical to implement the remaining processes.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Volta Basin SAP Implementation (P149969)



Political: The project experienced a delay in becoming effective due to the political instability in Burkina
Faso. Political instability might occur again in any of the member countries and make trans-boundary
collaboration challenging.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (p. 29) the project was based on VBA’s and member countries’ priorities. The Bank
  team identified relevant risks such as weak capacity in procurement and financial management.
  However, the risk related to the implementation of the priority actions under component 3 was not
  identified such as weak capacity within VBA to deliver the priority actions and address the resettlement
  and land acquisition issues in Burkina Faso. Also, mitigation measures such as providing technical
  assistance for weak capacity in procurement and financial management were not sufficient and resulted
  in implementation delays.

  The project design had several shortcomings: (i) the implementation plan was complex and VBA did not
  have sufficient capacity to implement this plan. According to the ICR (p. 25) staff assigned to the
  implementation of the project also had to fulfill their daily tasks and therefore had very little time for the
  implementation of the project; (ii) the four year duration of the project was short given that actions under
  component 3 required feasibility studies which had to be conducted before the implementation of the
  priority actions; (iii) several shortcomings in regards to M&E such as inadequate definition of indicators
  and poor timing of planned achievement of targets (see section 9a for more details); (iv) insufficient
  planning for the risks related to the land acquisition and compensation of the riverbank restoration action
  in Burkina Faso.

  Also, the ICR (p. 23) stated that the Terms of Reference (ToR) for the feasibility studies, necessary for
  the implementation of the six priority actions under component 3, were not prepared before project
  implementation. The ICR (p. 30) stated that three of the six sites of the priority actions including Mali were
  not visited. Also, the feasibility studies were to be conducted in the early phase of project
  implementation. However, due to absence of certain specialists within the VBA, the procurement process
  only started six months after the beginning of project implementation. This resulted in implementation
  delays.

  Furthermore, according to the ICR (p. 30) the allocated budget for the irrigation development (feasibility
  studies and development of irrigation) in Mali was likely insufficient.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                       Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Volta Basin SAP Implementation (P149969)



 The Bank team (March 30, 2020) stated that the Bank conducted only six implementation support
 missions. While the Bank also conducted videoconferences and trainings with the VBA to support project
 implementation, it seems that this was not sufficient given the VBA’s weak capacity. Also, according to the
 ICR (p. 25) the project experienced a high turnover of Task Team Leaders (TTLs) (five TTLs during four
 years of project implementation), resulting in lack of continuity and proactivity.

 The ICR (p. 31) stated that the Bank team repeatedly raised the capacity challenges to the Bank’s
 management team but no action was taken until the Mid-Term Review in November 2017 when a
 restructuring of the project was recommended. The project restructuring started in November 2017 and
 lasted until January 2019 due to member countries being invested in the priority actions and finding it
 challenging to agree on the scope of component 3. This lengthy process resulted in the cancellation of
 activities, such as support to smallholder farmers in Mali, and had a negative impact on the implementation
 of component 3.

 However, according to the ICR (p. 31) even though the project’s scope was reduced, the challenges of
 weak capacity in the VBA remained. The ICR stated that the Bank only allowed the VBA to hire two staff
 funded by the project but did not approve of hiring additional staff even though the VBA did not have
 sufficient funds to do so by itself. Also, according to the ICR (p. 31) the Bank’s implementation support was
 not sufficient for the challenges faced in regards to the component 3 investments. These challenges
 included, according to the Bank team (March 30, 2020), the lack of feasibility studies for sub-projects under
 component 3. Also, the ICR (p. 31) stated that the weak capacity of the VBA was partly due to the limited
 support of its member states such as financial contributions being delayed and at times only partially paid.

 Furthermore, the project also faced several M&E challenges. For example, the ICR (p. 28) stated that the
 project did not consistently use the M&E system to monitor implementation progress. Also, the wording in
 the Results Framework was not modified even though the wording of the intermediate outcome indicator
 “area reforested” was changed to “area protected due to awareness raising among the local population on
 the potential risks of deforestation.”



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s objective was clearly specified. The project’s theory of change and how outputs would lead to
 the intended outcomes were logical. However, while some indicators included in the Results Framework
 were clearly linked to the PDO such as PDO indicator 1 “action plan to implement findings of institutional
 assessment developed and validated by member countries”, PDO indicator 2 “number of direct
 beneficiaries” was not. Also, some intermediate outcome indicators such as the second intermediate



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Volta Basin SAP Implementation (P149969)



 outcome indicator “number of priority actions implemented in Volta Basin transboundary zones” did not
 measure adequately how project activities contributed to the PDO.

 The project’s M&E functions were to be carried out by the VBA and a M&E specialist was to be hired.
 According to the ICR (p. 27) the project’s target were overly ambitious for a four-year project especially
 since the project included activities such as feasibility studies, nursery production for trees and the
 development of an irrigation scheme. Also, the Results Framework did not include milestones that would
 have allowed for monitoring progress throughout implementation instead, most indicators were to be
 achieved during the last year of implementation.



b. M&E Implementation
  During the project restructuring in January 2019 the Results Framework was modified as follows: i) the
  second intermediate indicator was revised from “surface area forested” to “surface area reforested” and
  the target was increased from 150 hectares to 200 hectares; and ii) the river protection Burkina Faso was
  reduced from 10 kilometers to five kilometers, and the provision of material supplies and training for 90
  farmers to improve productivity was financed while the development of 50 hectares of irrigation and
  change from financing reforestation to the protection of trees was cancelled. However, the ICR (p. 27)
  stated that the project restructuring was not sufficiently used to modify indicators and to make the Results
  Framework a more useful tool to monitor progress towards the PDO.

  According to the ICR (p. 27) the VBA had no M&E specialist and the M&E plan, as outlined in the project
  execution manual, was not fully implemented. Also, while the VBA submitted M&E plans to the Bank
  before supervision missions, M&E reports were not produced on a regular basis.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p. 27) stated that the M&E system was not continuously used to track progress towards the
  PDO or to inform decision-making. While the project used M&E activities such as feedback validation
  workshops for outputs in the basin countries under component 1, implementation progress of component
  3 was not sufficiently tracked.

  According to the ICR (p. 28) the project conducted ad hoc M&E activities with email reminders being
  sent to the coordinator or consultant responsible for tasks to take required actions.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environment Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP/BP 4.36 (Forests), OP/BP 4.09 (Pest

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 13
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Volta Basin SAP Implementation (P149969)



  Management); Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), and OP/BP 7.50 (Project on International
  Waterways). According to the ICR (p.28) the project developed an Environmental and Social Management
  Framework (ESMF) for the infrastructure and physical activities, which were to be financed by the project.
  However, since the restructuring stopped these activities, these plans were made redundant. According to
  the Bank team (March 30, 2020) the project also prepared a Pest and Pesticides Management Plan (PPM)
  and a Resettlement Framework Plan (RFP). The VBA did not hire environmental and social safeguards staff
  as planned. The ICR (p. 28) stated that this had a negative impact on the implementation of component 3,
  especially for the Burkina Faso riverbank protection, which included a social evaluation.

  According to the Bank team (March 30, 2020), the project complied with all triggered safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  According to the ICR (p. 28) the project had adequate financial management arrangements. The project’s
  financial management rating was Satisfactory throughout its implementation. However, between May and
  project closing in August 2019 the rating was downgraded to Moderately Satisfactory due to the project
  accountant resigning and several commitments still being active and expenditures still outstanding. The
  ICR stated that the financial audit was completed satisfactorily within the grace period. According to the
  Bank team (March 30, 2020) the external auditor’s opinions were unqualified.

  Procurement:

  According to the PAD (p. 23) weak fiduciary capacity was identified as the main risk at project
  appraisal. The ICR (p. 29) stated that the Bank tried to mitigate this risk by: (i) strengthening the capacity
  of the Direction of Administration and Finances (DAF); (ii) providing procurement training to key members
  of the evaluation committee; (iii) using the Bank’s standard bidding documents, requests for proposals, and
  evaluation reports; iv) developing a project implementation manual which defines administrative
  procedures for procurement processes; and v) publishing procurement notices in local and well-known
  newspapers and the VBA webpage. However, the mitigation measures were not sufficient. According to
  the ICR (p. 29) the project experienced several procurement related delays due to lack of procurement
  capacity, which had a negative impact on project implementation. The ICR (p. 29) stated that procurement
  activities related to component 3 suffered from low quality of some procurement documents and processes
  and delayed disbursement and implementation. Also, the project’s procurement specialist left in March
  2019. Therefore, the Financial Management Specialist had to perform this additional role. While
  procurement was mostly rated Moderately Satisfactory throughout project implementation it was
  downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory in the last Implementation Status Report (ISR) in August 2019.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  NA



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Volta Basin SAP Implementation (P149969)




d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                  IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Unsatisfactory      Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately          Moderately
Bank Performance
                                 Unsatisfactory      Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest              Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 32-35) included several lessons learned which were adapted by IEG:

        The preparation of complex projects involving multiple countries needs to be given
         adequate time to identify project sites, design and implement feasibility studies, and
         mobilize the required technical and financial resources. In this project, the VBA lacked
         capacity and experience for implementing a Bank project, due to the lack of M&E, and social
         and environmental safeguard specialists within the agency. Also, the budget to recruit an
         environmental specialist and an M&E specialist was limited. All these shortcomings resulted
         in implementation delays and the cancellation of the implementation of activities under
         component 3.
        Results are more likely to be achieved by setting tangible milestones within a realistic
         implementation time period that allows for capacity development as well as complex
         collaborations and processes to reach consensus. For this project, the four year
         implementation period was ambitious and resulted in the cancellation of several activities.
        Successful project implementation relies on having the right mix of expertise in the
         Bank team, especially when the counterpart lacks capacity and requires intensive
         support. Also, effective capacity-building depends on TTL continuity and adequate
         transition arrangements when changes. In this project the Bank team did not have a
         forestry and irrigation specialist, which resulted in delays in providing support and no
         objections for Terms of Reference.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Volta Basin SAP Implementation (P149969)




The ICR provided an accurate account and good overview of project preparation and implementation. Also, the
ICR was internally consistent and provided useful lessons learned. However, the ICR did not include an
Economic analysis, was mainly output driven, and only provided limited evidence. On balance, the project’s ICR
rating was Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 13 of 13
