     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Strength. Serv. Delivery Ceará PforR (P127463)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0021875

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P127463                                    BR Strength. Serv. Delivery Ceará PforR

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                     Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83020                                 31-Jan-2018                                        346,513,418.75

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Nov-2013                                31-Jan-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           350,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            346,513,418.75                                              0.00

 Actual                                        346,513,418.75                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Christopher David            Christopher David Nelson       IEGFP (Unit 3)
 Krishnamani                 Nelson



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   This operation was financed through two Bank instruments: The Program-for-Results (PforR) and
   the Investment Project Financing (IPF) instruments.
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 7) and the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page vii):
   "To support the Government to improve public service delivery particularly in the areas of skills
   development, family assistance and water quality".



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Strength. Serv. Delivery Ceará PforR (P127463)



   This ICR Review will assess the achievement of the operation's goal of improving service delivery, in terms
   of three specific objectives.

     •   Skills development.
     •   Family assistance.
     •   Water quality.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  10-Mar-2017

c. Components
   The PforR instrument supported three subprograms of Ceara State's Multi-Year Plan and the IPF
   instrument supported a technical assistance component (PAD, pages 8 and 9).
   1. Skills development. This subprogram supported the program on vocational training,
   through expanding professional training schools, supporting research and providing scholarships to
   selected students.
   2. Family Assistance. This subprogram supported the expansion of the Integrated Family Assistance
   Program, administered by the Social Assistance Research Centers in selected municipalities.
   3. Water Quality. This subprogram supported the water management program aimed
   at improving water quality, through a water security plan for the watersheds, expanding household
   connections to existing sewerage networks in the metropolitan region of Fortaleza and in the Acarau and
   Salgado basins, implementing solid waste management plans and strengthening the hydro-environmental
   prediction and monitoring systems.
   4. Technical Assistance (TA). This component provided technical assistance for: (i) cross-cutting public
   sector management functions (results-based management and capacity building of the Ceara Economic
   Research Institute); and (ii) sector-specific activities in the areas of skills development, family assistance
   and water services.




d. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Program cost. The estimated cost of the operation at appraisal was US$350.00 million. The actual cost
   was US$346.51 million.




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Strength. Serv. Delivery Ceará PforR (P127463)



   Program financing. The operation was financed by an IBRD loan of US$350.00 million (US$315.00
   million through the PforR instrument and US$35.00 million through the IPF instrument). The total amount
   disbursed US$346.51 million.
   Borrower contribution. None was planned at appraisal. There was no borrower contribution during
   implementation.
   Dates. The operation, approved on November 21, 2013, became effective on December 20, 2013, and
   was originally scheduled to close on January 31, 2018. The program closed a year later on January 31,
   2019.
   Other changes. There were two Level 2 restructurings. These changes were made through the first
   restructuring on March 10, 2017, after the Mid-Term Review on April 11, 2016.

     • The targets for Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs), associated with the family assistance program
     and the public investment program, were reduced: The target for the families receiving family
     assistance was reduced by half from 15% to 7% in year three, and from 25% to 10% in year four, due
     to reduced federal transfers to municipalities, in the wake of the economic crisis of 2015 and 2016.
     The target for the percentage of public investments prepared using a results-based methodology was
     reduced from 25% to 15% in year 3.5, and from 40% to 20% in year four.
     • Funds (US$10.00 million out of US$35.00 million), were diverted from the IPF component to the
     PforR component, due to the cancellation of 14 planned TA activities.

   These changes were made by the second restructuring in October 2017. The closing date was extended
   by a year for using the remaining TA funds (due to the depreciation of the Brazilian Real relative to the
   US$ during implementation).
   Split rating. Given the substantial reduction in targets for the family assistance subprogram, this review is
   based on a split rating of objectives, when 70% of the loan (US$242.90 million) was disbursed before
   restructuring and 30% (US$103.61 million) disbursed after restructuring.



3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale
  Country Context. Despite improvements in economic and social indicators at the national level
  before appraisal, there were stark disparities between regions in Brazil. Ceara in the North East is one of the
  poorest states in Brazil, with a per capita income of US$5,236 in 2010, less than half the national average.
  An acute shortage of human capital has undermined the state's efforts at attracting private sector
  investment. The state experienced chronic water scarcity with long and severe droughts, and much of the
  state lacked access to basic water and sanitation facilities (with only 75% and 35% of its population
  connected to the public water and sewerage systems, as compared to the national averages of 82% and
  61% respectively). These aspects underscored the need for improving service delivery through the
  better management of the public sector.



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            BR Strength. Serv. Delivery Ceará PforR (P127463)



       Country Strategy. The program objectives were relevant to the state governments Multi-Year Plan (Plano
       Pluriannual), for 2012-2015. The plan underscored the need for: (i) promoting equitable social
       development, through improving service delivery in education and health; (ii) promoting sustainable
       economic development through public investments in water supply and sanitation services; and (iii)
       improving public sector management through results-based management.
       Bank Strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with the objectives of the Country Partnership Strategy for
       2012-2015; (i) increasing productivity of public and private investments; (ii) improving service delivery
       for low-income households: (iii) promoting regional economic development; and (iv) improving natural
       resource management. The PDOs are relevant to the Bank's current Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
       for 2018-2023. The CPF highlighted the need for improving government effectiveness. The focus area 1 of
       the CPF, highlighted the need for increasing effectiveness of the social protection system (Objective
       1.2), improving service delivery of education (Objective 1.3), and addressing the risk of water scarcity
       in the Northeastern part of Brazil (Objective 3.3).
       Relevance of PforR instrument for the Bank strategy. The Bank has a history of sub-national level
       engagement in Brazil. The IPF projects (Rural Sustainable Development and the Ceara Regional Economic
       Development), supported rural development and urban integration in Ceara. Previous Sector Wide
       Approaches (SWAp) in Ceara, supported fiscal consolidation, introduced results-based management and
       expanded coverage of programs in health, education, water, and private sector development. The
       SWAp operations demonstrated that top-down public expenditure programs are inadequate, in cases
       where multiple secretariats are involved (for instance, the underperformance of the secondary water quality
       indicator in a SWAp operation, was due to the presence of pollution in watersheds that fed urban water
       supplies). This justified an approach that aimed at communicating strategic objectives
       across multiple secretariats (such as the different state agencies responsible for improving water
       quality), the agencies of education and health for improving family assistance, and collaboration
       between public training institutions and private sector for skills development), and allowed for periodic
       evaluation and self-correction. This operation, using the PforR instrument, evolved from the Bank's
       experience in Ceara, Minas Gerais, and Pernambuco, aimed at continuing the broad approach used in the
       SWAps, combining support for sector reforms with capacity building activities. The Bank approach through
       this instrument was to link disbursements to specific project results. The rationale for using
       the instrument was strengthened by the state's familiarity with the modalities of disbursements against
       results-based indicators.
       Given this alignment with the WB country strategy and the preparedness of the provincial government for
       performance driven reform, the relevance of the project is Highly rated.



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL




                                                                                                      Page 4 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BR Strength. Serv. Delivery Ceará PforR (P127463)




 Objective 1
 Objective

 To improve skills development

 Rationale

 Theory of Change. Developing vocational training programs with the private sector and monitoring such
 programs, was likely to increase the supply of graduates with vocational skills. The intended outcome of the
 increase in the number of graduates from these schools absorbed into the productive
 sector was problematic, given that the demand for graduates was likely to depend on factors, outside the
 scope of the interventions.
 Outputs (ICR, page 15 and pages 35-36).

   • The skills development strategy and related action plans were completed in the municipalities. The plans
   were by the Secretariat of Education and the Secretariat of Economic Development and Labor, as
   targeted.
   • Technical and vocational training facilities were established in 74 of Ceara's 184 municipalities. Over
   38,000 students enrolled in these schools since the program began.
   • The Secretariat of Education and Labor in the municipalities developed a system for monitoring
   the Vocational Education Training Programs. No reports had been produced by the system to date, as
   the system became operational only in 2019.
   • 18 agreements were signed with private companies for developing the curriculum design and guarantee
   internship opportunities to graduates.

 Outcomes.

   • 31,600 technicians from the vocational schools were expected to be absorbed into the productive
   sector when the operation closed. Only 21,457 technicians were absorbed when the operation closed. The
   number of graduates employed in the productive sector was not only under the target, it was about 5%
   lower than the number of graduates (24,543), employed in the productive sector at the baseline
   in 2013. Some of this was due to the economic downturn, but the premise of linking training to inevitable
   increases in opportunities was ill conceived in the given context. Thus, achievement is rated as modest.



 Rating
 Modest
PHREVDELTBL
 PHINNERREVISEDTBL
 Objective 1 Revision 1
 Revised Objective


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            BR Strength. Serv. Delivery Ceará PforR (P127463)



    The targets were not revised during the lifetime of the operation.

    Revised Rationale
    No changes to the detail outlined above.



    Revised Rating
    Modest
PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective

     To improve family assistance.

    Rationale
    Theory of Change. Better targeting of family assistance programs and training of relevant staff in the State
    Assistance and Research Centers, would improve the coverage of family assistance program in the
    municipalities.
    Outputs (page 16-18).

        • The Secretariat of Planning and Management set up a multi-sector advisory committee in 2014, to
        integrate the activities relating to social assistance, education, health and cross-sector management.
        • All members of the technical teams in the Social Assistance Reference Centers were trained on issues
        relating to infant and child education, using manuals developed through the technical assistance
        component of the project.
        • An Impact Evaluation was carried out to measure the impact of the pilot educational development
        program on infants and children in rural areas.
        • A framework was developed for assessing the impact of family assistance programs. This framework
        was applied to 96% of family assistance projects.
        • An independent monitoring system was not implemented as envisioned. However, an internal
        monitoring system was developed, and this system was used by the 36 participating municipalities.

    Outcomes.

        • 11% of families in the targeted municipalities received support from the Social Assistance Reference
        Centers. This marginally exceeded the revised target of 10%, but was well short of the original target of
        25%. As discussed in section 2e, targets for this indicator were reduced, in the face of reduced fiscal
        transfers to the municipalities.



    Rating

                                                                                                         Page 6 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            BR Strength. Serv. Delivery Ceará PforR (P127463)



   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL
    PHINNERREVISEDTBL
    Objective 2 Revision 1
    Revised Objective
    The objectives were not revised, but the targets were revised downwards.

    Revised Rationale
    The revised targets were marginally exceeded.



    Revised Rating
    Substantial
PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective

     To improve water quality.

    Rationale
    Theory of Change. Better coordination of the different state agencies and the private sector involved in
    undertaking complementary activities in the water sector, together with establishing an environmental quality
    index, was likely to contribute to improving the quality of water in selected areas.
    Outputs. (pages 18-19).

        • An Inter-agency water security committee was established as intended to integrate the complementary
        actions between the different agencies (discussed in section 3b).
        • The water security plans for strategic watersheds were completed after the closing date, due to
        procurement delays. The watershed protection decree was passed by the project closing date.
        • The solid waste management law was submitted as intended.
        • An Environmental Quality Index (IQA) was created to monitor water quality. (According to the team, this
        index widely adopted in Brazil, provides a standardized method for monitoring water quality. The index is
        based on a scale of 0 (worst) to 100 (best).
        • The percentage of households with water connections exceeded the final year target of 85.9% in year
        two, implying that the goals were modest in terms of the level of ambition. It is unclear whether this was a
        major development limitation or was directed at filling a development gap.
        • A modeling tool to estimate the quality of water basins was developed to integrate climate forecasting
        and pollution factors into water resources management, under the technical assistance component of the
        project.
        • An integrated management plan was developed in 64 municipalities for activities associated with trash
        collection and waste site cleanup.



                                                                                                          Page 7 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            BR Strength. Serv. Delivery Ceará PforR (P127463)



    Outcomes.

        • According to the IQA, the quality of raw water improved to 82%, as compared to the target of 67.50%. It
        is unclear how important this target was in terms of the additional outputs and requirements for the
        intervention. This appears largely to be a connection issue rather than a coordination challenge and thus
        limits the performance story on what determines water quality issues. Having said that, the objective is still
        rated Substantial given achievement against the target.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL
    PHINNERREVISEDTBL
    Objective 3 Revision 1
    Revised Objective

    The targets for this area were not revised.

    Revised Rationale
    Details outlined above apply equally to the revised project.



    Revised Rating
    Substantial
PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 4
    Objective
     To improve public sector management through technical assistance activities.

    Rationale
    Theory of change. Capacity building activities aimed at results-based management would improve public
    sector management in the areas of skills development, family assistance and water quality.
    Outputs (pages 19-21).

        • As noted in section 2e, 14 technical assistance activities were cancelled, and funds allocated to these
        activities, were diverted for the PforR operation.
        • As part of technical assistance component, these activities were completed: (i) a new methodology for
        understanding the economic impact of policies for the Ceara Economic Research Institute (IPECE); (ii) A
        statistical analysis platform for integrating data from all the secretariats for IPECE; (iii) A new software
        platform was installed for automatic payroll auditing: (iv). An automated customized system was developed
        for the Municipal Court of Accounts; and (v) A user friendly platform was developed for engaging citizens
        in preparing Multi-Year Plans.

                                                                                                          Page 8 of 15
                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                        BR Strength. Serv. Delivery Ceará PforR (P127463)



                   •Six state agencies adopted the results-based management model when the project closed as targeted.
                   The ICR notes that one year after the project closed, the number of agencies adopting results-based
                   management model increased to 18.

             Outcomes.

                   • 32% of the public investments were prepared using the results-based methodology when the project
                   closed. This exceeded the revised target of 20% but was short of the original target of 40%. As discussed
                   in section 2e, the targets for this indicator were revised downwards.



             Rating
      Modest
     PHREVDELTBL
             PHINNERREVISEDTBL
             Objective 4 Revision 1
             Revised Objective

             The targets for the indicator were revised downwards with the project restructuring.

             Revised Rationale
             The revised targets were exceeded.



             Revised Rating
             Substantial

PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale




Overall Efficacy Rating
---

     5. Efficiency

                  ---



     Efficiency Rating
     ---


                                                                                                                  Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Strength. Serv. Delivery Ceará PforR (P127463)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                    Rate
                                                          Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                    Available?
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome


Overall relevance is rated as Substantial. Efficacy of the objective, of improving water quality was substantial, as
the intended targets were realized. Efficacy of the objective of improving skills development was modest.
Efficacy of the objectives of improving family assistance and public sector management was modest before
restructuring and substantial after restructuring, as the revised targets were exceeded. Outcome before
restructuring was rated as moderately unsatisfactory and moderately satisfactory after restructuring.
Taking these ratings discussed above and weighting them by the shares of Bank disbursement before and after
restructuring,(0.70*3 = 0.30*4 = 3.30), the overall outcome is rated as moderately unsatisfactory.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


Macroeconomic risk. There is macroeconomic risk to areas associated with family assistance and skills
development. In the case of the former, family assistance to municipalities depend on fiscal transfers, and
demand for employment in the productive sector depends on the resiliency of the labor market.
Environmental risk. Environmental changes increase the likelihood of drought and this could undermine the
accomplishments in the area associated with improving water quality.
Institutional risk. The government changes and high staff turnover could present risks to the commitment to
the results-based approach at the state level.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Strength. Serv. Delivery Ceará PforR (P127463)




a. Quality-at-Entry

  This operation was prepared based on the experience from prior Bank-financed multi-sector operations at
  the sub-national level in Brazil (Minas Gerais and Pernambuco) and previous SWAP operations in Ceara
  (Second SWAP project and the Inclusive Growth project), which introduced disbursements against results-
  based indicators. Lessons incorporated at design, included having fewer executing agencies for better
  coordination, permitting re-negotiations on DLIs only after the Mid-Term Review and to the extent possible,
  relying on local procurement systems. The operation appropriately combined sector interventions with
  technical assistance activities. Several risks were identified at appraisal, including substantial technical
  risks associated with coordination of several state agencies. Mitigation measures incorporated at design,
  included the capacity building of state agencies (PAD, page 23). The implementation arrangements - with
  the Ceara Economic Research Institute (IPECE) in charge of project coordination - was appropriate, given
  that IPECE had executed prior Bank-financed operations. The arrangements at appraisal for monitoring
  and evaluation (discussed in section 8a) and safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate
  (discussed in section 9).
  The multi sector operation, with two bank instruments, was complex and ambitious. Procurement delays
  contributed to cancellation of several technical assistance activities. There were moderate shortcomings in
  M&E design, with no indicators for monitoring the technical assistance activities financed through the IPF
  instrument. This is discussed further in section 3b.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision

  Eight Implementation Status and Results Reports were filed between 2014-2018. The number of
  supervision missions were more than the norm (48 missions during the project lifetime), in view of the
  complexity of the project (multi-sector operation, with two Bank instruments). Although the continuity of
  leadership was undermined through three changes to the task team leadership during the project lifetime,
  this was offset by the inclusion of team members from several Global Practices (GPs), including
  governance, social protection, and water specialists. The team aided in implementing M&E (discussed in
  section 9b) and the support provided by the team aided in safeguards compliance.
  The drawbacks in M&E design regarding the lack of indicators for the IPF component of the project, were
  not rectified during implementation.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Strength. Serv. Delivery Ceará PforR (P127463)



  Moderately Satisfactory



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design

  The M&E indicators for the PDOs pertaining to family assistance and water quality were measurable and
  appropriate, though the institutional aspects of water coordination were not well handled. The indicators
  pertaining to the skills development area were problematic, as demand for graduates could depend on factors
  which were outside the project scope. As indicated in section 9a, there were no indicators for monitoring the
  technical assistance activities financed through the IPF instrument. This undermined a proper evaluation of the
  project's accomplishments.
  The Secretariat of Planning and Management through the Ceara Economic Research Center was responsible
  for M&E, through the State Systems.



b. M&E Implementation

  The Bank supervision team provided support for facilitating data collection, through aligning the results
  framework and its indicators with the Government's own M&E systems. The lack of indicators for monitoring
  the IPF framework was not rectified during implementation.



c. M&E Utilization

  The ICR does not provide details but notes that (paragraph 68) the data-driven frameworks were being used
  after the project closed. However, there was no comprehensive monitoring of continuous employment of
  graduates of technical and vocational training schools.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

  The PforR Program. The PforR activities comprised civil works, capacity building and policy reforms.
  The environmental impact of PforR program interventions (such as construction of new skills development

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Strength. Serv. Delivery Ceará PforR (P127463)



  facilities, maintenance of existing social inclusion centers and extension of water connections), were
  expected to be minor (PAD, page 93). The PAD (page 96) notes that the laws and guidelines for
  environmental assessment and resettlement were deemed to be adequate and an Action Plan was
  prepared at appraisal to mitigate the possible adverse environmental and social impacts of the operation.
  The IPF component. The project was classified as a Category B project for World Bank Safeguard policies.
  Two safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal (PAD, page viii): Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
  4.01): and Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). The ICR (page 26) does not report of any adverse
  environmental or involuntary resettlement issues during implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

  Fiduciary management. A fiduciary (financial management and procurement) assessment conducted at
  appraisal, concluded that the arrangements were satisfactory (PAD, page 20). The ICR does not report any
  fiduciary compliance issues during implementation.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                        IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                    Overall relevance was rated
                                                                                    as Substantial. Efficacy of the
                                                                                    objectives was moderately
                              Moderately                 Moderately                 unsatisfactory before
Outcome
                              Satisfactory               Unsatisfactory             restructuing when 70% was
                                                                                    disbursed and moderately
                                                                                    satisfactory when the balance
                                                                                    was disbursed.
                                                         Moderately                 There were shortcomings at
Bank Performance              Satisfactory
                                                         Satisfactory               Quality-at-Entry.
Quality of M&E                Modest                     Modest                     ---
Quality of ICR                                           Substantial                ---

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Strength. Serv. Delivery Ceará PforR (P127463)




12. Lessons

 The ICR draws the following three lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with some
adaptation of language.
(1) The PforR instrument can be useful for supporting improvements in governance, with appropriate
DLIs but need to be carefully and discretely targeted. The experience of this operation showed that
the while the DLIs were appropriate for the areas associated with family assistance and improving water quality,
they were of limited use for the area associated with improving skills development. The level of ambition
regarding how the P4R would drive reform in all sectors was limiting given the scale and reach of where the
reform agenda was directed.
(2) While complementing the PforR instrument with a technical assistance component financed
through an IPF instrument, can help in producing improvements across several result areas, it is
necessary to include indicators for monitoring activities associated with the IPF instrument. Lack of
indicators for monitoring the activities financed through the IPF instrument, besides creating a a bias towards a
greater weight given to the PforR actions, undermine a proper evaluation of the project's accomplishments and
do not allow clearer insight in how each instrument informs the other.
(3) Better formulating of target values is required for PforR operations. In this operation, some indicators
reached their target levels early in the project, implying that the targets were modest in terms of the level of
ambition.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


The ICR is well-written and candid. It clearly discusses the issues associated with the PDO on skills
development. It provides a clear narrative of the deep economic crisis of 2015 and 2016, which necessitated a
reduction in targets for the family assistance area. The ICR is consistent with the guidelines and appropriately
conducts a split rating of objectives. The ICR draws reasonably good lessons from the experience of
implementing this operation.
The ICR would have been enhanced by a clearer narrative on how the P4R instrument drove the reform
approach of the state and explained how the breadth of engagement ultimately led to improved results
for citizens. Given the long and established background of the Bank's work in the region, a clearer explanation
around the differences in performance over time would have been useful.



a. Quality of ICR Rating

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BR Strength. Serv. Delivery Ceará PforR (P127463)



Substantial




                                                                                   Page 15 of 15
