     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Access and Renewable Energy (P127837)



                                                                             Report Number: ICRR0021949

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P127837                                 BO Access and Renewable Energy

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Bolivia                                 Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54540                               01-Dec-2021                                        10,404,925.67

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 27-May-2014                             30-Apr-2019

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         50,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                          15,314,088.63                                             0.00

 Actual                                      10,420,765.12                                             0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Paul Dolan                Dileep M. Wagle             Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1) and the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, page 5):

   “To expand access to electricity in the Recipient’s Unserved Areas under a model of electricity access
   expansion that supports the implementation of the national decentralized framework”.



                                                                                              Page 1 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Access and Renewable Energy (P127837)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  27-Jun-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Electricity Services for Unserved Areas (estimated cost at appraisal was US$52.45
   million, of which US$43.30 million IDA; actual cost at closing was US$8.22 million IDA).

   This component aimed at providing electricity services to households and social institutions (mainly schools)
   in two regions - Chuquisaca and Potosi. It included the following sub-components:

          Grid extension (US$39.05 million, of which US$30 million IDA – actual was US$8.22 million)
          Individual Photovoltaic (PV) systems (US$12.7 million IDA – actual was Nil)
          PV systems in public institutions (US$0.7 million, of which US$0.6 million IDA – actual was Nil)

   Component 2: Support to Access and Clean Energy Strategies (estimated cost at appraisal was US$2
   million IDA; actual cost at closing was US$0.33 million).

   This component aimed at supporting the government’s strategies on energy access and clean energy.
   Activities in this component included, design, installation and evaluation of pilot systems including pico-PV,
   training and capacity building, development of Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) framework, design and
   implementation of communication strategies, and studies on clean energy.

   Component 3: Project Management (estimated cost at appraisal was US$4.7 million IDA; actual cost at
   closing was US$1.86 million).

   This component aimed at providing project management support to the Ministry of Hydrocarbons and
   Energy (MHE), including for M&E and project audits.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. At appraisal, the total cost of the Project was estimated at US$59.1 million. The revised
   estimate following the restructuring of the the project was US$11.17 million, (email from project team dated
   June 26). The actual project cost was US$10.4 million.




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Access and Renewable Energy (P127837)



   Financing. The project was financed by an IDA credit of US$50.0 million. The revised estimate following
   partial cancellation of the credit as US$11.17 million. The amount disbursed was US$10.4 million.

   Borrower Contribution: US$5.15 million was anticipated at appraisal to come from the Borrower and
   another US$4 million from local beneficiaries. The actual contribution at closure, was US$0.97 million from
   the borrower and US$0.38 million, from local beneficiaries.

   Dates. The Project was approved on 05/27/2014, became effective on 09/22/2015 and scheduled to close
   on 12/31/2021. The project closed 32 months ahead of schedule on 04/30/2019.

   Other changes.

   The project was restructured twice. The first restructuring on September 9, 2015, was intended to amend
   the Financing Agreement for facilitating project effectiveness.

   The following major changes were made through a project restructuring on 06/27/2018, following the partial
   cancellation of loan.

         The project scope was drastically reduced, and the number of grid extension was reduced to eight,
          instead of the originally planned 30 grid extensions. All activities associated with renewable energy
          were cancelled.
         Funds were reallocated between disbursement categories.

   The implementation schedule was reduced by 32 months, from 12/31/2021 to 04/30/2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Strong economic performance (with average growth of Gross Domestic Product of 4.8
percent) before appraisal, the incidence of poverty was high in rural areas, with 61% of the rural population
classified as poor. The incidence of poverty also varied across regions, ranging more than 60 in the
autonomous departments of Potosi and Chuquisaca, to 20% in Taripa. In rural areas, access to electricity
remained low (with 31% of the population having no access to electricity in Potosi and Chuquisaca), and
this in turn contributed to limited opportunities for economic development. Improving access to electricity,
especially in the rural areas of Potosi and Chuquisaca, was important for the government strategy.

Government strategy. Article 20 of the 2009 Bolivian Constitution established universal electricity access
as a fundamental right. In 2011, the government established its Living with Dignity Electricity Program
(PEVD), with the objective of achieving universal electricity access by 2025 by providing access to roughly
600,000 households, of which 350,000 households were in remote rural areas. The government also
approved the legal framework for the Rural Electrification program for supporting renewable energy
development and through the 2010 Autonomy Framework and Decentralization Law granted subnational
agencies (such as, Gabernacions (autonomous departmental governments), and municipalities) new
responsibilities for: (i) design and implementation of investments; (ii) asset ownership; and (iii) operation
and maintenance. This project was designed in response to this new agenda. It focused on the territory of

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 11
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BO Access and Renewable Energy (P127837)



               two of Bolivia’s regional departments of Chuquisaca in the south of the country and Potosi adjacent to it in
               the southwest. The PDO was aligned to the Sustainable Energy for All Initiative, launched by the United
               Nations in 2010.

               Alignment with Bank Strategy. The objective of the Project was fully aligned with the Bolivia Country
               Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY2012-2015 under the prioritized areas of “sustainable productive
               development” and “human development and access to basic services”. It continues to be fully aligned with
               the Bolivia Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY2016-2020 under Results Area 3: Human
               Development and Access to Basic Services” on page 22, where access to electricity is specifically
               highlighted.

               Previous Sector Experience

               The World Bank has supported the government in pursuing its electrification agenda since 2003, including
               through two lending operations that benefited 42,000 households. These projects supported an approach
               that focused on utility-owned grid extension, and user-owned off-grid systems. The Decentralized
               Infrastructure for Rural Transformation project (IDTR-I) that closed in 2011, financed the provision of access
               to electricity of over 30,000 households. The Decentralized Electricity for Universal Access Project (EDAU)
               that closed in 2013 benefited 12,000 households.

               As indicated earlier, the scope of the project was drastically reduced. The project’s reduced size and scope
               (particularly cancellation of the renewable energy subcomponents), undermined the government’s PEVD
               program. The relevance of PDO is rated as Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Expand access to electricity in the Recipient’s Unserved Areas under a model of electricity access expansion
                             that supports the implementation of the national decentralized framework

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The links between the project activities, their outputs and outcomes were logical, and the
                             intended outcomes were measurable. Activities associated with investments in grid densification, extension of
                             low and medium voltage distribution lines, off grid photovoltaic systems, together with outreach and training of
                             beneficiaries, distribution companies and contractors, were expected to increase access to electricity through
                             grid connections and thereby expand access to electricity in Bolivia’s unserved areas. Technical assistance
                             activities were expected at establishing a model of electricity access expansion under the national


                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 11
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BO Access and Renewable Energy (P127837)



                            decentralized framework. The outcomes of these activities were expected to contribute to the long term
                            development outcome of universal access to electricity.

                            Outputs.

                                   Eight subprojects were completed to provide electricity services in rural areas. The subprojects
                                      included extension of low and medium voltage distribution lines and grid densification in Chuquisaca
                                      and Potosi.
                                     756.25 Kilometers (Kms) distribution lines were either constructed or rehabilitated under the project.
                                      This fell short of the original target of 800 distribution lines but exceeded the revised target of 669
                                      distribution lines.
                                     A total of 24,030 people directly benefitted from the project activities, well short of the original target of
                                      160,000 beneficiaries, but slightly short of the revised target of 26,700 beneficiaries. 48% of the
                                      beneficiaries were women as compared to the target of 50%.
                                     63 outreach and training activities were conducted for beneficiaries, distribution companies and other
                                      relevant stakeholders, as compared to the original target of 70, but exceeding the revised target of 41
                                      activities.
                                     Two energy sector studies were completed as targeted (as compared to the original target of five).
                                      One study was on the sustainability of photovotaic systems in rural areas and the other study was a
                                      survey of population with no access to basic electricity services.
                                     Ten capacity building activities for subnational entities were implemented under the project, well short
                                      of the original target of 35 but exceeding the revised target of eight.

                            Outcomes.

                            A total of 20,210 people were provided with access to household connections. This fell well short of the
                            original target of 135,000 beneficiaries, and marginally short of the revised target of 22,436 beneficiaries.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project’s achievements fell well short of its original targets, and achievement on this account was
                            negligible. After restructuring and cancellation of several components, the targets were revised significantly
                            downwards. Revised targets were nearly met in most cases, meriting a rating of substantial. Taking into
                            account the pre-structuring performance, overall efficacy is modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                       Primary Reason


                                                                                                                                      Page 5 of 11
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BO Access and Renewable Energy (P127837)



  Modest                                                   Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted both at appraisal and at closure, for activities
associated with the actual capital investment on grid extension. This component accounted for 79% of the actual
cost at closure and 98.7% of the cost at appraisal. The costs included capital investment costs and annual
operation and maintenance costs. The benefits of the project were assumed to come from increased energy
consumption (savings in traditional energy sources and the value of additional consumers). The Net Present
Value (NPV) at 10% discount rate was estimated at US$1.95 million at closure. This was considerably lower
than the NPV of US$17.2 million at appraisal. This was primarily due to the cancellation of significant
electrification subprojects. The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 14.4 percent, as compared
to the ex-ante EIRR of 19.7%. The lower economic return achieved by the project was due to the higher unit
costs per connection (US$2,034), caused by higher investment cost and lower level of connections.

Administrative and Operational issues. There were delays in credit effectiveness and the project became
effective, almost sixteen months after approval, due to the slow progress on two conditions for effectiveness
(signing of the Inter-governmental Agreement between the ministry and the Gobernacion de Potosi and the
preparation and approval of the Project’s operational manual. More than two years after implementation, only
eight percent of the IDA credit had been disbursed. There were delays associated with the infrastructure
component for providing electrical services for unserved areas. The slow start led to partial cancellation of the
loan at government request. The implementation delays continued after effectiveness due to the inadequate
government support, evidenced by the slow appointment of the Project Coordination Unit, and changes in
authorities in early 2016. The Mid Term Review scheduled at the end of May 2019, could not be held due to the
Government's cancellation decision, and a due diligence that could provide a greater insight of project
performance and alternative course of action and help in minimizing the negative impact of the proposed
cancellation, was not conducted. The revised closing date did not allow enough time for carrying out the habitual
beneficiary survey.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    98.70
 Appraisal                                                17.70
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    79.00
 ICR Estimate                                             14.40
                                                                                     Not Applicable



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Access and Renewable Energy (P127837)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO was rated as substantial, Efficacy of the single objective was rated as negligible before
restructuring when 53% of the loan was disbursed, and substantial after restructuring when the balance was
disbursed. Efficiency was rated as modest. Weighing by the share of disbursement before and after
restructuring (0.531*2 + 0.469 *4 = 2.93), the overall outcome was rated as moderately unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical risk. The risk associated with grid extension techniques were assessed as modest, given that
such techniques have been proven worldwide and posed no technical or commercial uncertainties.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The preparation of this project drew on the experiences from prior Bank-financed electricity projects in
  Bolivia (the Decentralized Infrastructure for Rural Transformation project and the Decentralized Electricity
  for Universal Access project). Lessons incorporated at design included, attempting to secure local
  commitment from subnational stakeholders from the early stages, training customers on the use and
  basic maintenance of PV equipment, and having a flexible design for meeting the conditions of each
  community. As the prior Bank-financed rural electrification projects often had a slow start, the design
  envisioned a seven-year implementation period. Several risks were identified at design, including high
  risk associated with the capacity of the implementing agency. With mitigation measures, the project risk
  was rated as substantial at appraisal (PAD, page 11). The implementation arrangements were
  appropriate, as the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in the Ministry of Hydrocarbon and Energy (MHE),
  had experience executing Bank-financed projects in the past. The arrangements made at appraisal for
  safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  The design underestimated the challenges associated with implementation of the specific decentralized
  model. The Bank could have been more proactive in introducing alternative arrangements that might be
  more workable, particularly given its experience with previous rural electrification projects in Bolivia that
  were successful.




                                                                                                       Page 7 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Access and Renewable Energy (P127837)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank actively supervised the Project, including engaging frequently with the Bolivian authorities and
 conducting regular supervision missions. The Bank team included locally based staff in Bolivia. The team
 conducted regular supervision missions (twice a year as per the norm) and had significant ongoing
 engagement with the relevant Bolivian authorities, particularly for accelerating the implementation of the
 Project prior to its restructuring. In addition to regular supervision missions that included specialists in the
 subject, the Bank launched one mission to address financial management issues. The support provided by
 the team aided in fiduciary compliance.

 However, neither a Mid-Term Review nor a due diligence that could have provided a greater insight of the
 project’s performance could be conducted. These could have helped in minimizing the negative impact of
 the proposed cancellation of the loan.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was logical. The key outcome indicators were limited, and the targets established by
 the M&E framework were appropriate and measurable. The overall M&E framework was suitable for
 measuring progress in achieving the development objective.




b. M&E Implementation
  The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) already had experience in handling this function in previous rural
  electrification projects, and proper data collection and reporting practices were followed. The PCU had a
  monitoring unit that maintained adequate measures of the project’s progress. Especially given the very
  limited progress during implementation, it was not difficult to collect the data, and there is evidence from
  ISRs etc. that this was consistently done. The PCU was not fully staffed for relatively short periods (ICR,
  page 18).


                                                                                                       Page 8 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Access and Renewable Energy (P127837)




c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was used by the PCU and the Bank for monitoring the project’s slow progress in early
  years.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a category B project, under World Bank safeguard policies. Five safeguard
   policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP
   4.12); Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) to address issues pertaining
   to environment, natural habitats and physical cultural resources, an Indigenous Peoples Planning
   Framework (IPPF), and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared and publicly disclosed, at
   appraisal. There was compliance with safeguards during implementation (ICR, page 19).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. An assessment conducted at appraisal, concluded that the financial management
   arrangements were deemed to be acceptable (PAD, page 12). The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) had
   experience in executing Bank-financed projects. The ICR reports that external audits were not qualified.
   The financial reports were delivered in a timely fashion, and the ICR does not report non-compliance with
   financial covenants.

   Procurement. The PCU was responsible for procurement activities and the contracting process. An
   assessment of the PCU was conducted at appraisal (PAD, page 38). Given the PCU’s experience with
   executing Bank-financed activities, procurement risk was rated as moderate (PAD, page 39). The ICR
   (page 20) notes that overall procurement responsibilities were handled in a satisfactory manner, despite
   some delays on procurement processes due to legal review requirements, during implementation. The ICR
   does not report any case of mis procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
    ---

d. Other

                                                                                                Page 9 of 11
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BO Access and Renewable Energy (P127837)



    ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Rural electrification projects implemented in remote areas and under difficult physical
conditions require effective coordination among a multiple number of actors. The lesson from
this project is that the implementing agency needs to be fully operational from the early stages of the
project to minimize delays during implementation.

Decentralized models for rural electrification require efficient coordination between the
national and subnational agencies. The experience from this project showed that hybrid models,
where the two-level agencies share executive and financial roles (particularly the ownership of
assets and debt obligations), added to the complexity of the implementation process. The lesson
from this project is that given the challenges of a decentralized policy it is preferable to that the
project needs to be executed, either at the national level or at the subnational level.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was generally well written. It provided a candid assessment of the implementation difficulties that
befell the project; However, it could have paid more attention to the underlying causes, particularly the poor
design of the Project. The ICR draws good lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

The ICR however could have provided more details on what the Bank could have done at the design stage or
during implementation to address the challenges.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 11
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
BO Access and Renewable Energy (P127837)



Substantial




                                                                        Page 11 of 11
