        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022132

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P145799                                      Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG)

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Mali                                         Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H8900                                    31-Mar-2019                                         19,158,792.14

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Dec-2013                                  30-Sep-2019

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             12,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              11,878,308.14                                               0.00

 Actual                                          10,952,979.03                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                 Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P129516_TBL
 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P129516                                      Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) ( P129516 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16288,TF-16307                                                                                   8205813.11

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Dec-2013

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)




                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                    0.00                                  8,425,925.00

 Revised Commitment                                     0.00                                  8,205,813.11

 Actual                                                 0.00                                  8,205,813.11




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as articulated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph
   9) ) was to:



   "expand the adoption of sustainable land and water management practices in target area in Mali."



   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 5) was to:



   "expand the adoption of sustainable land and water management practices in the Target Area within
   the Recipient's territory."



   The PDO in both documents was identical except where underlined. A split rating will be applied
   because activities were re-aligned and resources were re-allocated from one component to another with
   changes to the key outcome indicators. The PDO and the theory of change remained the same.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes


                                                                                               Page 2 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



d. Components
  The PDO was supported by four components as follows:

  1. Knowledge management, Governance and Communication (appraisal cost: US$4.86 million,
  actual cost: US$2.80 million). This component included the following three sub-components:

   1.1. Information system and knowledge management. This sub-component would contribute to building
  the capacity of the national information system for adaptation to climate change. Main activities
  would include: (i) Strengthening the existing National Environmental information Management System (the
  'SNGIE'); (ii) Supporting the sharing of climate hazards and adaptation data and knowledge; (iii) Training
  and sensitizing on the use of seasonal hydrological and meteorological forecasts by food crop producers;
  (iv) Strengthening the capacity of local food crop producers in the use of simple climate change adaptation
  technologies and practices; and (v) Building the capacity of national institutions and local stakeholders in
  the planning of Sustainable Land and Water Management (SLWM), land use changes and adaptation to
  climate change strategies.

  1.2. Natural Resources Management Governance at local level. This sub-component would aim to
  strengthen grass-root mechanisms for preventing competition, over-exploitation and degradation of the
  productive resources (rangelands, croplands, water resources, forests), through management tools and
  equitable regulations on access to and use of local natural resources (such as the regulations concerning
  the importance of mobility in pastoral areas, as this is stressed by the recent Mali's 'Pastoral Charter'). The
  main activities would support: (i) the preparation and adoption of participatory community resource use
  plans, which include resilience objectives, SLWM issues and biodiversity conservation, for their integration
  in 14 commune development plans (PDESC); (ii) the review and revision of the Communes development
  plans (PDESC) for the purpose of integration of SLWM, biodiversity conservation and climate changes
  adaptation; and (iii) the implementation of pilot activities of the revised PDESC including the strengthening
  of transparency and accountability in Natural Resource Management (NRM) through the translation and
  dissemination of key regulations governing land use, biodiversity conservation and natural resources
  management.

  1.3. Communication for resilience enhancement. This sub-component would focus on selected activities
  of the action plan which are relevant to address climate change adaptation challenges at both national and
  community levels. The main activities would include: (i) Sensitizing communities and decision makers on
  the risks and challenges of climate changes, including their impacts on natural resources, socioeconomic
  activities and livelihoods in rural areas; and (ii) Carrying out of awareness raising and education activities for
  promoting discussion platforms among local stakeholders and extension services (agriculture, pastoralism,
  etc.) on the appropriate SLWM and biodiversity conservation solutions in each beneficiary commune.



  2. Scaling-up Sustainable Land Management practices (appraisal cost: US$7.06 million, actual cost:
  US$7.49 million). This component would support sustainable land management practices and initiatives
  aiming at: (i) improving the sustainable use of biodiversity resources in the targeted areas through a
  landscape approach; (ii) reversing the reduction of forest coverage to contribute to the Great Green Wall
  Initiative (GGWI) objectives and the enhancement of carbon stock; and (iii) strengthening the resilience of
  rural producers' assets in the targeted areas and communities to climate change challenges. The
  component included the following two sub-components:



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



2.1. Conservation and valorization of biodiversity. This sub-component would aim at contributing to
sustainable landscape management, sustainable consumption practices, and rolling-back the biodiversity
erosion through specific knowledge production/sharing and capacity building in the project target area by: (i)
Promoting sustainable management of biodiversity in accordance with an ecosystem-based adaptation
approach; (ii) Supporting the promotion of indigenous sustainable modes of production and consumption
including low-carbon energy and woodless construction technologies; and (iii) Supporting community-based
reforestation initiatives.

2.2. Forests and rangelands management. The sub-component would help develop sustainable forest
management tools and skills for the three forests of the project area (Lorack Bane, Gadjiaba Khadiel and
Ouagadou), and contribute to the management of rangelands including
pastoralism corridors to both increasing the socio-economic resilience of households and reducing the
pressure from inadequate pastoralism on forest ecosystems. The following activities would be financed: (i)
Supporting the preparation, adoption and implementation of participatory management plans of the
Ouagadou, the Gadjaba Khadiel and the Lorack Baneforest ecosystems; (ii) Promoting the use of improved
agroforestry and other related SLWM technology packages in the adjacent lands of the three targeted
forests (Ouagadou, the Gadjaba Khadiel and the Lorack Bane); (iii) Supporting the management of
rangelands considering climate change challenges; and (iv) Strengthening the capacity of local NRM
committees in the integrated management of bushfires.

3. Diversification of local livelihoods (appraisal cost: US$6.69 million, actual cost:
US$6.15 million). This component would aim at reducing the vulnerability of these groups by providing
them with opportunities in jobs and revenues generation. The activities would be include: (i) Financing
sound income generating activities (IGA) which do not threaten the conservation of biodiversity; and (ii)
Training the beneficiaries of funded IGA on management (procurement, accounting, saving and
reinvestment for business development), and demonstration of opportunities from sustainable management
of forest and non-timber forest products.

 4. Coordination and monitoring & evaluation of project activities (appraisal cost: US$2.81 million,
actual cost: US$3.73 million). This component included the following two sub-components:

4.1. Monitoring and Evaluation. This sub-component would finance the following activities: (i) setting up
the M&E system; (ii) supporting the staffing of the Agency for the Environment and Sustainable
Development (AEDD) M&E, Fiduciary and internal auditing units; (iii) collecting, analyzing and sharing any
appropriate information on lessons learned including carbon sequestration trends; (iv) environmental and
social safeguard management and monitoring; and (v) updating the GEF Biodiversity Management
Effectiveness Tracking Tools (METT) and the other Focal areas' tracking tools (TT).

4.2. Project coordination. The following activities would be financed: (i) the project launching workshop; (ii)
Organizing the Steering Committee sessions; (iii) Preparing the consolidated annual work and budgeting
plan (AWBP); (iv) Managing the implementation memoranda signed with the key institutions responsible of
the execution of components/major activities; (v) Training the project team in management (monitoring &
evaluation, procurement, financial management, environmental and social safeguard, etc.) as approved
through the training plan; (vi) Coordinating the implementation activities at national and local levels; and (vii)
covering the operating costs.




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The total project cost at appraisal was estimated to be US$21.42 million. The actual cost as
   reported by the ICR (page 2) was US$20.16 million.



   Financing. The proposed financing instrument was an Investment Project Finance (IPF) to support Mali in
   improving the management of its natural resources and contributing in the global climate change mitigation
   effort. The total financing includes US$12 million IDA Grant, US$6.57 million GEF Grant, and US$1.85
   million grant from the Less Developed Countries Fund (LDCF) budget. The actual amounts disbursed
   according to the ICR (page 2) were US$10.95 million, US$6.50 million, and US$1.70 million for the IDA
   Grant, the GEF Grant and the LDCF, respectively.



   Borrower Contribution. The Borrower was expected to contribute US$1.0 million of counterpart funding.
   The Borrower fully contributed the expected amount.



   Dates. The project was approved on December 6, 2013 and became effective on March 24, 2014. The Mid-
   Term Review (MTR) was conducted on February 1, 2017. The PAD did not include a specific date for the
   MTR. The project closed on September 30, 2019 compared to an original closing date on March 31, 2019.
   The ICR did not explicitly explain the reasons for the six months delay. However, it could be inferred from
   the ICR text that the extension was to accommodate for the initial implementation delays that the project
   experienced. The project was restructured twice, both Level 2 restructuring. The first was on June 21, 2018,
   when the amount disbursed was US$8.62 million, in order to scale up the project from 14 to 30 communes,
   introduce changes to the Results Framework, changes in components and cost reallocation between
   disbursement categories, and extend the original project closing date by six months. The second was on
   April 25, 2019, when the amount disbursed was US$10.27 million, in order to reallocate funds between
   disbursement categories. The ICR did not report on when the project closing date was extended.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Mali has a total population estimated at 14.5 million people, predominantly rural,
with an average annual population growth rate of about 3.4%. The country is divided into five main
ecosystems presenting a wide range of agro-ecological environments. Poverty is more prevalent in rural
areas (57.6%) where most people continue to derive their livelihoods from agriculture and livestock; food
insecurity and malnutrition are high. Livelihoods are essentially based on agriculture in the Sudanese and
the Guinea savanna zones, and on livestock in the Sahelian zone. Land degradation is severe (shrinkage of
pasture lands, depletion of farmlands fertility and degradation of forest ecosystems), with a total annual cost
estimated at around 12% of GDP. The project were to specifically address this problem through



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



promoting sustainable land and water management (SLWM) practices in targeted landscapes and in
climate vulnerable areas.

At appraisal, objectives were in line with the objectives of the Sahel and West Africa Program (SAWAP,
2011) of expanding sustainable land and water management (SLWM) in targeted landscapes and in climate
vulnerable areas of the West African and Sahelian countries. Objectives were also in line with the the
Malian National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA, 2007). NAPA identified a total of 19 priority
projects which aim at: (i) highlighting key climate risks; (ii) identifying sectors, communities and areas that
are particularly vulnerable to climate variability and change; (iii) identifying adaptive sectoral measures; and
(iv) identifying adaptation priority projects. Objectives were in line with the Government's Strategic Growth
Framework for Poverty Reduction (2012–2017), which focused on strengthening the foundations of long-
term development and equitable access to quality social services by, among others, strengthening the
resilience and creating economic opportunities for rural households in Mali and preserving the environment
and natural resource base in a climate change context. Objectives were also in line with the Country
Strategic Investment Framework (CSIF) for Sustainable Land and Water Management (SLWM) which was
adopted by the Government in July 2010. The CSIF called for Effective transfer of natural resources
management to decentralized entities and Local Governments (regional assemblies and communes), and
for Effective coordination of land management and environmental programs, among others. Objectives
were also in line with Bank's Interim Strategy Note (ISN, 2013), which highlighted land degradation, natural
resources depletion, and climate change adaptation issues.

Furthermore, the objectives were in line with several GEF strategic goals, namely: addressing and
reversing current global trends in land degradation, specifically desertification and deforestation; and
supporting countries to become climate-resilient by promoting both immediate and longer-term adaptation
measures in development policies, plans, programs, projects, and actions, among others.



At project completion, objectives continued to be in line with the Government's national development
objectives reflected in the Strategic Growth Framework for Poverty Reduction (2012–2017), which focused
on strengthening the foundations of long-term development and equitable access to quality social services,
among others. Objectives also continued to be in line with Bank's Country Partnership Framework for Mali
(CPF, FY16–FY19). Specifically, with the CPF’s Focal Area 2 (Create Economic Opportunities), which
sought to increase productivity and market access in key agricultural value chains and improve water and
natural resources management, and also with Focal Area 3 (Build Resilience), which sought to strengthen
safety nets and reduce the risk of the poor and vulnerable to exogenous shocks.

Objectives also were in line with global priorities related to the current 2018–2022 GEF-7 land degradation
strategic focal area, which emphasizes sustainable land management of dryland landscapes to enhance
on-the-ground implementation of land degradation neutrality (LDN), and create an enabling environment to
support LDN implementation globally. Finally, objectives continued to be in line with SDG 15 of the 2030
Agenda, which aims to “protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably
manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss.”

The statement of objectives to expand the adoption of sustainable land and water management practices in
target area in Mali lacked a connection to higher level objectives namely, sustaining a more equitable




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



               poverty reduction, and empowering local stakeholders (governments, communities, rural professional
               organizations, NGOs and Civil society organizations) to fully participate in local development.



               Based on the above-mentioned assessment, Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             PDO: to expand the adoption of sustainable land and water management practices in the Target Area within
                             the Recipient's territory.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. To achieve the stated objective the project aimed to address three drivers of
                             unsustainable land and water use, namely, the lack of knowledge, inadequate governance, and the lack of
                             alternative opportunities due to poverty. The following activities would be supported: first, the project
                             would support closing the knowledge gap, improving governance of natural resources, and broadly sensitizing
                             the general population to SLWM practices and the risks of climate change. This would help create an
                             enabling environment in which SLWM practices could be adopted on a wider basis. Second, the
                             project would directly increase adoption of SLWM practices by scaling up locally appropriate techniques
                             through pilot farmers. This would be complemented with the provision of training, equipment, and investments
                             in crops and working animals to increase soil fertility and reduce erosion of pastures. As a result of these
                             activities, farmers would become advocates of SLWM practices with the potential to influence their
                             cooperatives to adopt more SLWM practices over time. Third, the project would finance sub-projects aimed at
                             diversifying livelihoods and boosting incomes. The activities promoted aimed at reducing the need for grazing,
                             reducing the encroachment of agriculture into the forest, and providing an alternative for women to abandon
                             unsustainable fuel wood collection and charcoal production as a livelihood. The pressure on the natural
                             resource base was expected to decrease by providing alternatives for people to shift away from
                             unsustainable land and water use. These activities would also contribute to higher-level outcomes related to
                             rural economic growth with a focus on gender quality; and to global environmental goals to address and
                             reverse current trends in land degradation, specifically desertification and deforestation.

                             The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by two critical assumptions: first, the lack of information and
                             poor governance of natural resources are drivers of unsustainable land and water use; and second, poverty
                             and lack of opportunities are drivers of unsustainable land and water use in rural areas of Mali.



                                                                                                                             Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



Overall, the first two chains stated in the ToC were directly linked to the PDO, and the third chain (IGAs)
complemented the PDO by aiming to reduce unsustainable land and water management practices.



Outputs (as reported in the ICR Annex 1- no targets were provided).

Knowledge management, governance, and communication

      15 studies completed. However, the ICR did not provide further information on the impact of such
         studies.
        79 training sessions for beneficiaries and technicians implemented (total of 2,290 participants).
        A database at National Environmental Information Management System was updated (www.sngie.ml).
        32,118 broadcast messages on climate risks and adaptation options have been made in public across
         9 local radio stations, and the training of technicians.
        14 Social, Economic, and Cultural Development Plans were revised and adopted by the municipal
         councils.
        Sketch on sustainable land management and climate change translated into three local languages
         (Soninke, Peul, and Bambara).
        2 documentary films about the project activities were completed in three languages (French, English,
         and Portuguese) for the first documentary and four languages (French, Bambara, Soninke, and Peul)
         for the second.
        6,000 communication material produced (flyers, t-shirt, notebook, diary, caps, and calendars).
        Acquisition and programming of 300 mobile phones per 300 village focal points trained to use them in
         sharing and disseminating weather information.
        7 automatic weather stations acquired, installed and secured in 7 communes of the project for the
         collection and transmission of meteorological data.
        Three Local Groups of Meteorological Support (GLAM) created and are functional.
        1,400 producers supplied with rain gauges and trained in how to use them.
        370 village focal points and 18 radio communicators trained to collect, analyze, use and distribute
         weather information.
         3 years of weather forecasts disseminated (2016, 2017, and 2018) with information and advisory
         support to beneficiaries in the project area

Scaling-up sustainable land management practices

      Sustainable land management practices were applied to a total of 3,667 hectares.
      Eight studies completed. The ICR did not elaborate on the benefits of these studies nor how the
         contributed to the PDO.
      Three management plans and management developed, validated and adopted.
      26 training sessions for 1,130 trained actors.
      Dissemination of the Nubian vault technology through the construction of 28 buildings (community
         and private).
      6 buildings with Nubian vault technology.


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)




      Forest areas (4) have been set up (Nioro and Nara) for a total of 140 (25 ha enrichment and 10 ha
         enclosure per site) with a water source (drilling and castle).
        800 ha of assisted natural regeneration (200 per site) were carried out in the municipalities of
         Guétéma, Kadiaba Kadiel, Fallou, and Niamana.
        5 ha of reforestation/afforestation and 50 ha of RNA made in the communal forest Sebete.
        Delimitation and mapping 4 communal forests (Kiban, Boron, Sebete, and Toubakoro).
        Recovery works - 200 ha of degraded land at Gadiaba-Kadiel and Guétéma.
        Works development in the communal forest Sebete (5 ha of reforestation/afforestation with wire mesh
         fence, 50 ha of RNA in the mountains, and a nursery of 400 m2 fenced mesh with a well).
        15 developed natural resource management agreements.
        14 anti-firefighting brigades in place and operational.
        5 studies completed. No further information was provided in the ICR on the impact of such studies.
        14 communal transhumance management plans covering 14 target communes
        6 training sessions for 230 trained actors
        Materialization of 245 km transhumance tracks in the provinces of Banamba (Sebete: 12 km;
         Toubacoro: 13 km; Kiban: 25 km) and Nara (Dilly: 97 km; Fallou: 35 km; Ouagadou: 37 km; Niamana:
         26 km)
        1,510 ha enrichment at 12 grazing areas (grazing areas) by the RNA at 100 ha pastoral perimeter, 40
         ha by seeding 60 ha reforestation
        14 Pastoral Cooperative Societies (CPS) created
        12 kits (materials) to support the enrichment of pastoral areas have been acquired
        11 positive wells were drilled in Dilly (1), Koronga (1), Fallou (1), Dabo (1), Niamana (1), Boron (1),
         Kadiaba Kadiel (1), Yéréré (1), and Kiban (3) of which 3 were converted to grazing Kiban well
         Two ponds arranged in the common Kadiaba Kadiel.
        1 study completed.
        14 training sessions for 1,400 trained actors.
        1,332.3 ha of crops realized that 642.25 a of certified seed, 49 ha basic seed and 641.05 ha in other
         technologies SLWM (compost, Zai, half moon, stony cordon labor in ridges, RNA).
         3 ha of market garden perimeters in a wall system put in place in Nioro (2) and Banamba (1)
         provinces.
        1,400 selected producers formed on 6 technologies Sustainable Management of Land (NAS,
         composting, ridge tillage, cords, stony, zai and half-moon) (see DNA brochures).
        1,400 producers supported by improved seeds and agricultural equipment (donkey carts and so on).
        4 fields schools implemented in the provinces of Nioro (1), Nara (1), and Banamba (2).

Diversification of local livelihoods

        2 studies completed. No further information was provided in the ICR on the impact of such studies.
        658 sub-projects were funded (Banamba: 140, Nara: 371, and Nioro: 147).
        16,249 beneficiaries including 12,344 women, or 76% women beneficiaries.
        12 simplified accounting training sessions for 766 trained beneficiaries.

Outcome


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



The assessment of the PDO relies on three elements as follows:

First, creating an enabling environment for the wider adoption of SLWM practices by strengthening
knowledge, governance, and communication on SLWM, climate change, and adaptation. By project
completion all 14 communes covered under the project incorporated SLWM and climate adaptation into local
development plans (100% of original target). Local Steering Committees for Development Coordination and
Actions in each of the 14 communes drafted and adopted communal Social, Economic, and Cultural
Development Plans (PDSECs), which integrate SLWM, conservation of biodiversity, and adaptation to climate
change as strategic priorities for building resilience and reducing land degradation and deforestation (ICR,
paragraph 30). While the PDSECs became the guiding documents for all activities in the commune
and resource allocation from national sources and mobilization of funds from external partners, the project
did not follow the implementation of the PDSECs after closure (ICR, paragraph 30). Also, 15 community or
inter-community NRM agreements (target: 14) that define access and user rights to shared natural resources
were signed by stakeholders in each of the project communes, as well as for the commune of Tougouné
Rangabé in Nioro province, which covers much of the Lorack Bane forest. These agreements were expected
to decrease conflicts between communities due to competition for natural resources. The project also
implemented a comprehensive media campaign with 17,000 messages over the life of the project (174% of
the original target) to sensitize the general public to the impacts of climate change and the need to adopt
SLWM practices to preserve biodiversity and prevent the degradation of ecosystems. To support agriculture
management by local farmers, the project supported the collection, analysis, and dissemination of rainfall and
weather forecast for three years (2016, 2017, and 2018) to help farmers make informed decisions. Seven
automatic weather stations were installed in seven project communes for collection and transmission of
meteorological data. The project also supplied 1,400 producers (no target provided) with rain gauges and
trained and engaged 370 village focal points and 18 radio communicators in the collection, analysis, and
distribution of weather information using mobile phones.

Second, expanding the adoption of SLWM practices on cropland, pastureland, and forestland in the
project area. By project completion SLWM practices were being applied on a total of 3,667 ha of cropland,
pastureland, and forestland in the project area, well short of the expected target (34% of the original target of
10,748 ha). The ICR (paragraph 35) explained that "the gap in the achievement of outcome indicator #1
relative to its original target relates to interventions that were planned on 7,952 ha in the protected part of the
Lorack Bane forest and which could not be undertaken due to land tenure issues." To improve soil fertility of
crop land, the project supported 1,652 farmers (118% of original target of 1400) to adopt locally traditional
and SLWM practices such as the use of organic manure, crop residue, ridge tillage, and planting pits to
harvest rainwater. Pilot farmers identified by local communes received training, equipment, crops, and
technical assistance to adopt SLWM practices. To assist natural regeneration on 828 ha of cropland and
range-land, the project supported local communities through using techniques for fire suppression, weed
control, and effective pruning of bushes, among others. To monitor and protect against forest fires, a seven
member community fire brigade was established (no target provided) and operational at the village level in
each of the 14 project communes. Their role also included reporting slash-and-burn practices to the
competent authorities. To improve sustainability of pasture lands, the project provided enriched forage seeds
and enclosed 12 pastoral sites on 790 ha of pastureland, and 245 km of transhumance trails were
demarcated )no targets provided). The project enabled the creation of 14 pastoral cooperatives and the
adoption of 14 communal transhumance management plans covering 14 project communes (100% of revised
target). To promote reforestation and afforestation on forestland, the project provided support to local farming
cooperatives in mapping and demarcating four communal forests covering 820 ha. Three participatory forest
management plans were approved and adopted by the ministry in charge of the environment for the protected


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



forests of Gadiaba Kadiel and Lorack Bane and by the Governorate of Koulikoro for the forest of Ouagadou
(100% of the original target).

Third, strengthening the livelihoods of vulnerable communities and reducing pressure on natural
resources through IGAs related to SLWM. The project provided 658 sub-grants to 16,249 beneficiaries
organized individually or in groups for IGAs (470% of original target). According to the ICR (paragraph
36) "anecdotal evidence from project reports and the final stakeholder workshop confirmed the causality
between IGAs and their positive impact on household incomes and on reducing pressure on the natural
resource base to support SLWM." The IGAs reached 16% of the population in the 14 project communes
(258,978 people/16,249 beneficiaries) and 15% of all households in the same area (41,279 households/2,708
beneficiary households). Of the 16,249 beneficiaries, there were 12,334 women or 75% of all IGA
beneficiaries and 67% of all project beneficiaries (134% of target achieved). About 55% of IGAs were
approved for sheep fattening and 8% for bovine fattening. Sheep/bovine fattening could potentially reduce the
pressure on pastureland through reducing the movements of herds and their need for grazing, and through
limiting wild fires by preserving herbaceous species that act as firewalls. This was expected to reduce the
pressure on pastureland, and strengthen the resilience of local communities against the impacts of land
degradation. Another 15% of the IGA projects supported market gardens. These were expected to have a
positive impact on land degradation, as they reduce the encroachment of agriculture into the forest. The
remaining 20% of IGAs covered various commercial activities, such as the manufacture of agricultural tools,
arboriculture, fish farming, poultry farming, and beekeeping, and a few sesame and milk processing projects.
These activities would provide alternative livelihoods mostly to women who were previously engaged in
unsustainable fuelwood collection and charcoal production. Overall, these activities were expected to
reduce the pressure on pastureland, and strengthen the resilience of local communities against the impacts of
land degradation.



The project was particularly successful in delivering results against the first and third elements, but the
outcome target was significantly under achieved for the second element (the adoption of SLWM practices
reached only 34% of the intended target of 10,748 ha). This was explained in the ICR as an intractable land
tenure issue, but in these circumstances it is disappointing the team did not find a more effective tool for
measuring the impact of the other two components on measurable outcomes for improving sustainable land
management issues. Having said that, progress on the other two key interventions was substantial and we
can presume that these would significantly diminish the pressure on land and thus improve SLWM. Therefore,
the overall rating is Substantial.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
PDO: to expand the adoption of sustainable land and water management practices in the Target Area within
the Recipient's territory.

                                                                                              Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



PDO was not changed, only outcome targets were revised.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. Same as above.



Outputs

Same as above.



Outcome

The same assessment mentioned above applies here with the exception that the evaluation is against the
revised targets.

First, creating an enabling environment for the wider adoption of SLWM practices by strengthening
knowledge, governance, and communication on SLWM, climate change, and adaptation.

      The project also implemented a comprehensive media campaign with 17,000 messages over the life
       of the project (116% of the revised target of 15,000) to sensitize the general public to the impacts of
       climate change and the need to adopt SLWM practices to preserve biodiversity and prevent the
       degradation of ecosystems.
      To support agriculture management by local farmers, the project supported the collection, analysis,
       and dissemination of rainfall and weather forecast for three years (2016, 2017, and 2018) to help
       farmers make informed decisions. Seven automatic weather stations were installed in seven project
       communes for collection and transmission of meteorological data. The project also supplied 1,400
       producers with rain gauges and trained and engaged 370 village focal points and 18 radio
       communicators in the collection, analysis, and distribution of weather information using mobile
       phones.

Second, expanding the adoption of SLWM practices on cropland, pastureland, and forestland in the
project area.

      By project completion SLWM practices were being applied on a total of 3,667 ha of cropland,
       pastureland, and forestland in the project area (122% of the revised target of 3,000 ha). The ICR
       (paragraph 35) explained that "the gap in the achievement of outcome indicator #1 relative to its
       original target relates to interventions that were planned on 7,952 ha in the protected part of the
       Lorack Bane forest and which could not be undertaken due to land tenurial issues."
      To improve soil fertility of crop land, the project supported 1,652 farmers (103% of revised target of
       1600) to adopt locally traditional and SLWM practices such as the use of organic manure, crop
       residue, ridge tillage, and planting pits to harvest rainwater. Pilot farmers identified by local communes
       received training, equipment, crops, and technical assistance to adopt SLWM practices.
      The project enabled the creation of 14 pastoral cooperatives and the adoption of 14 communal
       transhumance management plans covering 14 project communes (100% of revised target).


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 24
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



                            Third, strengthening the livelihoods of vulnerable communities and reducing pressure on natural
                            resources through IGAs related to SLWM.

                                    The project provided 658 sub-grants to 16,249 beneficiaries organized individually or in groups for
                                     IGAs (132% of revised target). According to the ICR (paragraph 36) "anecdotal evidence from project
                                     reports and the final stakeholder workshop confirmed the causality between IGAs and their positive
                                     impact on household incomes and on reducing pressure on the natural resource base to support
                                     SLWM."
                                    The IGAs reached 16% of the population in the 14 project communes (258,978 people/16,249
                                     beneficiaries) and 15% of all households in the same area (41,279 households/2,708 beneficiary
                                     households). Of the 16,249 beneficiaries, there were 12,334 women or 75% of all IGA beneficiaries
                                     and 67% of all project beneficiaries (134% of revised target achieved).
                                    About 55% of IGAs were approved for sheep fattening and 8% for bovine fattening. Sheep/bovine
                                     fattening could potentially reduce the pressure on pastureland through reducing the movements of
                                     herds and their need for grazing, and through limiting wild fires by preserving herbaceous species
                                     that act as firewalls. This was expected to reduce the pressure on pastureland, and strengthen the
                                     resilience of local communities against the impacts of land degradation. Another 15% of the IGA
                                     projects supported market gardens. These were expected to have a positive impact on land
                                     degradation, as they reduce the encroachment of agriculture into the forest. The remaining 20% of
                                     IGAs were covered various commercial activities, such as the manufacture of agricultural tools,
                                     arboriculture, fish farming, poultry farming, and beekeeping, and a few sesame and milk processing
                                     projects. These activities would provide alternative livelihoods mostly to women who were previously
                                     engaged in unsustainable fuelwood collection and charcoal production. Overall, these activities were
                                     expected to reduce the pressure on pastureland, and strengthen the resilience of local communities
                                     against the impacts of land degradation.



                            Based on the above mentioned assessment, efficacy of the outcome after restructuring is rated High. This
                            rating reflects the over achievement of the outcome indicator related to the application of the SLWM practices
                            on 3,667 ha cropland, pastureland, and forestland in the project area exceeding the revised target of 3,000
                            ha. Also, under the project 1,652 farmers and herders (103% of the revised target) were introduced to SLWM
                            techniques in their agricultural practices. A total of 2,708 households gained access to IGAs (135% of the
                            revised target) and adopted alternative livelihoods that helped reduce pressure on degraded land areas and
                            strengthened their resilience against the impacts of land degradation. The total number of beneficiaries
                            reached over 18,000 people (122% of the revised target).



                            Revised Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                              Page 13 of 24
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



         Overall Efficacy of the outcome pre-restructuring is rated Substantial. The provided evidence in the ICR point
         to the success of the project under the first and third elements of the PDO. However, the outcome target was
         significantly under achieved for the second element of the PDO (the adoption of SLWM practices reached
         only 34% of the intended target of 10,748 ha). Having said that, we can presume the impact on SLWM was
         still substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Overall efficacy of the outcome after restructuring is rated High. This rating reflects the over achievement of
         the outcome indicator related to the application of the SLWM practices on 3,667 ha cropland, pastureland,
         and forestland in the project area exceeding the revised target of 3,000 ha. Also, under the project 1,652
         farmers and herders (103%of the target) were introduced to SLWM techniques in their agricultural practices.
         A total of 2,708 households gained access to IGAs (135% of target) and adopted alternative livelihoods that
         helped reduce pressure on degraded land areas and strengthened their resilience against the impacts of land
         degradation. The total number of beneficiaries reached over 18,000 people (122% of the target).



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         High



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis

ex ante

The EFA in the PAD did not directly estimate an overall economic rate of return for the project. Alternatively, the
PAD (paragraph 47) stated that the "economic and financial viability of a range of SLWM technologies
conducted by the on-going Mali Agricultural Productivity Project found an economic rate of return of 34% and a
financial rate of return ranging from 27% to 64% depending on the agro-ecological zones for targeted
technologies (with a 12% discount rate)."

The project support focused on three broad categories of investments: (i) the income generating activities; (ii)
the promotion of a range of SLWM practices; and (iii) the strengthening of natural governance and institutions.
The economic analysis focused on the first two categories of investments. This was due to limitations on data
collection in the project areas due to security concerns.

The analysis was based on secondary data and information derived from the results of previous studies and
from ongoing investments operations. A standard benefit-cost analysis was conducted for a representative

                                                                                                          Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



business model of income generating activities of the project areas. The estimated economic rate of return runs
ranged from 18.7% for small-scale irrigated vegetable production (one hectare), 18.5% for peanut butter
production, 53% for small ruminant fattening, and 31% for beekeeping for honey harvesting. According to the
PAD (paragraph 45) "these levels of economic viability are robust because they would withstand a 25% increase
in total investment cost."

Implementing SLWM technologies was expected to generate multiple unquantifiable environmental benefits
including: (i) increased primary production of ecosystems; (ii) increased biodiversity; (iii) increased recharge of
ground water; and (iv) increased carbon sequestration (forest and soil).



ex post

The ICR (paragraph 43) reported that no ex post EFA analysis was conducted due to limited data availability on
its impacts. This stemmed from "security concerns, presence of a wide variety of interventions, and potential
long-term time frame for some of them to show impact." This made it "impossible to conduct a cost-benefit
analysis (CBA) for the whole project or even for single activities (ICR, paragraph 43)." The expected project
benefits according to the ICR were local benefits through improved agricultural productivity, national benefits
through improved ecosyems and global benefits through the reversal of current trends in land degradation,
stimulating conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, and supporting enhancement of carbon benefits
from reforestation and reduced forest fires.

Cost-effectiveness of the project. The project disbursed US$20.2 million and reached about 18,300 direct
beneficiaries, which corresponds to US$1,100 per beneficiary. While this was significantly lower than the $7,000
per beneficiary estimated at appraisal, it was higher than the costs in other comparable countries in the
region. The unit cost of adopting SLWM practices was US$2,000 per ha, which was in the upper range found for
other African countries (US$200–US$2,300, with a median of US$670).



Administrative and Institutional Efficiency

The project closed six months later than the expected date. Extension pf the closing date was needed to
accommodate initial implementation delays. The project suffered initial implementation delays that resulted from
the absence of a dedicated project implementation unit (ICR paragraph 47). While addressing land tenure
issues was critical to overcoming unsustainable land and water use, the project design overlooked this aspect.
Implementation efficiency was negatively impacted by the relatively high level of staff turnover in the ministries
and agencies charged with implementing the project. The final cost of component 4 (project coordination,
monitoring and evaluation) was US$3.73 million or 33% over the estimated cost of US$2.81 million, which
accounted for 18% of the total project costs.



Overall, Efficiency is rated Modest. This rating reflects the absence of a meaningful ex post EFA, concerns on
cost-effectiveness aspects and initial implementation delays combined with shortcomings on achieving the
SLWM adoption target in the Lorack Bane forest.



                                                                                                       Page 15 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                  0
 Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                  0
 ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Pre-Restructuring

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial with moderate
achievement on the adoption of SLWM practices, but significant progress on the livelihoods and institutional
aspects. Efficiency was rated Modest based on the absence of a meaningful ex post EFA, concerns on cost-
effectiveness aspects and initial implementation delays combined with shortcomings on achieving the SLWM
adoption target in the Lorack Bane forest.

Based on the ratings assigned for the three elements (Relevance of Design, Efficacy and Efficiency), outcome is
rated Moderately Satisfactory.



Post Restructuring

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated High due to the over achievement of
the project on the adoption of SLWM practices which reached 3,667 ha cropland, pastureland, and forestland in
the project area exceeding the revised target of 3,000 ha. The project also exceeded its targets on the number
of beneficiaries, households who gained access to IGAs, and farners and herders who applied
SLWM. Efficiency was rated Modest based on the absence of a meaningful ex post EFA, concerns on cost-
effectiveness aspects and initial implementation delays.

Based on the ratings assigned for the three elements (Relevance of Design, Efficacy and Efficiency), outcome is
rated Moderately Satisfactory.



Weighted Outcome


                                                                                                 Page 16 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



The amount disbursed at Restructuring was US$ 8.62 million which represents 78% of the total disbursed Bank
financing which reached US$10.95 million.

The Outcome rating pre-restructuring was Moderately Satisfactory which corresponds to 4 on a 1 to 6 scale,
and post restructuring was Moderately Satisfactory which corresponds to 4 on the same 1 to 6 scale.

Thus, the Overall Weighted Outcome is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks were identified by the ICR (paragraphs 90, 91, 92 and 93):

      The adoption of SLWM practices on 3,667 ha of land is at high risk. Post completion the practices of
       SLWM might be discontinued among farmers and pastoralist if maintenance and inputs costs become
       higher than the costs incurred before the project. Land tenure rights issues also need to be
       addressed else it is unlikely that further progress will be achieved going forward.
      Sustainability of pastoral perimeters. The pastoral perimeter of Guajaba-Kuagèlewas successfully
       implemented and continues to be operational serving the communes of Guétéma and Guajaba-
       Kuagèle. The perimeter serves herds coming from these two communes as a place to water
       livestock, provide fodder for livestock feed, and provide a rest place for herds. The municipalities
       have set up a management committee which allows them to levy a fee on the number of heads of the
       herd at the entrance to the perimeter. The resources of this inter-municipal fee allow the pastoral
       perimeter to be maintained, and the controlled movement of herds reduce their pressure on natural
       resources.
      Lack of political will to implement SLWM practices. Plans and agreements are a first step toward
       sustainable land and water management that must be followed by a strong commitment to act on
       their implementation. The project supported numerous studies, development plans, investment plans,
       and local agreements, which lay the foundation for action to restore land through SLWM
       practices. The forest management plans had been approved for two years before project closing, and
       yet the project was not able to meet its main outcome indicator primarily due to the challenges of
       restoration on publicly owned forestland.
      Security and political instability (a risk emphasized by IEG). Mali continues to experience security
       threats and possible political upheavals. Such events could undermine the project achievements and
       even reverse gains that resulted from the adoption of SLWM activities.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

                                                                                                 Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



  The project design benefited from the Bank’s experience in addressing land degradation and
  deforestation. Key lessons learned from other projects in Mali and reflected in the design
  included: empowering local actors, tapping local know-how and adaptation strategies, and involving local
  communities in NRM. While project design was comprehensive in addressing unsustainable land and
  water use, it was challenging in the context of an under funded public sector and weak community
  organizations. The sequencing of activities could have benefited from better attention to establish
  better synergy between activities. A notable example was the lack of a pre-feasibility study for the Lorack
  Bane forest at the preparation stage which "would have facilitated timelier implementation and outcome
  of project activities (ICR, paragraph 58)." The project was designed without a dedicated project
  implementation unit (PIU), where implementation relied on a core team at the Agency for the
  Environment and Sustainable Development. However, the lack of a dedicated PIU contributed to
  implementation delays in the earlier stage of the project. A notable design shortcoming was the failure to
  address land tenure issues despite being key to overcoming unsustainable land and water use. At the
  appraisal stage, several risks were identified related to the capacity of the implementing agency, financial
  management and project related risks including design, environmental management and sustainability.
  The PAD (Annex 4) included a detailed discussion of risks and the suggested mitigation measures.
  However, the ICR did not report whether any of the risks identified at appraisal materialized during
  implementation nor how effective the mitigation measures were. M&E design had some shortcomings
  with regards to the specificity of indicators (see section 9 for more details).

  Based on the above mentioned assessment, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory. This rating
  reflects moderate shortcomings in project design, a lack a pre-feasibility study for the Lorack Bane forest,
  concerns on implementation arrangements and some M&E weaknesses.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project was implemented under a challenging security situation that limited field visits. The Bank team
 relied on field officers to report on the implementation of activities due to the security situation. The Bank
 conducted biannual supervision missions to support the implementation activities. According to the ICR
 (paragraph 87) the Bank "provided adequate assistance on safeguards, FM, and procurement." Project
 implementation benefited from the stability of the Task Team leadership which only experienced one
 change throughout implementation.

 The ICR (paragraph 89) reported that the underachievement of the project's outcome regarding the
 adoption of SLWM practices "was not candidly reported in the World Bank supervision documents and
 correspondence, which reduced the effectiveness of the M&E system." Further, the tracking of the project's
 outcome was undermined by the inconsistencies in the Restructuring Paper and the Results Framework
 (RF). For example, the target for the PDO outcome indicator #1 was reduced 72% without providing a clear
 rationale, and one PDO outcome indicator ‘Land area under sustainable landscape management practices
 (ha) was added without a defined target (ICR paragraph 73). The supervision team should have addressed
 these issues earlier in the implementation period to enable accurate tracking of the activities and reporting



                                                                                                    Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



 on outcomes. Also, the restructuring of the project came late in the implementation cycle and should have
 happened at an earlier stage to maximize benefits of the restructuring .

 Quality of supervision is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. This rating reflects a concern on poor reporting of
 achievements in the Bank supervision documents, late attention to M&E weaknesses, and late
 restructuring of the project.



 Overall, Bank Performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory given the default methodological approach
 of consideration of the Efficacy rating in situations where the ratings are split. This rating reflects moderate
 shortcomings for Quality at Entry and significant shortcomings for Quality of supervision.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD did not include an explicit Theory of Change (ToC), which was not a requirement at the time of
 appraisal. Nevertheless, the detailed project description in the PAD (Annex 2) reflected clear connections
 between the project inputs/activities, outputs, and expected outcomes. Also, the ICR (paragraph 7 and
 figure 1) included a good discussion on the ToC and the key underlying assumptions.

 The Agency for the Environment and Sustainable Development (AEDD) had the overall responsibility for
 M&E activities. At the local level, the decentralized services of the participating institutions (National
 Directorate of Agriculture, National Directorate of Water and Forestry, and National Directorate of Animal
 Productions and Industries) would collaborate for data collection, compilation, communication to the M&E
 specialist within AEDD.

 The PDO was to be assessed through three outcome indicators: 1. Increase in land area with
 SLWM practices in targeted areas, compared to baseline (hectares reported by crop, range, forest,
 wetlands, protected areas); 2. Changes (increase) in vegetation cover in targeted areas, compared
 to baseline; and .3. Direct beneficiaries of the project (number) of which female (percentage). While the first
 indicator was directly related to the PDO and measurable, the basis for the target of 10,748 ha was not
 clearly explained in the PAD. Also, the disaggregation to each of the categories proved difficult and was
 later dropped. The second indicator was dropped due to potential attribution issues and lack of reliable
 counterfactuals. The third indicator provided a count of beneficiaries, which did not provide any assessment



                                                                                                      Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



 on impacts. In sum, with practically only one PDO outcome indicator, the M&E design fell short on
 comprehensively capturing the full impact of the project.

 The Results Framework included fourteen intermediate outcome indicators to assess the different activities
 supported by the project. Most were linked to the activities and measurable, but there were no baselines
 available.

 Overall, M&E design was weak particularly for the PDO level indicators, and the lack of any baselines
 undermined assessment of activities.




b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was challenging due to the security situation. The Bank relied on local focal points
  as well as NGOs to collect monitoring data from project activities implemented on the ground. The
  baseline studies for vegetation cover and beneficiaries were not carried out as planned. M&E activities
  had an initial slow start, but according to the ICR (paragraph 74) "M&E data were consistently collected
  on the different aspects of project implementation." However, deeper technical assessment of land use
  change was needed to make use of satellite images of project areas. Also, the lack of information on the
  IGA beneficiaries regarding their previous livelihoods made it difficult to accurately assess their impact on
  reducing the pressure on natural resources and on helping to strengthen the economic resilience of
  households (ICR paragraph 76).

  Restructuring and revision of the RF. As part of the 2018 restructuring the RF was revised as follows:
  of the 14 original intermediate outcome indicators, 4 were dropped, 1 was moved to the PDO level, and 5
  were revised. One new indicator was added. Notable changes included the reduction of the target for
  outcome indicator #1 by 75% from 10,748 ha to 3,000 ha. The ICR (paragraph 64) attributed this
  significant reduction to land tenure rights. Specifically, "living off public land, the stakeholders had lower
  levels of ownership of the resources and, in the absence of proper incentives, considered their individual
  interests. The project was unable to overcome this obstacle to effectively engage this group of
  stakeholders in the expansion of SLWM practices on this part of the project area. It was also reported
  that this area faced security risks during the last years of project implementation." Another notable
  change was the upward revision of the target for the number of alternative income-generating activities
  financed by the project from 140 to 500. This was to reflect a shift in the focus of the project after the
  significant reduction of the outcome indicator #1 target. While these changes were understandable, this
  Review does not agree with the assessment of the ICR that the ToC was not affected. The focus of the
  project shifted from the adoption of SLWM activities -which was the core activity that would contribute to
  achievement of the PDO, to a complementary activity (Income Generating Activities or IGAs) that was
  expected to support the PDO by reducing unsustainable land and water management practices.



  Overall implementation was challenging due to security concerns, and the revision of the RF was carried
  out late in the implementation cycle.




                                                                                                     Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E utilization was mixed. On one hand, the ICR (paragraph 78) stated that the "project monitoring was
  adequately used to inform project management and improve project performance." On the other
  hand, the expansion of SLWM activities lacked reporting on key aspects. This lack of
  information undermined the project management and prevented "course correction and potentially to
  better outcomes for the Lorack Bane forest (ICR paragraph 78)." At restructuring, M&E data were used
  to adjust the outcome targets for each of the outcome indicators.

  Overall, M&E quality is rated Modest. This rating reflects design weaknesses including lack of a
  baseline, poor design of outcome indicators, and limited utilization of M&E data due to lack of detailed
  reporting.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was an environmental category B-Partial Assessment. The following six safeguard policies were
   triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01, Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04, Pest
   Management OP 4.09, Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11, Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12,
   and Forests OP/BP 4.36. The environmental and social impacts of the project were mainly related to the
   implementation of components 2 and 3. The expected impacts of the project included: (i) water pollution and
   prevalence of water-borne disease around small irrigation or multi-purpose water point areas; and (ii)
   increase in illegal poaching following the publication of the wildlife inventory results; (iii) introduction of
   inappropriate plant species for afforestation. Positive impacts on the environmental and social side
   included: (i) improvement of livelihoods; (ii) reduction of resource use conflicts; (iii) strengthening of social
   cohesion; (iv) reduction of unemployment rate among unqualified youth; (v) increase of knowledge base
   and improvement of production practices. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
   and a Pest Management Plan (PMP) were prepared, and disclosed in country on June 11, 2013 and at the
   Bank's Infoshop on June 12, 2013.

   Environmental safeguards. 670 physical investments under component 3 were environmentally and
   socially screened. This resulted in 218 notices of expected environmental and social impact for IGAs (ICR
   paragraph 81). The Bank provided safeguards training and capacity building to 127 staff of the
   implementing agencies in the proper implementation of World Bank policies. After the MTR, the
   project appointed environmental and social focal points in each implementation agency to improve
   safeguard monitoring.

   Social safeguards. The project established a simplified grievance redress mechanism (GRM) mainly for
   component 3 on IGA sub-grants. Most of the complaints received related to the delay in disbursement. The
   ICR did not report on the number of complaints received nor whether these complaints were resolved.




                                                                                                     Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



    Safeguard compliance. The ICR (paragraph 82) reported that "the project complied with all applicable and
   triggered safeguards policies and was consistently rated Satisfactory and Moderately Satisfactory."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The ICR reported limited details on financial management. The core
   implementation team included financial management (FM) specialists. The World Bank team provided
   adequate assistance financial management (ICR paragraph 87).

   Procurement. The World Bank team provided adequate assistance on procurement (ICR paragraph 87).
   No further details were reported in the ICR.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                    IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                              Moderately
Outcome                                             Moderately Satisfactory
                              Satisfactory
                              Moderately
Bank Performance                                    Moderately Satisfactory
                              Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included three lessons. The following are emphasized with some adaptation of language:

      Addressing land tenure issues is critical to ensure a successful outcome for land
       restoration projects. The project experience showed that without addressing the underlying
       land tenure insecurity, land degradation outcomes will not materialize, and they will not be
       sustainable. It is also important to build in short-term incentives, while the longer-term
       benefits of land restoration materialize.
      Implementing a project without a dedicated PIU is possible with a proper incentive
       structure in place. The project relied on a core team of staff appointed within the
       implementing agency to coordinate the daily management and monitoring of tasks. Staff

                                                                                                Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



         incentives were addressed through a national incentive framework, using counterpart
         funding. This allowed for bonuses and other benefits to align public official’s responsibility
         with project implementation. This also ensures that public officials would not be pulled into
         competing priorities of the implementing agency.

The following lesson is emphasized by IEG:

        Restructuring of projects needs to be timely and comprehensive to maximize the
         benefits of the restructuring process. The project experienced a relatively late
         restructuring process. This left limited time for benefits to materialize by completion. Also, the
         restructuring needs to be comprehensive and involve the revision of the PDO especially
         when critical activities are scaled back.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence.

The ICR acknowledged that M&E design had weaknesses and utilization was limited. The ICR (paragraph 76)
also reported that baseline studies for vegetation cover and beneficiaries were not carried out as planned. Also,
the impact of IGAs on reducing pressure on natural resources or helping strengthen the economic resilience of
households could not be accurately assessed due to limited information. Overall, quality of evidence was
relatively poor-which is beyond the control of the ICR.

Quality of Analysis.

The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings to the extent possible - given the M&E
weaknesses.

Lessons were generally based on evidence and analysis. They were based on the project experience.

Results Orientation.

The ICR included a good discussion on outcomes despite concerns on the accuracy of the M&E data.
However, the discussion could have benefited from a better balance between shortcomings and actual
achievements.

Internal Consistency.

Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and integrated.



                                                                                                       Page 23 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mali- NRM Changing Climate (PSG) (P145799)



Consistency with guidelines.

The ICR is substantially longer than what is stated in the guidelines.

Conciseness.

The ICR provided thorough coverage of the implementation experience and candidly reported on
shortcomings. There was enough clarity in the report’s messaging. However, discussion of outcomes suffered
from a poor M&E design combined with limited M&E utilization. The ICR did not report on whether the project
closing date was extended as part of the changes introduced during the first or second restructuring of the
project, and included limited information on financial management and procurement.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated substantial, despite some shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 24 of 24
