     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DTF: MA-Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship (P144134)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022098

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P144134                                    DTF: MA-Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Morocco                                    Social


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-15089                                  31-Mar-2018                                            4,837,483.25

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Jun-2013                               31-Aug-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             5,000,000.00                                     5,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              4,837,483.25                                     4,837,483.25

 Actual                                          4,837,483.25                                     4,837,483.25




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Maria Vanessa               John R. Eriksson            Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Corlazzoli




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the project Strengthening Micro-Entrepreneurship for Disadvantaged Youth (P144134) was to
   provide Beneficiaries in the Project Areas with access to micro-entrepreneurship development services
   (Financial Agreement, pg. 6). The legal agreement had the same objective as the PAD dated June 28,
   2013. The objective did not change throughout the life of the project.

   Beneficiaries were defined as disadvantaged man or woman between the ages of 18 and 29 who were
   aspiring to be or were an entrepreneur with secondary education or less[1] [2] , as selected pursuant to the

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DTF: MA-Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship (P144134)



   provisions of the POM[3] . The beneficiaries would also include individuals that were outside the labor market
   or actively in the informal sector, having basic know-how in a specific activity or trade, and ideally having an
   idea of a business start-up in mind (PAD, para. 17).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Integrated Micro-entrepreneurship Support for Disadvantaged Youth in the Project
   Areas (Appraisal cost was estimated at US$2,956,400. At closing the cost was US$2,860,000). This
   component aimed at providing non-financial support to 5,000 disadvantaged youth to facilitate the start-up
   and expansion of local youth-led micro entrepreneurship (PAD, para. 23). The project aimed to achieve this
   by carrying out market assessments to identify key growth sectors, constraints for businesses and trades,
   and possibilities for growth (PAD, para. 23). It also sought to build entrepreneurship skills and support a
   sub-set of participants in post-enterprise creation business development support, such as mentoring,
   physical space, and assistance to access markets (PAD, para. 23).


   Component 2: Institutional Capacity Building (Appraisal cost was estimated at US$813,300. At closing
   the cost was US$690,000). This component aimed at providing capacity support to ensure that Component
   1 was successfully implemented. Support included product and curricula development, strengthening of
   institutional capacity for service delivery, and capacity building to recipient agencies and local entities (PAD,
   para 26). This component also included capacity support for monitoring and evaluation (PAD, para 26).


   Component 3: Project Management and Institutional Capacity Building (Appraisal cost was estimated
   at US$1,100,000. At closing the cost was US$1,270,000). This component aimed to finance the Project
   Management Unit (PMU), including all project coordination, financial management, implementation of
   monitoring and evaluation, communications, and oversight of local implementing organizations and service
   providers (PAD, para. 28).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. At appraisal, the total cost of the project was estimated at US$5 million, of which all would be
   allocated through an Investment Project Financing by the World Bank (PAD, pg. i). At closing, the total
   project cost was projected at US$5 million (ICR, pg. 2).

   Financing. A total of US$5 million was financed through a Trust Fund (TF-15089). The grant amount was
   revised to US$4,837,483. At the end of the project, the actual disbursement was US$4,837,483 (ICR, pg.
   2).

   Borrower Contribution. There were no provisions in the PAD or in the legal agreement that indicated that

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DTF: MA-Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship (P144134)



   the Borrower had to make a financial contribution to the project.

   Dates. The project was approved on the 27th of June 2013 and became effective on August 27, 2013. The
   midterm-review (MTR) took place on March 25, 2016 (ICR, pg. 2).

   On March 30, 2018 a project restructure was approved. It consisted of changes to the loan closing dates,
   disbursement arrangements, and implementing schedule. The project close date was moved from the 31 of
   March 2018 to March 31, 2019.

   On March 31, 2019 the project received another 6 month extension. The no-cost extension was to allow for
   the continuation of the post-creation entrepreneurship support beyond the 12 month period (ICR, para 12).
   The project closed on August 31, 2019, which was17 months after the original closing date (ICR, para 12).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At the time of appraisal, Morocco’s overall economic performance was strong, but young people were
disproportionately affected by economic exclusion. Among youth, 51 percent of the 15-29-year age bracket
were out of school and out of work. Low skilled youth represented 63 percent of all unemployed youth.
Females were particularly vulnerable with 82 percent not in school due to family reasons or discouragement
(PAD, para 1). Moreover, 87 percent of youth worked in the informal sector.

There was a growing interest in developing small enterprises. Starting and expanding a business remained
a challenge for disadvantaged youths. Obstacles included lack of access to information, skills, finance, land
and property rights, pre-post start up orientation, and micro-entrepreneurship development support.

Previous Sector Experience: The Government of Morocco had been implementing several high-profile
development programs and sectoral strategies focusing in the areas of education, employment, and youth
(PAD, para. 3). These projects included the second phase of the National Human Development Initiative
(INDH). The first phase of the INDH project yielded several important lessons that were incorporated into
the design of this project (PAD, para. 32). The project was also designed keeping in mind evaluation
findings from other donors, such as the EU, and literature review related to youth-led micro-enterprises
(PAD, para 31-34).

Alignment with Development Goals: The objective of this project was to provide access to services for
disadvantaged youth to increase their opportunities at successful micro-enterprises. If the project was
successful, it would fully support the World Bank Development twin goals of reducing poverty and
increasing economic growth. This would be done through job creation and income generation among
disadvantaged youth (ICR, para. 26).

Alignment with Government Development Strategy: The project aligned with the Government of
Morocco’s strategy to formalize informal enterprises and strengthen the availability of non-financial support
services to small businesses at the local level (ICR, para. 3).



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      DTF: MA-Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship (P144134)



               At the time of appraisal, the project’s objective was very relevant. The Country Partnership Strategy of
               2014-2017 highlighted the challenges that disadvantaged youth had in setting up their own micro-enterprise
               (CPS 14-17, para 29). The project’s objective supports the CPS’s result area: Promoting Competitive and
               Inclusive Growth (CPS, pg. 19), in particular Strategic Outcome 1.6 Improving Higher Education or
               Vocational Training for youth (CPS, pg 22-23). At closing, the objective continued to be relevant to
               achieving Strategic Objective A: Promoting Job Creation by the Private Sector, in Specific Outcome:
               Increasing Opportunities for Private Sector Growth with a Focus on MSMEs and Youth Employability (CPF,
               pg. 22).

               Overall, the project’s objective was relevant given the context and the priorities of the government as
               outlined in the Country Partnership Frameworks. If the project were to be successful, it would support the
               achievement of the World Bank’s Development Strategy. The relevance of the objective is rated high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             To provide Beneficiaries in the Project Areas with access to micro-entrepreneurship development services.




                             Rationale
                             The project aimed at achieving the objective of providing disadvantaged youth, including women, with access
                             to micro-entrepreneurship development services. In addition, there were two underlying outcomes that were
                             described in the PAD. They included (a) strengthening the capacity of national and local stakeholders to
                             provide assistance to youth in starting and growing their micro-enterprises and (b) supporting rigorous
                             learning about the effectiveness of unemployment support to inform scale up of the project.

                             The theory of change that underpinned this project stated that disadvantaged youth would be more likely to
                             launch or grow their micro-enterprises if they received training, learned about business development, and
                             were mentored for a period of one-year. Moreover, the project believed that in order for the results to be
                             sustainable, the project needed to raise the capacity of national and local stakeholders to ensure quality
                             implementation, support, and long-term engagement.

                             The theory of change tackled important gaps that needed to be closed in order for youth to launch their own
                             businesses. The proposal also integrated gender analysis and described means by which young women
                             would benefit from the program. One barrier that the theory did not take into account was the lack of income

                                                                                                                             Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DTF: MA-Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship (P144134)



or finances available for youth to begin their business endeavors, in particular for disadvantaged youth.
Without seed funding, youth are often unable to test let alone implement their initiatives. Given that the target
of this project was disadvantaged youth, the lack of funds is an important oversight of the theory of change
and project design.

The logical framework stressed the importance of measuring who participated, quality of trainings delivered,
and capacity strengthening of institutions. Unfortunately, the indicators in the PDO failed to take into account
any kind of outcome or impact of the project. For example, the project did not seek to measure the number of
businesses that were launched, employment rates, or return to school rates. Without this information it is
difficult to assess the outcome of the trainings and what additional constraints or barriers the youth faced as
they attempted to implement or grow their micro-enterprises. This is a major flaw of the logical framework.
Moreover, the logical framework also did not include indicators to measure the quality of performance of the
NGO implementing partners.

While it was not part of the logframe, the project collected some of this data through its outcome evaluation.
The assessment of the outcome of this project is primarily drawn from results of the outcome evaluation
included in the ICR.

Outputs:

      13,293 youth participated in pre-identification boot camp, of which 46% were women (Target
       exceeded. Target: 10,000, 40% women, ICR, pg. 22-23).
      6,822 youth of which 3,343 were women (49%) benefited from the project (Target exceeded. Target:
       5,000 youth, 40% women. ICR, pg. 10).
      5,761 youth completed entrepreneurship training, of which 2,535 were women (44%) (Target
       exceeded. Target: 4,500 youth, 40% women. ICR, pg. 10).
      2,813 youth received post-creation follow up support for at least 12 months, of which 1,086 were
       women (38.6%) (Target mostly exceeded. Target 1,800 youth, 720 female (40%) ICR, pg. 10).

Outcomes

Micro-Enterprises Created. The project was able to reach, train, and provide support to more youth than
originally targeted. More than 4,500 youth received project support to register their business (ICR, para.
36). At project closure, 2,572 enterprises were created of which 67% attained legal status of auto-
entrepreneur and 31% were cooperatives (ICR, pg. 28). Businesses created operated in the following sectors
trade (37.5%), services (29%), arts and crafts (13.5%) and agriculture (12%) (ICR, pg. 28). A total of 4,221
beneficiaries participated in legally registering a business (either as auto-entrepreneurs or as a cooperative)
(ICR, para 28 and World Bank Interview, 2020).

Barriers to Forming a Micro-enterprise. While the project helped some youth form a business, the barriers
that other youth experienced should not be overlooked. From the evaluation, out of a sample of 361
participants, 158 beneficiaries formed a company. This means that 56% of those individuals surveyed did not.
Moreover 11% of survey respondents stated that after starting a small enterprise they had to quit it (ICR, pg.
42). Reasons for not forming a company included financial burden (84%), skill-set not enough to overcome
budgetary obstacles, and desire to continue an education (6%) (ICR, pg. 41). Focus groups also highlighted
that another reason for not forming a company remained apprehension of taxes and fiscal legislation (ICR,
pg. 41). Participants would prefer to remain in the informal sector.


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DTF: MA-Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship (P144134)



Improvement in Economic Situation of Beneficiaries. The project had mixed results in improving the
economic situation of beneficiaries. According to the beneficiary survey, the project helped improve the
economic situation of at least more than half of survey respondents who became entrepreneurs (52%)
(ICR,para. 15) . Other entrepreneurs did not see a change in their economic situation. For example, 57% of
survey respondents that had succeeded in becoming entrepreneurs reported that their overall economic
situation had improved after the enrollment in the project (ICR, pg. 37). A total of 38% of those that launched
their own business did not see a change in their economic situation (ICR, pg. 37) and a small percentage of
the ones that succeeded in establishing an enterprise saw a deterioration in their economic situation (ICR, pg
37).

After project closure, of the 304 respondents who had never worked, 98 (32%) had paid jobs, 91 (30%) were
self-employed, and 31 (10%) were employers. A total of 53 (17%) did not have work (ICR, pg. 43).

Perceived Benefits of Training. The youth that were successful in becoming entrepreneurs were more
likely to view the project as very beneficial than those that did not (65% vs. 52%) (ICR, para. 15). Of the
sampled population, 59% of males and 57% of females surveyed viewed the project as being very beneficial .
The outcome evaluation defined beneficial as “the extent that the program changed anything in your life”
(World Bank Interview, 2020). It is important to note that 6% of respondents surveyed stated that there were
no benefits from the project (ICR, para. 15).

Quality of Trainings. While generally most project participants felt that the trainings were useful, survey
respondents also felt that the quality of the trainings could be improved. A total of 84 % of participants rated
the quality of training package useful or very useful (Target exceeded. Target: 80%, ICR, pg. 23).
Unfortunately, “useful” was not defined in the M&E plan (World Bank Interview, 2020) Focus group
discussions with participants highlighted that the project helped participants understand the value of
marketing, articulate goals professionally, and take ownership of feasibility of their aspirations (ICR, para. 16).
That said, the quality of the training could have been improved as participants felt that the training courses
were challenging because of language barrier (training was delivered in French as opposed to Arabic) and
the material was too academic in nature (ICR, para. 36). Given that the target population was disadvantaged
youth that had at most completed a high school diploma, the language and material choices hindered quality.

Similarly, while the post-training mentoring was useful, survey respondents felt could have been improved.
Eight-seven percent of beneficiaries also evaluated the post-creation follow-up support as useful or very
useful (Target exceeded: Target: 80%, ICR, pg. 24). The evaluation found out that the training provided
management and business planning skills, but lacked depth and follow up related to budgetary management
and profitability (ICR, pg. 38). For the post-creation training, the evaluation uncovered that the courses were
very academic and theoretical. Simultaneously, focus group participants felt it was too superficial and it did
not relate to their day to day activities (ICR, pg. 39).

That said 92% of participants that launched a business and 87% that did not, felt that the project trainings
taught them how to run a small business (ICR, pg. 40).

Lack of Financial Assistance. The project experienced a miscommunication between the implementing
agencies and the youth. Some youth had the impression that financial assistance would be provided as part
of the project component (ICR, pg. 39). This created a sense of disappointment and discontent among
numerous youth (ICR, pg. 39). The project created partnerships with two microfinance institutions and
grantmaking and soft loan institutions (ICR, para 25). At least 91 93% of total) enterprises created benefited
from the project’s partnership (ICR, para. 25). However, 85% of the businesses that were created were self-

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               DTF: MA-Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship (P144134)



                            funded, and 15% received donations or other resources (ICR, pg. 28). Eighty-one percent of businesses
                            invested less than US$5,200, 14% between US$5,200-US$10,400, and 5% more than US$10,400 (ICR, pg.
                            28). The evaluation also uncovered that many beneficiaries underestimated the cost of either equipment, staff
                            or rent (ICR, pg. 38).


                            Female Youth. The courses may have been more beneficial for female youth, even though there were more
                            male than female youth entrepreneurs. According to the outcome evaluation, females reported that the
                            project content was interesting and it taught them to run a small business more than their male peers (ICR,
                            pg. 36-37). Females also reported, on average, that the project had a larger positive effect on their lives
                            relative to males (ICR, pg. 37). Qualitative research demonstrated that the project granted female youth
                            perspective in different employment pathways (ICR, pg. 42). Urban respondents also reported a higher
                            overall benefit from the project than rural respondents (ICR, pg. 37).

                            Strengthening Capacity of Implementing Partners and Other Stakeholders

                            Outputs:

                                  251 youth professionals, of which 42 percent were women, at implementing NGOs/CBOs were
                                   provided with training and support (Target exceeded. Target: 200 of which 40% were women, ICR, pg.
                                   24).
                                  201 public officials at central and local level were trained by the program (Target not met. Target:
                                   250, ICR, pg. 25).

                            Outcomes

                            The project also sought to strengthen the capacity of implementing partners to provide assistance to youth in
                            starting and growing their micro-enterprises. Support was given primarily in the form of trainings. The ICR did
                            not specify why the project did not meet the output target of training 250 public officials. All stakeholders that
                            participated in trainings rated the quality of the training useful or very useful (Target exceeded. Target: 80%,
                            ICR, pg. 25). Moreover, 94% of youth professionals that participated in the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
                            training rated the quality of the training as useful or very useful (Target exceeded. Target: 80%, ICR, pg. 25).
                            As a result of the project, the implementing partners also developed training tools (World Bank Interview,
                            2020). They also formed a dedicated network to continue to work with disadvantaged youth (World Bank
                            Interview, 2020).




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DTF: MA-Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship (P144134)




  Rationale
  On balance, the project met the PDO indicators and it implemented the activities as planned. It met the
  requirement of providing youth with access to micro-entrepreneurship development services. There is also
  evidence that businesses were created. The economic well-being of participants was mixed. While some of
  the participants experienced improved income, others did not. That said, quality of training had some glaring
  weaknesses in particular language that the courses were led and level of content. The project seemed to
  have benefited female youth more than male youth, even if they did not launch a business. As a result, the
  objective is rated as Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Scope of Analysis. A financial and economic analysis was not carried out as part of the design of the project
(PAD, para 50). The PAD argued that public sector involvement to support youth private enterprise through non-
financial services was justified by the weak market capacity to enable low income youth to start and grow new
businesses. (PAD, para. 50). At preparation it was estimated that the cost per beneficiary would be US$800.
These projected costs were in line with similar projects where the average cost per-beneficiary was between
US$500- 2,000 (PAD, para. 50). The project expected to conduct an ex-post economic and financial analysis of
the training and coaching activities and calculate rates of returns based on income change (PAD, para. 51). A
financial and economic analysis of the capacity building of institutions was determined to not be feasible (PAD,
para. 51).


Economic Analysis. At project closure, the project calculated that the cost per beneficiary was US$830 (ICR,
pg. 32). This calculation was based on (i) the direct implementation cost of the entrepreneurship support
activities, (ii) the indirect cost of the institutional support and technical assistance and (iii) and training
completion. If the analysis considered all the beneficiaries that received entrepreneurship support then the cost
per beneficiary would be US$750 (ICR, pg. 32) The cost per beneficiary is on the lower end of cost comparisons
and meets the expected target at appraisal.


An outcome evaluation was conducted which yielded important social and economic benefits of the project,
which are outlined in the Efficacy section. However, the project did not calculate the rate of return of the training
and coaching activities as planned (World Bank Interview, 2020) which was a substantial shortcoming. The
project experienced challenges in data collection when relying on multiple service providers (World Bank
Interview, 2020). An analysis on the quality of services delivered by the contracted service providers was also
not carried out (ICR, para. 20). This assessment would have provided insight into value for money of the
services under the project (ICR, para. 20).




                                                                                                        Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DTF: MA-Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship (P144134)



Operational Efficiency. Although there were administrative delays in this project, the project did not incur
project cost escalations (ICR, pg. 32). The project did experience fiduciary management challenges that
impacted the efficiency of the project (see Section #10. Fiduciary Compliance) (ICR, para 20).


Overall, the project met its expected cost-per beneficiary target and maintained its costs at the lower end of
other similar project projections. However, it did not carry out a planned analysis to assess rates of returns. As
the ICR reflected, it also could have conducted a value for money analysis of the services provided and of
the operational inefficiencies. Moreover, there were administrative and fiduciary management challenges that
impacted the project. On balance, the efficiency of this project is rated at modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s objective aimed at improving access to services to disadvantaged youth to establish small
businesses. The objective was relevant given the context, and the priorities of the government as outlined in the
Country Partnership Frameworks. The relevance of the project objective is rated as high.

All PDO indicators met the basic requirement of the objective. There is also evidence that businesses were
created and the economic well-being of some, but not all, of the participants also improved. That said, the
quality of training had some glaring weaknesses, in particular language in which the courses were given and the
content level. . As a result, the overall efficacy of achieving the PDO is rated as substantial.

Overall, the project met its expected cost-per beneficiary target and maintained its costs at the lower end of
other similar project projections. However, it did not carry out a planned analysis to assess rates of returns. On
balance, the efficiency of this project is rated at modest.

In summary, the project’s objective was relevant and the project was able to meet its intended results. While the
project met its expected cost-per beneficiary target, it experienced disbursement and procurement set-backs.
On balance, the outcome of this project is rated as moderately satisfactory.


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DTF: MA-Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship (P144134)




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There were two main risks to the development outcome:

Continued mentorship for youth. The project aimed to increase capacity of implementing partners in order
for them to continue to provide services beyond the life of the project (ICR, para 53). Some organizations
are committed to continue to work with disadvantaged youth. However, it is unclear to what extent the youth
that participated in this project have access to long-term mentors and support.

Access to Long term Capital. Many youths were successful at starting their own micro-enterprises, but a
majority used personal funds as seed capital. In order to continue to grow or maintain their business they
may need access to financial capital, which may not be available from traditional sources, such as banks.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of the project was relatively simple and purposely envisioned as a pilot. Its objective could
  have been better defined as ‘access’ is rather a vague term. The objective was supported by a
  straightforward theory of change that aimed at providing services to disadvantaged youth while
  simultaneously building capacity of implementing agencies. The PDO indicators could have been focused
  on the outcome and impact of the project on the beneficiaries, as opposed to merely measuring access to
  services (ICR, para. 50).

  The project’s objective had strategic relevance, aiming to lift youth out of poverty. The design of the
  project was also based on evidence and lessons learned from similar projects. Some of the key evidence
  was incorporated into project design: (a) programs related to entrepreneurship creation should include
  training, financing, and coaching elements; (b) greater effectiveness is likely when programs are
  implemented through local organizations, (c) the systematic targeting of women leads to more effective
  program results and (d) similarly, low-income youth need to be targeted at the outset (PAD, para. 31 and
  34). The PAD also integrated gender analysis throughout the design of the project.

  The project also included an ambitious impact evaluation intended to assess impact and effects of
  treatments on the different project participants. At the design stage, the impact evaluation could have
  been better integrated into the narratives of components. Institutional arrangements to build ownership
  would have been more effective had they been established at project conception.



                                                                                                 Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DTF: MA-Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship (P144134)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank worked towards mitigating some of the key challenges that the project
 experienced. These challenges were in the area of fiduciary compliance, measuring results, project
 delays, and staff turnover. For example, the Bank worked towards ensuring that the government
 reimbursed the ineligible expenses and that the PMU prepared and implemented an action plan (ICR, para.
 51).

 The impact evaluation, a critical cornerstone of the measurement system and pilot design, was not
 implemented. The impact evaluation was supposed to be managed by the World Bank task team with
 close coordination with the Ministry of Youth and Sports, PMU, and service providers (ICR, para. 33). The
 measurement approach, selection and vetting of beneficiaries could have better been communicated with
 service providers (ICR, para. 51). Unfortunately, the Bank was notified that service providers had trained
 beneficiaries in the control group after the fact and as a result the impact evaluation could not be
 conducted (World Bank Interview, 2020) This risk to the measurement plan is an important oversight by the
 implementing partners, which the World Bank could have anticipated given the Bank’s experience with
 implementing impact evaluations. The Bank shifted the evaluation approach towards an outcome
 evaluation that provided data to assess the effectiveness of the project.

 The project implemented results-based payment to help maintain expected deadlines. However, this
 system caused excessive pressure to achieve results at the expense of project quality. For example,
 implementing partners rushed the recruitment process and did not vet participants to ensure that they had
 the competences necessary to become entrepreneurs (ICR, para. 56). This may have been because
 payments were made against the delivery of agreed results. This system put pressure on NGOs to deliver
 according to agreed schedules and deliverables (ICR, para. 30). Despite this pressure, the project
 experienced delays due to the hold ups in payment of the service providers. These payment delays
 affected the reputation of the project, and decreased motivation among the service providers (ICR, para.
 34). These delays also impacted the project’s efficacy and impacted youth ability to take advantage of the
 training in a comprehensive and coherent manner (ICR, para. 35).

 The MTR (March 2016) also proposed mid-term course corrections related to financial management,
 procurement procedures and systems, pace of implementation and proposed adjustments to the activities
 (ICR, para.51).

 However, the project also experienced delays in the implementation of activities as the MYS dismantled the
 PMU and transferred responsibility to civil servants. This decision was made with the objective to
 “mainstream the approach within the MYS beyond the duration of the pilot project and enhance the MYS
 capacity to manage future similar projects at scale” (ICR, para. 37).

 Some of these challenges were outside the control of the Bank including staff changes and implementation
 of procurement and financial management. Given the Bank’s experience in implementing such evaluations
 some of the constraints related to beneficiary selection could have been anticipated. The outcome


                                                                                                 Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DTF: MA-Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship (P144134)



 evaluation that was implemented provided good data. Given that these issues affected efficiency and M&E
 quality, the quality of supervision is rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Theory of Change. The theory of change that underpinned this project stated that disadvantaged youth
 would be more likely to launch or grow their micro-enterprises if they received training, learned about
 business development, and were mentored for a period of one-year. Moreover, the project believed that in
 order for the results to be sustainable, the project needed to raise the capacity of national and local
 stakeholders to ensure quality implementation, support, and long-term engagement.

 The theory of change tackled important gaps that needed to be closed in order for youth to launch their
 own businesses. The proposal also integrated gender analysis and described means by which young
 women would benefit from the program. One barrier that the theory did not take into account was the lack
 of income or finances available for youth to begin their business endeavors, in particular for disadvantaged
 youth. Without seed funding, youth are often unable to test let alone implement their initiatives. Given that
 the target of this project was disadvantaged youth, the lack of funds is an important oversight of the theory
 of change and project design.

 Results Framework. The logical framework stressed the importance of measuring who participated,
 quality of trainings delivered, and capacity strengthening of institutions. Unfortunately, the indicators in the
 PDO failed to take into account any kind of outcome or impact of the project. For example, the project did
 not seek to measure the number of businesses that were launched, employment rates, or return to school
 rates. Without this information it is difficult to assess the outcome of the trainings and what additional
 constraints or barriers the youth faced as they attempted to implement or grow their micro-enterprises. This
 is a flaw of the logical framework. Moreover, the logical framework did not include indicators to measure the
 quality of performance of the implementing partners. The PAD and subsequently the M&E system also
 failed to define key terms in the objective. For example terms such as “access” and “development services”
 were rather vague and open-ended.

 M&E System. The PAD outlined the project’s commitment to putting together a straight forward M&E
 system that focused on tracking progress, results, and learning. The key monitoring activities included (a)
 implementing an Information and Communication Technology tool (ICT) to enable real-time monitoring, and
 (b) evaluations of training sessions (PAD, para. 41).

 The PAD also outlined an impact evaluation that would inform the program's future expansion. This
 evaluation would seek to answer the project’s impact on beneficiaries’ knowledge, viability of business,


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DTF: MA-Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship (P144134)



 income levels, and dosage and delivery method of the different activities. The impact evaluation was meant
 to be carried out by an independent firm, follow a randomized design, and enable participants registered
 into different treatment arms (PAD, para. 42). Simultaneously, the project would carry out a process
 evaluation to assess the quality and effectiveness of services delivered (PAD, para. 56).

 The PAD also outlined that the PMU was responsible for monitoring the project.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project developed an M&E plan and the PMU carried out the day to day monitoring and reporting
  (ICR, para 40). Unfortunately, the M&E plan did not define key words in the indicators such as
  “usefulness” of training (World Bank Interview, 2020). Without defining key words in indicators, data and
  findings is unreliable and left open to interpretation. Biannual reports included information on the results
  and indicators (ICR, para. 41). An Information and Communication Technology (ICT) platform was used
  by service providers to report results in real time (ICR, para. 41).


  The impact evaluation conducted its baseline study and yielded useful information on the profile and
  capabilities of the project beneficiaries (ICR, para. 43). However, the roll out of the evaluation faced major
  challenges related to the inability of service providers to abide by randomization of beneficiaries, lack of
  capacity of the independent firm in understanding local constraints, and failure of the World Bank to
  propose alternative solutions (ICR, para. 43). The impact evaluation was eventually replaced by an
  outcome evaluation (ICR, para. 43).



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR, the data collected was used in the ISRs. The PMU regularly verified individual
  beneficiary participation in project activities and delivery of services by service providers. The outcome
  evaluation was prepared and informed the preparation of a follow up project (ICR, para. 44).

  While the data may have been used for report writing, the monitoring data was not used to improve
  project implementation. For example, the outcome evaluation reported that there were problems with the
  training provided to the youth, including a language barrier and materials being too academic in nature.
  These gaps could have been addressed through a strong monitoring program. It is unclear in the ICR
  whether this data was not collected in real-time or whether the implementing actors did not adequately
  reflect on the data and information.

  The overall rating of quality of M&E is rated modest. The M&E design had key weaknesses in its choice
  of indicators and failure to adequately define the objective. The outcome evaluation also uncovered
  program quality challenges that could have been addressed during the implementation. Unfortunately,
  the impact evaluation was not implemented and monitoring data was not used to improve the quality of
  the training. Due to the shortcomings during the implementation and subsequently use of monitoring
  data, the M&E section is rated as modest.




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DTF: MA-Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship (P144134)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category “C”. The project activities focused on technical
   assistance and institutional capacity. There were no physical interventions which triggered safeguard
   analysis at appraisal (PAD, para 64). The project did not trigger any safeguard while it was implemented
   (ICR, para. 1).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project experienced delays in launching its activities which impacted the overall project rating. The
   delays included budget delays, insufficient ownership, lack of clarity over the central role of service
   providers, and changes within the Ministry of Youth and Sports (MYS) and the Project Management Unit
   (PMU) (ICR, par 46).

   The financial management rating of the project was downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory due to
   challenges experienced during project implementation. Key challenges included unclear definition of roles
   between the PMU and MYS, weak leadership of the National Consultative Committee, and turnover of
   PMU staff (ICR, para. 47). To address these weaknesses, the Bank worked with the implementing agency
   to put together an action plan and focused on reviewing the revised Operations Manual (MOP) during the
   MTR (ICR, para. 47). The Bank also worked with the PMU to ensure that it had adequate staff and support
   for financial management monitoring and compliance (ICR, para. 47).

   The project was audited annually by the General Finances Inspection, Morocco’s independent audit
   authority (World Bank Interview, 2020). The auditor confirmed that the financial statements closed on
   December 31, 2018 are unqualified (World Bank Interview, 2020).


   Disbursement: The project was granted two project-closing date extensions. The main cause of the delay
   in implementation of activities was due to challenges in budgeting the remaining resources. Only in July
   2019, a month before the project would close, did the MYS submit the expenditure and action plan and
   receive the Bank’s no objection to implement part of the additional activities to be executed before the
   closing date (ICR, para. 48). The disbursement rate was 96.7% at the end of the grace period on
   December 31, 2019 (ICR, para. 48).

   Procurement: A post procurement review conducted in 2015 raised key issues about the project’s
   procurement practices and system. Key challenges included lack of proper filing of procurement
   documents, splitting of contracts in order to proceed with shopping, the absence of deadlines in request for
   quotations sent to bidders, inconsistency in the designation of activities in the bidding documents and
   contracts (ICR, para. 49). An INT investigation uncovered fraudulent practices in three purchase orders for


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DTF: MA-Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship (P144134)



   an amount of US$41,059 (ICR, para. 49). An action plan was prepared and implemented by the
   implementing agency. The funds were returned to the Bank.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None



d. Other
   None



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons



The following lessons were extracted from the ICR:

    1. Financial support is important to enable youth to establish their micro-enterprise. For
       example, youth cited lack of financial funds as the primary reason that they did not launch a
       small business. Even though the project established partnerships with lending sources, the
       vast majority of youth used personal funds to start their business (ICR, para 56). Barriers to
       access also included cost of transportation, in particular for female youth (ICR, para. 38). The
       ICR reflected that future projects need to take into account the barriers that exist for youth to
       gain access to start-up capital.

    2. Results-based payment may help a project maintain expected deadlines, but
       excessive pressure to achieve results may result in quality being compromised. For
       example, implementing partners rushed the recruitment process and did not vet participants
       to ensure that they had the competences necessary to become entrepreneurs (ICR, para.
       56). This may have been because payments were made against the delivery of agreed


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DTF: MA-Youth Micro-Entrepreneurship (P144134)



         results. This system put pressure on NGOs to deliver according to agreed schedules and
         deliverables (ICR, para. 30).

     3. Monitoring systems need to be systematically designed to capture quality of program
         implementation, in addition to project outcomes. For example, the monitoring system
         failed to capture important implementation weaknesses in the project activities, in particular
         the fact that (i) courses were taught in French as opposed to Arabic and (ii) courses were too
         academic. Similarly, the project could have benefited from a verification process to ensure
         that the implementing partners were applying consistent selection criteria when enrolling the
         beneficiaries (ICR, para. 32). A basic monitoring system can pick up these weaknesses and
         adjust in real-time to ensure quality program implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICRR reflected on lessons learned related to implementation partner payments, training quality, and flaws
in the project design. It was also upfront about the fiduciary challenges the project experienced. The ICR could
have benefited from more detailed justification of its ratings, in particular the sections on Relevance and
Efficacy. The information to validate the objective’s achievement was scattered throughout the ICR. In fact,
most of the data on the project’s outcomes was in an annex, instead of in the report. Overall, the quality of this
ICR is rated as Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 16
