          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          GH-Macro Stability for Competitiveness(P133664)



                                                                                      Report Number : ICRR0021761

   1. Project Data



    Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
    Ghana                                        Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


    Programmatic DPL
    Planned Operations:           2              Approved Operations:          2

    Operation ID                                 Operation Name
    P133664                                      GH-Macro Stability for Competitiveness


     L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
     IDA-57000                                   30-Nov-2016                                        151,757,276.00

     Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
     30-Jun-2015                                 30-Nov-2016

                                                 IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                            150,000,000.00                                              0.00

     Revised Commitment                             150,000,000.00                                              0.00

     Actual                                         151,757,276.00                                              0.00




     Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
     Paul Holden                  Clay Wescott                 Malathi S. Jayawickrama        IEGEC (Unit 1)


PHPROJECTDATATBL




     Operation ID                                Operation Name
     P157343                                     GH-Macro Stability for Competitiveness 2 ( P157343 )



                                                                                                        Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Macro Stability for Competitiveness(P133664)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-57000,IDA-61710                      30-Jun-2018                                        201,598,529.10

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Dec-2017                              30-Jun-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                            Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          200,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                           200,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                       201,598,529.10                                            0.00




2. Program Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The Program Development Objectives (PDOs) of the two operations are taken from the Program Documents
   (PD1) and (PD2). The Financing Agreements contained a list of prior actions under the programs. The PDOs
   for the first operation were:
   ·     To strengthen institutions for more predictable fiscal outcomes;
   ·     Enhance the productivity of public spending.
   For the second operation, the PDOs were:
   ·     Strengthen institutions for more predictable fiscal outcomes;
   ·     Improve competitiveness for job creation;
   ·     Protect the poor and the vulnerable.
   For both operations, the pillars were identical to the PDOs. Although conflating development objectives and
   pillars is not good practice, IEG will assess the project against the stated PDOs.
   The series was initially designed to be three operations, but when a new government was inaugurated in
   2017, it decided to formulate a new strategic plan and requested that the third operation not go ahead and
   that a new series be initiated once priorities had been identified.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   There were two pillars in the first operation. Under the first pillar there were three sub-components:
   improving control over the public sector wage bill; strengthening the management of government subsidies
   and arrears; and enhancing debt management capacity. Under the second pillar, there were also three sub-
   components: strengthening the governance of state-owned enterprises (SOEs); increasing the effectiveness
   of public investment management; and strengthening social protection through the period of
   macroeconomic transition that would rest on a more robust macroeconomic foundation.


                                                                                                Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Macro Stability for Competitiveness(P133664)



   Under the second operation, the pillars were rearranged. The SOE governance sub-component was moved
   into the first pillar. The focus of pillar two was changed to improving competitiveness for job creation, with the
   components comprising improving the delivery of energy infrastructure and making public investment
   management more effective. The social protection component of the second pillar in the first operation,
   namely reinforcing social protection in the context of macroeconomic transition to a stronger fiscal foundation
   became a pillar in its own right in the second operation.




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   The first Development Policy Credit (DPC) (P133664) was approved on June 30, 2015 in the amount of
   SDR106.7 (USD150 million equivalent) and became effective on that date. The actual amount disbursed was
   USD151.76 million, the difference being accounted for by changes in the SDR/USD exchange rate. The
   Executive Board also approved a policy-based guarantee up to the equivalent of USD400 million on the same
   date. The guarantee required a special waiver to enable the use of IDA resources.
   The second DPC (P157343) was approved in the amount of SDR142.4 million (USD200 million equivalent)
   and became effective on December 20, 2017. It closed on schedule on June 30,2018. The actual amount
   disbursed was USD201.6 million with the difference being accounted for by changes in the SDR/USD
   exchange rate.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  While very general, the objectives were relevant to country circumstances at appraisal. The development
  objectives of the government, as outlined in the Ghana Shared Growth and Development Agenda (2014-
  2017) included “ensuring and sustaining macroeconomic stability” (PD1 p.17), which encompassed the fiscal
  outcome objective and the productivity of public spending in the PDOs in the first DPC. They also included
  enhancing the competitiveness of Ghana’ private sector, which covered one of the sub-objectives of the
  second operation. The World Bank-supported Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the period FY13-FY16
  supported three objectives; (i) improve economic institutions; (ii) improve competitiveness and job creation;
  and, (iii) protect the poor and the vulnerable. The CPS (p. 20) expanded the goal of improving economic
  institutions to include public financial management, which encompassed the first sub-objective of both
  operations. Objective (ii) of the CPS was consistent with the improving competitiveness for job creation of the
  second sub-objective of the second DPC as well as the competitiveness goal of the Ghana Development
  Agenda. In addition, the parallel 2015 arrangement under the IMF’s Extended Credit Facility (for USD918
  million) had the goal of macroeconomic stability to foster a return to high growth and job creation while
  protecting social spending. The objectives were therefore relevant to country, World Bank and other donor
  objectives.




                                                                                                      Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Macro Stability for Competitiveness(P133664)



  The objectives remained relevant at closure. There has been no subsequent CPS published, but the 2018
  Systematic Country Diagnostic (p. ix and p. xiv) stressed the need for continued focus on the fiscal situation,
  the need for job creation, improving the conditions for private sector investment, and the protection of
  vulnerable groups. The objectives in the two programs were part of the government’s ongoing reform agenda.
  The relatively small number of reform areas improved the potential for achieving outcomes.



  Rating
  Substantial

b. Relevance of Design
  The ICR does not attempt to identify the causal relationships between policy actions as embodied in the prior
  actions and the desired PDO outcomes. These relationships are derived in what follows.

  Under the first pillar, gaining better control over public sector wage and salary payments and procurement
  practices was to be achieved through the introduction of an electronic wage and salary system, eliminating
  government subsidies for gasoline, diesel fuel and LPG and strengthening the payment systems associated
  with procurement. The capacity to manage public sector debt would be improved by developing a Medium-
  Term Debt Management Strategy to reduce the refinancing costs of domestic debt and developing credit risk
  assessments for debt related financing transactions, particularly for SOEs.


  Under the second operation, policy was to focus on further strengthening the payroll and procurement
  systems through audits of electronic payment vouchers and capping earmarked funds at 25 percent. Debt
  management was to be improved through the publishing of the medium-term debt strategy describing the
  steps that would be taken to reduce the debt burden.


  The performance of State-Owned Enterprises under pillar two of the first operation and pillar one of the
  second was to be improved through: the establishment of a single agency to provide financial oversight of
  SOEs; developing terms of reference for SOE operation; undertaking credit risk assessments for selected
  SOEs; developing action plans for corporate governance reforms for six major SOEs that were to be
  approved by the Cabinet; publishing the 2016 audited accounts for the Ghana National Petroleum
  Corporation.
  Public Investment management, which had been characterized by arbitrary decisions, was to be strengthened
  by the approval of a specific policy governing public investment that embodied best practice principles for the
  operation and governance of the Ghana Infrastructure Investment Fund.


  The social protection component of the operation was to ensure (under pillar two of the first DPC) that funding
  was available in the budget to make payments under the LEAP program (a program to provide cash transfers



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GH-Macro Stability for Competitiveness(P133664)



to the poor) to 150,000 households. Under the second DCP, this component became pillar 3 and required
that the recipients under the LEAP program were increased to 250,000 households.

Pillar two in the second operation was aimed at improving competitiveness for job creation. This was to be
achieved by improving the transparency of the cash flow of energy SOEs, improving the coordination of
producers in the energy sector (later dropped because it became redundant) and publishing policies for the
Infrastructure Investment Fund.


Overall, under pillar one, the causal chain linking the prior actions to the PDOs was convincing. Under the first
operation improving fiscal outcomes would result from gaining control over public payroll expenditure,
including setting up automated payroll systems, reducing subsidies and improving procurement. These would
lead to a reduced government wage bill by eliminating “ghost workers”. Reducing budget draining SOE
deficits would in turn also improve fiscal management. Debt management was strengthened through
changing its term structure. These all linked directly to the PDOs. They addressed priority areas that
contributed to sound fiscal management. The measures were also consistent with the need to address fiscal
leakages identified in the arrangement under the IMF’s Extended Credit Facility.


On the other hand, the causal chain for the objective of improving competitiveness for job creation is unclear.
While improving the cash flow and financial positions of SOEs and the Ghana Electricity Corporation were
necessary actions, relating these to job creation requires a heroic leap of causality. Similarly, there is no
apparent direct relationship between public investment management and job creation. While a link between
these and competitiveness could possibly exist, it would be indirect. The causal chain under the third
objective, increasing the number of households receiving transfer payments is also clear. While poverty rates
in Ghana have dropped substantially over the past decade, there are still a significant number of households
that exist in extreme poverty. The goal was to increase the number of households in the LEAP scheme by a
factor of three.


With respect to the adequacy of the macroeconomic framework, at appraisal of the first operation, the PD1 (p.
8) noted a number of vulnerabilities, some of which arose from structural weakness and which highlighted the
importance of prudent macroeconomic management. It points out that there had been a substantial increase
in government and external debt prior to the program period, with a concomitant increase in debt service
costs. The PD1 stated that the proposed reforms supported by the two Development Policy Credits, together
with the Extended Credit Facility arrangement would ameliorate macroeconomic risks by enhancing fiscal
discipline. The appraisal of the second operation noted the government’s commitment to “strengthening and
sustaining macroeconomic stability over the medium term” (p. 9) and that Ghana’s external position was
expected to strengthen but noted (p. 12) that Debt Sustainability Analysis (2017) indicated that Ghana was
still in high risk of debt distress. Nevertheless, PD2 maintained that growth prospects were strengthening,
inflation was falling and the external outlook was improving to the extent that the second operation was
warranted. In the event, the expected fiscal consolidation did not occur, with budget deficits exceeding the
projections in the program documents. However, the IMF recognizes the significant macroeconomic gains in
2019, and notes that the “outlook for Ghana remains favorable”, in its 2019 Article IV report.

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            GH-Macro Stability for Competitiveness(P133664)




       Rating
       Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     Strengthen institutions for more predictable fiscal outcomes

     Under the second operation, the first objective subsumed objective two of DPC1, namely enhancing the
     productivity of public spending. These are discussed together.

    Rationale

      Strengthen institutions for more predictable fiscal outcomes

      Under the second operation, the first objective subsumed objective two of DPC1, namely enhancing the
      productivity of public spending. These are discussed together.

      Rationale
      To measure the achievement of controlling the public sector wage bill under the first and second
      operations, the results indicator was that the public wage to tax revenue ratio would decline to less than
      40%, from a 2014 baseline of 52.9%. This result was not achieved–at the end of 2018, the value was 46%,
      but the indicator does not reflect progress. The shortfall arose primarily because neither tax nor non-tax
      revenues increased in line with expectations. The ratio of tax to GDP for Ghana in 2017 was 12.9 percent,
      which was substantially below the 16.8 percent forecast in PD1 (p. 12). At the equivalent of 1.5 per cent of
      GDP, oil revenues also fell short of the 2.2 percent of GDP forecast in PD1. The 2018 SCD ascribes
      problems of revenue collection to tax incentives in the form of tax exemptions as well as institutional
      weaknesses in tax collections. This indicator was therefore of mixed value because measuring the ratio of
      wages to tax revenue does not necessarily provide an accurate picture of progress in controlling wage
      expenditures, nor the extent to which the computerization of public sector wages strengthened payment
      systems. Increases in public sector wages did attenuate but because of budget revenue shortfalls, the
      ratio of wages to tax revenues increased.


      A secondary indicator was that the Comptroller and Accountant General would analyze a monthly report of
      the number of employees in all ministries. The baseline in 2014 was zero and by the end of 2017 all


                                                                                                        Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GH-Macro Stability for Competitiveness(P133664)



ministries had complied. However, this indicator is an input to bringing the wage bill under control and
there is no information on how the analysis was used.

To measure the extent of the improvement in the management of Government subsidies and arrears there
were two indicators that measure progress for both operations. The first was that the subsidy on gasoline,
diesel, and LPG would fall to zero compared with a baseline of more than 20% subsidy on all three of
these products. This was partially achieved; there was no subsidy in 2016 and 2017, but there was a small
subsidy in 2018. The indicator measuring arrears was that current outstanding arrears by the end of 2018
would decline to less than GH¢3 billion compared with a baseline of GH¢6.2 billion in 2014. This target
was achieved; by the end of 2018 arrears had fallen to GH¢2.7 billion. These indicators effectively
measured improvements in progress in bringing subsidies and arrears under control.

To measure progress with respect to enhanced debt management capacity and improved accountability of
SOEs (under the second operation), there were 3 results indicators. Firstly, improving the maturity
structure of debt was measured by the proportion of domestic securities with a maturity of one year or less
was targeted at falling from 50 percent of the total in 2014 to less than 40 percent in 2018. This was
substantially overachieved with the actual proportion declining to 12.7 percent by the end of 2018. The
ICR (p. 9) points out that the USD400 million policy-based guarantee enabled Ghana to issue a USD1
billion bond in October 2015. It had a 15-year maturity which contributed substantially to the improvement
in the term structure of the debt. A further indicator of the improvement in debt management was that the
difference between planned and actual issuing of domestic debt fell from a baseline of 114 percent in 2014
to less than 10 percent in 2018. This target was achieved with the actual deviation in 2018 coming in at
8.7 percent. The third indicator involved the risk to the budget arising from the need to fund SOE deficits.
The target was that by 2018, 10 SOEs would use the framework for assessing their credit risks compared
with zero in 2014. This was also achieved, with 11 SOEs using the framework by 2018. These indicators
effectively measured improvements in debt structure and management.

To measure the improvement in the governance of SOEs, which was part of pillar two in the first operation
but was moved to pillar one in the second, there were two targets that were both partially achieved. The
first was that by 2018, four major SOEs would publish their financial results, annual reports and their
investment plans on their websites (compared with zero in 2015); and the second was that the audited
financial statements of the Ghana National Petroleum Corporation would be published for the three years
to 2018, compared with a baseline of none having been published in 2014. Summaries of the accounts of
the four SOEs and GNPC were published on the MOF website, not on their own sites, and with insufficient
detail to reveal progress on reducing fiscal risk. Moreover, these accounts were incomplete. The audited
accounts of the four SOEs and GNPC are available within the companies but, according to the TTL, they
were not made public as the information contained was considered too sensitive for public
dissemination. Up to date financial information is a necessary step in improving the operation of SOEs.
Ensuring public scrutiny brings transparency to SOE management and indicates the extent to which their
financial performance is a drain on the budget. The indicators demonstrated whether transparency had
improved.




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 15
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            GH-Macro Stability for Competitiveness(P133664)



      The ICR is silent on whether its investment plans for 2017 were approved by Parliament and whether the
      Cabinet approved the action plans for SOE corporate governance reform. IEG considers this indicator to
      have not been achieved.

      The rating is based on two targets not achieved, five targets achieved,(although usefulness of one of
      these is questionable), and three targets partially achieved.




    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     Improve competitiveness for job creation

    Rationale

      Objective two of the first operation, enhancing the productivity of public spending is discussed above
      under the first objective.
      Under Pillar 2, improving competitiveness of the economy for job creation, there were two indicators. To
      measure the effectiveness of public investment management, the indicator was that a notional, or shadow
      risk rating of the Ghana Infrastructure Investment Fund would be finalized – there was none in place in
      2015. This was not met because the ICR (p. 14) states that the CEO of the Fund considered a risk rating
      to be premature and in any case, the indicator bears no relationship to job creation.

      To measure the improved delivery of energy infrastructure, the indicator was that by the end of 2018, the
      outstanding amount of accounts payable of the Electricity Company of Ghana would not exceed or those
      outstanding at the end of 2016. This was achieved; by the end of 2018, accounts payable were nearly 30
      percent below what they were in 2016.




                                                                                                       Page 8 of 15
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               GH-Macro Stability for Competitiveness(P133664)



      However, it should be noted that neither of these indicators measure job creation.




    Rating
   Negligible
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective
     Protecting the poor and vulnerable

    Rationale
    There was one indicator to measure the achievement of pillar 3, protecting the poor and vulnerable, namely
    the number of households defined as poor receiving transfers. The target was to reach 250,000 by the end
    of 2018, compared with a baseline of 80,000 in 2014. This was exceeded, with 324,000 receiving assistance
    by the end of 2018. Since the average number of persons per household in Ghana is 4.5
    (africageoportal.com), the program is estimated to have aided 1.5 million persons, a substantial portion of
    the 2.4 million Ghanaians living in extreme poverty. The indicator could have been strengthened by setting a
    target for the percentage of the poor receiving assistance through the program.




    Rating
   High
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




   5. Outcome

   The objectives of the two operations were aligned with those of the country as well those of the Bank and
   development partners, including the IMF. However, this was not a major achievement given that they were
   pitched at a very high level. They were designed to restore the economy to its high growth path of earlier years.
   The relevance of design was mixed, however.




                                                                                                       Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GH-Macro Stability for Competitiveness(P133664)



With regard to efficacy, under the first pillar (objective), the prior actions contributed to the goal of improving
fiscal outcomes. Improving control of the public sector wage bill, strengthening the governance and fiscal
management of SOEs, removing subsidies for energy related activities, and controlling management of
payments and the public debt contributed to achieving the PDO and the causal chain was robust with a clear
line of reasoning between the prior actions and the objectives, particularly once improving the governance of
SOEs was moved to the first pillar in the second operation. Most of the indicators were achieved and efficacy is
rated substantial, although the usefulness of some of the indicators is questionable.

The efficacy of the second objective, improving competitiveness for job creation is rated negligible. The prior
actions were directed at improving the delivery of energy infrastructure as well as making public investment
management more effective. The causal link between these goals and job creation is unclear, and the indicators
were of no value in determining if job creation had in fact occurred.

There was one indicator to measure the achievement of pillar 3, protecting the poor and vulnerable, namely the
number of households defined as poor receiving transfers. The target was to reach 250,000 by the end of 2018,
compared with a baseline of 80,000 in 2014. This was exceeded, with 324,000 receiving assistance by the end
of 2018. Since the average number of persons per household in Ghana is 4.5 (africageoportal.com), the
program aided nearly 1.5 million persons, a substantial portion of the 2.4 million Ghanaians living in extreme
poverty. The indicator was adequate but could have been strengthened by setting a target for the percentage of
the poor receiving assistance through the program. The efficacy of the third objective was rated high.




a.   Outcome Rating
     Moderately Satisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

Looking to the future, the dependence of the economy on international oil, gold, and cocoa prices continues to
make macroeconomic risk high. Furthermore, the public sector wage bill is substantial when considered relative
to overall tax revenues and there has not been a history in Ghana of resisting demands for public sector wage
increases. Under the COVID-19 crisis, government revenues will decline from a pre-COVID projection of 15.5%
of GDP to an estimate between 12.5 and 13.5% of GDP for 2020, worsening the wage bill/tax ratio. The overall
fiscal deficit is projected to increase to 9.7 percent of GDP in 2020 (up from a pre-COVID-19 crisis projection of
6.4 percent of GDP). Since not all budgetary expenditures occur through the Information Management System,
there is a possibility of arrears building up in the future as well as contingent liabilities arising out of incomplete
reforms of the electricity sector. However, the ongoing IMF program, the continuation of World Bank DPCs
which are supporting fiscal consolidation and energy sector reforms should mitigate these risks. Overall the risk
to the development outcome is rated substantial.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
     Substantial

                                                                                                        Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Macro Stability for Competitiveness(P133664)




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of the series benefited from substantial policy dialogue with the Government of Ghana that had
  taken place before the onset of the macroeconomic crisis in 2013. In addition, a significant amount of
  diagnostic and analytical work was produced from 2009-2014 (PD p.21). There were also complementary
  financial management and energy technical assistance projects that had been ongoing and which,
  according to the ICR (p. 15-17) provided diagnostic studies that proved to be invaluable in designing the
  program. However, the policy agenda embodied in the series was complex and did not allow for the time
  needed to fully implement a number of the reforms, in particular reforming the wage structure of the public
  sector, changing the framework for managing state owned enterprises and the wide-ranging reforms in the
  energy sector. The cancellation of the third operation reflected difficulties associated with dealing with a
  substantial change in the priorities of a newly elected government that developed its own development
  strategy and requested that the third operation be eliminated. .




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  Supervision was undertaken through the implementation of substantial technical assistance that is
  described in the ICR (pp. 4-5). and other projects as well as part of the preparation of a subsequent follow-
  on operation. This enabled sufficient dialogue for the Bank to track in detail the progress of the reforms and
  make corrections such as those that occurred in the second operation of the series. The ICR (P. 32) reports
  that the Ministry of Finance and World Bank teams worked closely together to assist the Government to
  access capital markets to extend Ghana’s debt structure following the presentation to the World Bank
  board regarding the restructuring of the debt.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  The ICR indicates (P. 31) that the government was responsive to the exigencies of the program and took
  many of the necessary decisions event though they might be politically unpopular. They included
  eliminating petroleum subsidies, initiating SOE reform, initiating new management practices with respect

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Macro Stability for Competitiveness(P133664)



  to the public sector wage bill, and strengthening the public debt management system. These changes
  reflected an understanding that far-reaching reforms were necessary. In the event however during the
  election year 2016, there were significant fiscal overruns. In addition, the reforms were unable to include
  fiscal consolidation that would lead to increasing tax revenue to better balance it with fiscal spending.


  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance
  The implementing agency for the series was the Ministry of Finance, which designated a counterpart
  program unit to the World Bank team. The ICR (P. 32) points out, however, that the Bank staff worked
  with the line ministries and agencies directly to implement the reform program which somewhat
  sidelined the coordinating unit's role at the Ministry of Finance.


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  A number of indicators in the monitoring and evaluation framework provided useful information to track
  progress and assess performance under program. Nevertheless, there were some serious deficiencies in the
  choice of indicators. The wages/revenue indicator does not effectively measure progress in bringing the public
  sector wage bill under control since it is affected by volatility in tax revenues. The indicators for pillar two of the
  second series contained severe deficiencies because they failed to measure how the program enhanced
  competitiveness and job creation. This was a significant weakness in the design of the M&E framework.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Ministry of Finance had overall responsibility for providing data for the monitoring and evaluation of the
  series. The World Bank team supervising the operation aligned its M&E with that of the government's reform
  agenda. In order to monitor progress series of government and donor reports were utilized. These included
  detailed monthly reports on budget developments that were prepared by the Ministry of Finance, donor
  reports including those from the IMF on progress in their respective areas and ad hoc reports from the
  Controller and Accountant General’s offices. In this way policy decisions were verified and institutional
  changes tracked but the deficiencies in the indicators described above would not have allowed for accurate
  monitoring of progress in some areas.


                                                                                                        Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Macro Stability for Competitiveness(P133664)




c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR provides no information regarding how developments in the M&E indicators were used to make
  modifications to the program.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  There were not environmental and social issues arising from the program.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  No fiduciary issues were reported.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  N/A



d. Other
  N/A



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                      ICR                       IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                             Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory   ---
                             Satisfactory
Risk to Development
                             Substantial               Substantial               ---
Outcome
                             Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory   ---
                             Satisfactory

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GH-Macro Stability for Competitiveness(P133664)



                               Moderately
Borrower Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory   ---
                               Satisfactory
Quality of ICR                                           Substantial               ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

  IEG draws three lessons from the series, which overlap those of the ICR.

 IEG concurs with the observation in the ICR that a policy-based guarantee can be a useful instrument for debt
 restructuring. In the case of Ghana, the refinancing of the debt reduced pressure on the government and on
 the exchange rate that arose from the very short-term nature of the country’s debt.

 Close working relations between the government and the Bank strengthens not only specific reforms
 incorporated into the series but can also enhance more generally a government reform program. In the case
 of Ghana, the extensive analytical foundation and continuing diagnostic work not only allowed the series to be
 prepared within a short time frame when the need arose as a result of the crisis, but also provided a
 foundation for the future preparation of assistance.

 When elections overlap series operations, continuity risks can be reduced by briefing key opposition
 politicians on the rationale for reforms, progress to date and expected results. An awareness of electoral
 cycles is necessary in order to ensure that significant changes in government priorities do not compromise
 the final operations in a series. In Ghana the change of government in 2016 and its changing priorities led to
 the cancellation of the third operation.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written and states the issues that arose as a result of the programmatic series. Its narrative is
clear and describes well the problems that the Bank faced in formulating the reform program. More discussion
of M&E issues would have been welcome, in particular in the M&E design section. A more critical analysis of
the choice of indicators is also lacking. Overall, however, this is a sound document.


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Macro Stability for Competitiveness(P133664)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                    Page 15 of 15
