          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
          MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)



                                                                                       Report Number : ICRR0022067

   1. Project Data



    Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
    Madagascar                                    Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


    Programmatic DPL
    Planned Operations:           1               Approved Operations:         1

    Operation ID                                  Operation Name
    P160866                                       MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in


     L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
     IDA-D1430                                    31-Dec-2018                                         62,329,830.00

     Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
     22-Nov-2016                                  31-Dec-2018

                                                  IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                              65,000,000.00                                              0.00

     Revised Commitment                               65,000,000.00                                              0.00

     Actual                                           62,329,830.00                                              0.00




     Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
     Antonio M. Ollero            Clay Wescott                  Sengphet Lattanavong            IEGEC (Unit 1)


PHPROJECTDATATBL




     Operation ID                                 Operation Name
     P164137                                      PFSI DPF II ( P164137 )



                                                                                                        Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                       Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D1430,IDA-D2460                        31-Dec-2018                                               45,161,468.25

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Nov-2017                                31-Dec-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                 Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                              45,000,000.00                                                   0.00

 Revised Commitment                               45,000,000.00                                                   0.00

 Actual                                           45,161,468.25                                                   0.00




2. Program Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The program development objective of the programmatic Madagascar Public Finance Sustainability and
   Investment Development Policy Financing Operation I (DPO1) and II (DPO2), was "to strengthen the fiscal
   framework by creating the fiscal space to support priority expenditures and to improve the environment for
   investment," according to the Program Document for DPO2 (page 15). The statement of the objective for the
   series differed slightly in the Program Document for DPO1 (page 10), "to strengthen the fiscal framework and
   to enhance the environment for investment."




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   The DPF had two policy areas:

   Strengthening the Fiscal Framework supported actions to: (a) increase tax revenues; (b) reduce the cost
   of selected transfers; and (c) strengthen public investment management.

   Improving the Environment for Investment supported actions to: (a) promote the recovery of the
   electricity sector; (b) reinforce commercial justice; and (c) promote the stability of the financial sector.




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   Program Cost: The cost of the program was estimated at SDR 46.6 million (US$65 million equivalent) for
   DPO1 and SDR 31.9 million (US$45 million equivalent) for DPO2.



                                                                                                         Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)



   Financing: The program was financed with International Development Association (IDA) grants of SDR 46.6
   million (US$62.3 million) to Madagascar in 2016 and SDR 31.9 million (US$45.2 million) in 2018. Both grants
   were disbursed in single tranches at effectiveness (the US$ equivalent values differed from those at appraisal
   because of changes in the SDR/US$ exchange rate).

   Dates: DPO1 was approved on November 22, 2016, became effective on December 13, 2016, and closed
   two years later as scheduled on December 31, 2018. DPO2 was approved on November 16, 2017, became
   effective on December 14, 2017, and closed a year later as scheduled on December 31, 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  The program objective was highly relevant to the development priorities of Madagascar at the time of
  appraisal in 2016-17 and closing in 2018. The "Economic Development Paper (EDP), 2017-2019",
  implementing the "National Development Plan, 2015-2019", supported measures directed at: "increased
  revenue", "efficient allocation of public resources", and "access to bank financing." Specifically, the program
  objective was relevant to the following policies advanced by the EDP:

    • "The chief aim of the fiscal policy is to increase revenue and rationalize budget expenditure in order to
    provide ample margins to finance priority spending, specifically social and infrastructure spending. The
    priorities are, first, to expand the tax base and continue reform of tax and customs administration, and
    second, to eliminate the causes of inefficient public expenditure and under-funding of the retirement and
    pension funds, and the planned reform of the national public institutions" (EDP, page ii).
    • "The energy policy includes the continued reform of the electricity and water utility Jiro sy Ramo
    Malagasy (JIRAMA) ... " (EDP, page iii).
    • "The financial system is underdeveloped. ... It must nonetheless address the challenges linked to
    development imperatives: competition within the sector; ... expanded access for economic agents; ... and
    sector resilience" (EDP, page ii).

  The program objective was highly aligned with the country partnership strategy of the Bank Group in
  Madagascar at the time of program appraisal in 2016-17 and at the time of program closing in 2018. The
  "Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Republic of Madagascar for the Period FY17-FY21" committed
  Bank Group support organized around two "focus areas": increasing resilience and reducing fragility; and
  promoting inclusive growth. The program objective was aligned to the second focus area, specifically with its
  goals to "support the capacity of the state to increase its fiscal space so that it can finance key public
  infrastructure and ensure basic service delivery", "improve the business environment", and "improve access to
  finance" (CPF, page 25), and with the first focus area, specifically with its emphasis on "expanding the state’s
  capacity to mobilize resources and deliver services ... with greater accountability" (CPF, page 24).


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)




  Rating
  Substantial

b. Relevance of Design
  The theory of change was sound. Mobilizing tax revenues, reducing regressive subsidies and transfers, and
  strengthening public investment management would create the fiscal space (defined as the room
  to undertake discretionary fiscal policy relative to existing plans without endangering market access and debt
  sustainability) to support priority expenditures and hence strengthen the fiscal framework for national
  economic and social development. Promoting the recovery of the electricity sector, reinforcing the integrity of
  commercial justice, and promoting the stability of the financial sector would improve the environment for
  investment, which is vital to drive economic growth and development.

  The reform areas were directed at major constraints to: (a) a strong framework for fiscal policy --- the
  government revenue effort was weak, subsidies and transfers were sizable and strained the budget, and
  public investment management capacity was poor, with capital projects improperly appraised, prioritized, and
  selected; and (b) an enabling environment for private investment --- costly and unreliable electricity supply
  hampered economic activity, weaknesses in commercial justice stifled business formation and bank credit,
  weaknesses in commercial justice impaired creditor rights in debt collection litigation and commercial
  bankruptcy cases, and major gaps in financial oversight exacerbated poor access to credit by businesses.

  The prior actions were supportive of the policy areas and linked to results targets.

  On Strengthening the Fiscal Framework:

    •  The issuance of an Arrete (order) in May 2016 limiting the scope of the exemptions regime in the
    Customs Code; the adoption of an expedited customs clearance process and the use of performance
    contracts for customs inspectors at the port of Taomasina; the publication of the first annual tax expenditure
    statement; and the issuance of a Protocole d'Accord (agreement) establishing a risk-based procedure for
    verifying customs and tax data for 20 large high-risk importers and exporters --- would help the government
    to increase tax revenues.
    • The issuance of an Arrete establishing an automatic adjustment mechanism for retail fuel prices; the
    issuance of a decree eliminating the fuel subsidy; the completion of the verification of pension beneficiaries
    in large urban areas and in rural cooperatives to remove ineligible beneficiaries from the pension
    register; and the issuance of a Circulaire (circular) setting the obligations for payment of pension
    contributions and sanctions for non-compliance --- would reduce the cost of selected transfers.
    • The issuance of a Decret (decree) creating the institutional framework, and a Decret setting the
    procedure for awarding contracts for PPPs; and the issuance of a Circulaire setting standardized criteria for
    screening and selecting domestically-financed investment projects, consistent with the Madagascar
    National Development Plan, 2015-2019 --- would strengthen public investment management.

  On Improving the Environment for Investment:

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 19
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)




           • The issuance of an Arrete requiring the National Commission for Public Procurement (CNM) to review a-
           priori all JIRAMA procurement to verify and ensure compliance by JIRAMA with the provisions of the Public
           Procurement Code of 2004 and Decree No. 2005-215 on the Public Contracts Regulatory Authority
           (following previous single-sourcing and other non-competitive procurement practices by JIRAMA); the
           publication of quarterly data on the cost of electricity per kilowatt-hour for each power supply contract,
           beginning with the first two quarters of 2016; and the adoption by JIRAMA of standard contracts for all new
           PPAs --- would promote the recovery of the electricity sector.
           • The issuance of a Circulaire mandating the random allocation of commercial cases to magistrates; the
           enactment of a Loi (law) amending the provisions of the Malagasy Code of Civil Procedure reducing the
           number of postponements of commercial cases and integrating commercial justice reforms in the legal
           framework --- would reinforce commercial justice.
           • The completion by the Central Bank of Madagascar (CBM) and the Commission for Banking and
           Financial Supervision (CSBF) of the on-site inspection of the two largest banks; and the submission by the
           government to Parliament of the draft Loi on microfinance, providing for resolutions schemes for
           microfinance institutions, the lending portfolio of which is highly concentrated --- would help promote the
           stability of the financial sector (resolution schemes had been introduced earlier for banks).

       The choice of lending instrument was appropriate. The IDA loans series would provide US$60 million in
       budget support when DPO1 became effective in December 2016, and US$45 million when DPO2 became
       effective in December 2017. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) projected overall fiscal deficits (cash
       basis) of 6 percent of GDP in 2018 and 5.2 percent of GDP in 2018, which would be financed by foreign
       borrowing, domestic financing, and budget support.1/ At the same time, the programmatic series would
       advance reforms to raise fiscal revenues and reduce tax expenditures, helping strengthen the fiscal
       framework, among other objectives.

       1/ 2017 Republic of Madagascar Article IV Consultation Staff Report


       Rating
       Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To strengthen the fiscal framework by creating the fiscal space to support priority expenditures.

    Rationale



                                                                                                         Page 5 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)



The degree of achievement of this objective is assessed as modest.

Increasing Tax Revenues. One of two results targets for increasing tax revenues was achieved.

  • Tax revenues rose from 10.1 percent of GDP in 2015 (the baseline) to 12.3 percent in 2019, slightly
  exceeding the target of 12 percent. Domestic tax revenues increased from 5 percent of GDP in 2015 to
  6.5 percent in 2019, and taxes from international trade, from 5.1 percent of GDP in 2015 to 5.7 percent in
  2019.
  • The value of tax expenditures eliminated was Malagasy Ariary (MGA) 1.3 billion (US$0.4 million) in
  2019, far short of the target of MGA 70 billion (US$24.8 million). Tax expenditures are revenue losses
  attributable to tax laws that allow special exclusions, exemptions, or deductions from gross income or that
  provide special credits, preferential tax rates, or tax liability deferrals to certain groups of taxpayers or for
  specific economic activities. The target was based on a commitment by the government to scrap tax
  expenditures for propane gas, imported edible oil, and paper, the economic and social benefits of which
  were unproven. But few of the measures in the government's overall plan to eliminate tax expenditures
  have been implemented. Instead, the government committed to periodically assess the economic and
  social benefits of tax expenditures to determine which should be discontinued.

Reducing the Cost of Selected Transfers. One of two results targets for reducing the cost of selected
transfers was met.

  • The cost of selected transfers was reduced from 13 percent of total expenditures in 2015 to 6.4 percent
  in 2019, missing the target of 3 percent. Transfers to the pension fund were reduced from 6.8 percent of
  total expenditures in 2015 to 3.8 percent in 2019, missing the target of 1.6 percent. Although the prior
  actions cleared the pension rolls of illegitimate beneficiaries, a parallel public-sector human resource
  management reform initiative converted some wage-bill beneficiaries to pension beneficiaries, resulting in
  a smaller reduction in transfers than planned. Transfers for fuel subsidies were reduced from 1.8 percent
  of total expenditures in 2015 to 0 percent in 2019, meeting the target. But, reforms to fuel subsidies have
  not been sustained. The government adopted an automatic adjustment mechanism for fuel prices in 2016,
  but then reversed course and introduced a smoothing formula to the pricing mechanism. Changes in
  domestic retail fuel prices lagged as the price of oil rose from US$46 per barrel in June 2017 to US$77 per
  barrel in October 2018. Government liabilities to petroleum companies rose to 0.6 percent of GDP and
  payments by petroleum companies to the Road Maintenance Fund, about 0.25 percent of GDP,
  were cancelled. Until a sustainable pricing mechanism (planned for 2020) is adopted, the government will
  continue to accrue liabilities to petroleum companies. Subsidies to SOEs were reduced from 5.6 percent
  of total expenditures in 2015 to 2.6 percent in 2019, missing the target of 1.4 percent. This target was to
  be achieved through the reduction of transfers to JIRAMA, to cover operational losses, and to Air
  Madagascar. While the target was missed, budget lines for these transfers are on a declining
  trend. Moreover, part of JIRAMA's arrears, about one percent of GDP, was paid back in 2019.



                                                                                                        Page 6 of 19
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)



        • Spending on the social sectors was raised from 0.7 percent of GDP in 2015 to 1.2 percent in 2019,
        almost meeting the target of 1.3 percent.

    Strengthening Public Investment Management. One results target for strengthening public investment
    management was not applicable; the other was not met.

        • There have not been any PPPs approved since 2015. Hence, the target that all (100 percent) of new
        PPPs follow the appraisal and selection processes mandated under the Law on Public and Private
        Partnership of 2015 is not applicable. A PPP Directorate, responsible for the budgetary aspects of
        projects, and a PPP Unit, responsible for project selection and monitoring, both at the Ministry of Finance
        and Budget, were made operational following the legislation. A pipeline of projects was finalized in 2018,
        but the PPP Committee, which would approve the projects, was never convened. The new government,
        elected in 2018, plans to revise the PPP framework and two projects are being considered as pilots. The
        review was scheduled for the first quarter of 2020, but has reportedly been put on hold (at the time of this
        ICR Review). Although no project has been approved since 2015, the PPP legislation has created
        an institution to appraise and select projects and has discouraged unsolicited PPP proposals.
        • The percentage of domestically-financed projects, valued more than MGA 5 billion (US$1.4 million), that
        were subject to the new project appraisal methodology and selection criteria was 0 percent in 2019, in
        contrast to the target of 100 percent. The target was actually met in 2017 and 2018 with the application of
        the Circulaire standardizing the decision criteria for investment projects. The new government,
        however, dropped the system after the program closed in 2018 and will prioritize investments based on the
        President's electoral commitments. The government is preparing instead a new guide for public
        investment management, with technical assistance from the IMF; the effort is ongoing (at the time of this
        ICR Review).

    Overall, two results targets for this objective were met or nearly met, three were not met, and
    one concerning PPPs wasn't applicable because no new PPPs were signed over the duration of the
    series. One of the ten prior actions supporting this objective was reversed, and one was dropped after the
    program closed.


    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     To improve the environment for investment.

    Rationale


                                                                                                        Page 7 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)



The degree of achievement of this objective is assessed as substantial.

Promoting the Recovery of the Electricity Sector. There is no data to assess the achievement of the sole
result target defined for the reform of the electricity sector.

  • There is no data to assess the target that 70 percent of new power generation contracts (measured
  relative to the value of all power generation contracts) be awarded competitively and that the contracts be
  published by 2019. Contracts were not competitively awarded nor publicized in the baseline in 2015. The
  reforms supported by the prior actions were not maintained. First, although the government issued an
  Arrete requiring the CNM to review a-prior all JIRAMA procurement, no new energy purchase and
  generator location contract underwent the process prescribed in the Arrete. In fact, there was no
  consolidated list of current PPP contracts, according to the ICR (page 23). Of the little information
  available --- on some new contracts awarded in the Antananarivo region, and published following the Bank
  ICR mission --- all contracts signed in 2018 were awarded to the same firm. Second, after the publication
  by JIRAMA of the first report on the cost of electricity per provider (not per contract, as required) in 2016,
  JIRAMA did not follow up with the quarterly reporting schedule. A report filed by JIRAMA in 2019 following
  the Bank ICR mission was "largely incomplete and inaccurate", according to the ICR (page 23). Third,
  JIRAMA has not systematically used the standard contract for PPAs, developed with the assistance of the
  Bank. The standard contract does not appear to be adaptable to all types of power generation
  agreements, according the ICR (page 23).
  • On a more positive note, although past the program closing date, the government completed in end-
  2019 the competitive recruitment of JIRAMA's Managing Director and Chief Operating Officer. The new
  managers have committed to implement the corporate recovery plan, including continuing with the
  successful revenue protection and loss reduction program, developing and implementing performance-
  based pay for the staff, and regularizing and renegotiating costly and un-competitively-awarded
  PPAs. The Bank is funding legal work for the preparation of the negotiation strategy, the negotiations
  themselves, and the regularization of the defective contracts. So far, with the legal assistance, JIRAMA
  has finalized agreement on three contracts, the tariffs and arrears of which have been revised. Following
  the successful contract re-negotiations, JIRAMA has reportedly partly trimmed it subsidy needs.

Reinforcing Commercial Justice. The two results targets for reinforcing commercial justice were achieved.

  • A hundred percent of commercial justice cases were randomly assigned in 2019, meeting the
  target. Commercial justice cases were not randomly assigned in the baseline in 2015. The random
  assignment is relevant to the Antananarivo court, where there are 11 magistrates, but less so in the seven
  other regional courts where there are only one or two magistrates.
  • The number of days to resolve a commercial conflict was reduced to 399 days in 2019, exceeding the
  target of 600 days. The number of days to resolve a commercial conflict was 871 days in 2015. A
  comparison of this baseline number with the target is problematic because the baseline number, derived
  from the Bank's Doing Business report, uses a different methodology to assess case length than that used


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)



        in this operation. The Doing Business report uses a theoretical case study with predetermined parameters
        and applies it to a country, based on a survey of pre-identified respondents. On the other hand, this
        operation used actual data, compiled from the Commercial Court of Justice of Antananarivo, for end-
        period reporting. The 399 days achieved under this operation consisted of 21 days for filing, 229 days for
        judgement to be issued, and 150 days for enforcement of the decision. The reforms also cut the number
        of postponements of commercial cases to two per party and reduced the length of trials.

    Promoting the Stability of the Financial Sector. The sole target for promoting the stability of the financial
    sector was met.

        •  A risk-based supervision system was adopted for micro-finance institutions, meeting the
        target. Following the Republic of Madagascar Financial System Stability Assessment of 2016, and with
        assistance from the IMF's Africa Technical Assistance Center, the CSBF adopted a risk-based framework
        for the supervision of banks and micro-finance institutions in 2018. Since then, on-site inspections have
        used this framework. The Microfinance Law of 2017 also included a resolution framework for micro-
        finance institutions.

    Overall, three of four results targets were met or exceeded, and one was not met. Three of seven prior
    actions could not be sustained, all three pertaining to reforms at JIRAMA, although corrective measures
    have been pursued with initial success after project closing.


    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  The program development objective was substantially relevant to the development priorities of Madagascar and
  substantially aligned with the Bank Group country partnership framework for Madagascar at the time of program
  appraisal and closing. The degree of achievement of the first objective to strengthen the fiscal framework is
  rated as modest with two of the six results targets met and two of ten prior actions not maintained. The degree
  of achievement of the second objective to improve the environment for investment is rated as substantial with
  three of four results targets met but with three of seven prior actions not sustained, albeit with corrective action
  after project closing.


  a.        Outcome Rating
            Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)




6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

The risk to the sustainability of the development outcome of the programmatic series is assessed as high.

Political Risk. Two follow-up actions remain pending: the adoption of an automatic price adjustment
mechanism for retail fuel pricing, due in 2020, and the renegotiation of JIRAMA power supply contracts that
were un-competitively procured, currently ongoing. At the same time, two remedial measures are expected of
the government: the creation of a new public investment management guide, to replace the framework
developed under this program but dropped in 2019, and the review of the PPP framework, presumably to help
replace the framework developed under this program. Although most of the reform objectives appear to remain
on the agenda of the new government, a continuing high-level dialogue with the authorities is essential to
continuing the reform effort supported by this series. Uncertainty about the full political ownership of the
reforms can put the sustainability of the development outcome at risk.

Macroeconomic Risk. Madagascar remains a low-income country facing considerable economic
challenges. Progress in macroeconomic performance and structural reform agenda in recent years has been
supported by the IMF Staff Monitored Program (SMP) in 2015-2016 and Extended Credit Facility (ECF) in 2016-
2020 (see Section 3.B). According to the IMF 2019 Article IV Consultation staff report and the sixth review of
the arrangements under the ECF in January 2020, performance under the IMF program has been "broadly
satisfactory with solid growth, moderate single-digit inflation, and a robust external position." However, the
outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 is expected to have a severe impact on the economy, with
disruptions to mining and manufacturing exports, a decline in tourism, and uncertainty with international trade
and investment. The IMF approved an arrangement under the Rapid Credit Facility in April 2020 for SDR 122.2
million (US$166 million) to help Madagascar meet balance of payments problems stemming from the
pandemic. The difficult and uncertain global and national macroeconomic environment in the near- to medium-
term will pose high risks to sustaining reforms in tax revenue mobilization, tax expenditure reduction, subsidy
reform, and public investment management.

Institutional Capacity Risk. Weak governance, especially in some key agencies, poses a high risk to the
continuation of the reform effort supported by this series. In the Ministry of Finance and Budget, despite
significant improvements in institutional capacity (including through the creation of a Tax Policy Unit), no
framework has been established to assess the effectiveness of tax expenditures, according to the ICR (page
27). With the passage in 2017 of new laws granting additional tax incentives to special economic zones,
industrial zones, and future agriculture zones, understanding the economic and fiscal effects of tax
expenditures becomes even more important. At JIRAMA, the poor record at maintaining the reforms supported
by this series (see Section 4 - Objective 2) indicates that sustaining efforts at promoting the recovery of the
electricity sector will likely remain challenging.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
    High


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)



7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The policy areas were underpinned by analytic work produced by the Bank and the IMF, as well as the
  government, according to the Program Document for DPO1 (pages 20-21) and DPO2 (pages 25-
  26): On Strengthening the Fiscal Framework: (a) World Bank, policy note on customs data mirror analysis;
  (b) IMF, Tax Policy Diagnostic report, 2015; (c) IMF, Tax and Customs Administration report, 2014; (d)
  Ministry of Finance and Budget, tax and customs administration data and analysis; (e) World Bank,
  analysis of pump price subsidies, 2014, 2017; (f) IMF, technical assistance on pump price subsidies; (g)
  World Bank, analysis of pension funds, 2016; (h) IMF, technical assistance on pension funds, 2017; and (i)
  IMF, Public Investment Management Assessment, 2017. On Improving the Environment for Investment: (a)
  World Bank, re-engagement policy notes, 2014; (b) World Bank, Doing Business survey; (c) World Bank,
  Enterprise Survey, 2013-14; (d) World Bank, Doing Business report, 2016; (e) World Bank, study of the
  commercial justice system; and (f) IMF and World Bank, Financial System Assessment Program, 2015.

  The programmatic series complemented other Bank investment projects and technical assistance
  operations with related development objectives, according to the Program Document for DPO1 (page 22)
  and DPO2 (page 27), including: On Strengthening the Fiscal Framework: (a) the Public Sector
  Performance Project (approved in 2016), which aimed to strengthen revenue mobilization by establishing a
  tax information management system and introducing performance contracts at the Tax and Customs
  Department; (b) the ESMAP Energy Subsidy Reform Facility technical assistance, which assisted the
  government with reforms to the fuel pricing mechanism; (c) the Social Safety Net Project (2015), which
  aimed to increase the access of extremely poor households to safety net services and to lay the
  foundation for a social protection system; (d) the Support to Strengthen Public Investment, Risk and Debt
  Management Project (2015), which aimed to improve fiscal management in Madagascar and Mozambique
  through the provision of technical assistance for enhanced public investment, and risk and debt
  management; and (e) the Energy Sector Operations and Governance Improvement Project (2016), which
  aimed to improve the operational performance of JIRAMA and improve the reliability of electricity supply in
  the country. On Improving the Environment for Investment: (a) the Integrated Growth Pole Project (2005),
  which aimed to strengthen the business environment for exports in Antananarivo-Antsirabe, tourism in Nosy
  Be, and mining and tourism in Taolagnaro; and (b) the Microfinance Supervision Project (2015), which
  aimed to help improve the legal, regulatory, and institutional capacity for adequate supervision of the
  microfinance sector.

  The macro-fiscal framework was adequate for the programmatic series. Macroeconomic performance was
  broadly satisfactory under the IMF SMP from September 2015 to March 2016. Macroeconomic targets
  were met through March 2016, with the exception of the ceilings on net credit to government and new
  external payment arrears. Tax revenue began to improve gradually, and priority social spending targets
  were met. An accumulation of foreign exchange reserves boosted external buffers. Progress in structural
  reform included: strengthened audits and controls for revenue collections; the submission to Cabinet of a
  revised Central Bank Act; the approval by the Cabinet of a National Social Protection Policy; better
  functioning and transparency of the foreign exchange market; and a new database to enhance debt
  management capacity. In 2016, the IMF approved a 40-month SDR 220 million (US$305 million)

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 19
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)



  ECF arrangement for Madagascar, to help reinforce macroeconomic stability and boost sustainable and
  inclusive growth. In 2017, the IMF expanded the access to SDR 250.55 million (US$347 million), and in
  2019, extended the term for another three months to February 2020. The reforms supported by the series
  were consistent and aligned with the IMF SMP and the ECF.

  The Bank identified risks to the implementation of the reforms and offered mitigation measures.

    • Political tensions and weak governance were high risks to maintaining the reform
    momentum. Discontinuing fuel subsidies and containing losses at JIRAMA were pro-poor, but politically
    sensitive and might be reversed if political tensions mounted as the Presidential elections neared. To
    mitigate the risks, the Bank: embedded governance and transparency measures in the program, aimed to
    strengthen governance through the Public Sector Performance Project, and coordinated with the IMF to
    maintain the reform agenda.
    • Macroeconomic risk was substantial, particularly fiscal risk. The Bank considered the budget support
    provided by the series, and financing by the IMF ECF, to be mitigation measures. The Bank also
    supported operational reform measures at JIRAMA to reduce claims by the utility on the
    budget. Separately, the government had negotiated with most of his creditors to stretch its arrears
    clearance schedule.
    • Weak Institutional capacity was a significant risk. Actions supported by the program might not be
    implemented as effectively as expected or in the agreed time frame. To mitigate the risk, the Bank
    designed the series to be complementary to other investment projects and technical
    assistance operations, which taken together would offer a comprehensive support environment for the
    reform program.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The Bank supervised the program by fielding missions to Madagascar and consulting and meeting regularly
  with the Ministry of Finance and Budget. The Bank also used activity at other projects to help supervise the
  implementation of the reform measures: the Public Sector Performance Project, for tax revenue-related
  reforms; the Integrated Growth Pole Project, for PPP framework and commercial justice reforms; and the
  Microfinance Supervision Project for microfinance institution supervision reforms.

  According to the ICR (page 29), the Bank found the difficult political environment to have constrained
  corrective action when: reviews by CNM of JIRAMA procurement proved ineffective; the next quarterly
  reports on electricity costs were not published; and the standard contracts prepared with the assistance of
  the Bank were not used.

  The Bank did not file any Implementation Results and Status Report (ISR), as none was required. The


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)



 Government shared a government supervision report mid-way through implementation which informed the
 preparation of this ICR.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  The government conveyed its commitment to the reform measures supported by the series. The Minister
  of Finance and Budget issued, in September 2016 and September 2017, the first and second Letters of
  Development Policy that were made part of the Program Document for DPO1 (pages 32-39) and DPO2
  (pages 39-46). The letters informed the Bank of the fulfillment by the government of the prior actions and
  affirmed the government's commitment to the objectives of the series.

  However, some reform measures, or aspects of reform measures, were only partially completed or even
  reversed, albeit with remedial steps expected moving forward.

    • The automatic adjustment mechanism for retail fuel prices was effectively reversed with the
    introduction of a price smoothing formula (see Section 4 - Objective 1).
    • Under 2 percent of tax expenditure reduction targets were delivered after two years of program
    implementation (see Section 4 - Objective 1).
    • The criteria-based process for selecting domestically-financed public investment projects was
    dropped after the program closed in end-2018 (see Section 4 - Objective 1), although a new guide is
    being prepared, with technical assistance from the IMF.
    • The PPP framework is being reviewed by the new government (see Section 4 - Objective 1),
    ostensibly with a revision expected.
    • PPAs and generator rentals have not been competitively procured; the quarterly data on the cost of
    electricity per provider (not per supply contract as required) has not been published since 2016;
    and standard contracts prepared under this program for PPAs are not systematically used. The CNM
    has not been able to review JIRAMA procurement (see Section 4 - Objective 2), although un-
    competitively procured PPAs are being renegotiated.



  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)



  The Ministry of Finance and Budget was the principal implementing agency of the programmatic
  series. Various other agencies implemented measures supported by the series: the General
  Directorate of Customs, for changes to the customs clearance process and use of performance
  contracts; the General Tax Administration, for a risk-based procedure to identify tax and customs data;
  the Ministry of Energy and Hydrocarbons, for changes to the fuel pricing system; the CNM for the
  review of JIRAMA contracts; the JIRAMA, for changes to contracting for PPAs, fuel purchases, and
  generator rentals and for transparency with electricity costs; the Ministry of Justice for commercial
  justice reforms; the CBM and CSBF for the onsite inspection of commercial banks; and the CBM for
  changes to the supervision framework for microfinance institutions.

  The performance of the General Directorate of Customs, General Tax Administration, the Ministry of
  Justice, the CBM, and the CSBF were satisfactory (see Section 4). The performance of Ministry of
  Finance and Budget, the Ministry of Energy and Hydrocarbons, the CNM, and JIRAMA fell short of
  expectations (see Section 4 and Section 8.A).


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The M&E plan defined six results indicators to measure the achievement of the objective to strengthen the fiscal
  framework, and four to measure the achievement of the objective to improve the environment for investment
  (see Section 4). Of these indicators, only two were readily available --- the revenue effort (tax revenue as a
  percentage of GDP) was published in government budget reports, while the number of days to resolve a
  commercial dispute was reported by the Ministry of Justice in its website. Most other data would have to be
  secured by sending a data request to: the Ministry of Finance and Budget --- tax expenditures eliminated,
  transfers reduced (as a share of total expenditures), domestically-financed capital investment projects (greater
  than MGA 5 billion) that were selected following the new appraisal and selection methodology, and new PPP
  projects that were screened following the new appraisal and selection methodology; the CSBF --- the extent of
  risk-based supervision of microfinance institutions; and the JIRAMA --- new PPAs that were competitively
  awarded. Finally, data for two indicators could be drawn from other programs --- priority spending on social
  sectors, from the IMF ECF, and the number of commercial cases randomly assigned to magistrates, from the
  Integrated Growth Pole Project.

  The Ministry of Finance and Budget, as principal implementing agency of the program, would be responsible for
  M&E implementation.



                                                                                                 Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)




b. M&E Implementation
  There were many issues with M&E implementation, according to the ICR (pages 13-15).

    • The Ministry of Finance and Budget and the CSBF were forthcoming with M&E data, but JIRAMA was
    less so.
    • Monitoring was initially conducted with the Economic Council meeting the Bank staff to review program
    implementation, but the outcomes of the meetings were not documented in official records.
    • The result indicators were reviewed when DPO2 was prepared in 2017, covering results in 2016.
    • An ISR internal to the program team was to be prepared at the end of 2018, but information for the report
    was not all readily available; hence, the report was not filed as planned.
    • As the Economic Council was deactivated, systematic M&E implementation became even more difficult.




c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (page 16), some M&E data from the program remained relevant to the government
  even as the program closed in end-2018. For example, Ministry of Finance data on tax expenditures are
  reportedly useful to policy discussions on tax expenditure reform. The Ministry of Justice has continued to
  publish information on the resolution of commercial disputes in its website.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  Environmental Effects. According to the Program Document for DPO1 (page 25) and DPO2 (pages 29-30):

    • The reforms under the series were expected to have positive climate co-benefits of US$6.6 million
    (based on the new Multilateral Development Bank methodology for assessing climate co-benefits), with
    the removal of the fuel subsidy assigned 100 percent mitigation co-benefits, the improvement in the
    procurement regime to increase hydro-power generation assigned 50 percent mitigation co-benefits, but
    with the elimination of the exemption on propane gas expected to be insignificant.
    • The scaling-up of investments and PPPs might have potential environmental impacts, which would
    depend on the nature of the project, but which would be regulated by the Madagascar Environmental
    Charter and other regulations. The laws required all investment projects that were likely to have an
    environmental impact to prepare an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment which must be
    approved by the Ministry of Environment, and published in the National Environment Office (NEO). The


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)



    environmental impact assessment might require a Project Environmental Management Plan, the execution
    of which would be monitored by the NEO. The PPP decree required that a preliminary assessment be
    made to estimate environmental and social feasibility of a PPP project and that this information be
    presented in a risk matrix.
    • The reforms to JIRAMA would have the potential to increase the use of renewable
    energy, the environmental impact of which would be positive. However, most of these likely projects were
    at an early stage, making it difficult to quantify the environmental effects.

  The ICR did not discuss the environmental effects of the operation.
  Social Effects. The Program Document for DPO1 (pages 23-24 and 43-44) and DPO2 (pages 28-29 and 49-
  50) expected the reform measures to have generally positive social effects.

    • Reforms to fuel subsidies, tax expenditures, and transfers to the pension fund were expected to
    significantly reduce the extent to which public spending was regressive. According to the household
    survey of 2012, the top quintile of the income distribution benefitted from an estimated 40 percent of total
    expenditures due to the un-targeted nature of subsidies on fuel. Similarly, some 73 percent of future
    pension beneficiaries (public sector employees, including those in SOEs, who are entitled to social
    benefits) were in the top consumption quintile, while 17 percent were in the fourth quintile. Moreover,
    the tax expenditures to be cancelled pertained to goods that were not typically consumed by the poor,
    such as sports clothes and propane gas.
    • While the operation was expected to have an overall positive poverty and social impact, some mitigation
    measures were needed for certain households. Fuel subsidy removal was expected to have the largest
    effect on the distribution of income, while the elimination of certain tax expenditures and exemptions and
    the reduction of budget transfers to the pension fund might also have welfare effects.
    • The effects of the reforms on the poor would need to be mitigated by scaling-up social safety
    nets. Because of their dependence on kerosene for lighting, the bottom 40 percent of the population
    accounted for 14 percent of total fuel consumption in 2012. Although the reforms would result in only a
    marginal increase in the price of kerosene, the removal of the subsidy would nonetheless reduce the
    purchasing power of households in the bottom 40 percent by 1 percent.

  The ICR (pages 26-27) stated that reforms supported by the series had generated the potential for positive
  distributional effects, including by creating the fiscal space for social spending, but that these social effects
  would take time to materialize.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The Program Document for DPO1 (page 26) and DPO2 (page 31) stated that the
  IDA grant would be disbursed following standard IDA procedures for DPOs, with the grant proceeds
  disbursed into a dedicated U.S. dollar-denominated account designated by the government as part of the
  country’s foreign exchange reserves account at the Central Bank of Madagascar and with an equivalent

                                                                                                       Page 16 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)



   amount credited in the government's budget management system. The ICR did not cite any problem with
   the financial management of the operation.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
    ---


d. Other
    ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                        IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                    Moderately Satisfactory   ---
                                Satisfactory
Risk to Development
                                High                       High                      ---
Outcome
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                           Moderately Satisfactory   ---
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Borrower Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory   ---
                                Satisfactory
Quality of ICR                                             Substantial               ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

 Three lessons are drawn from the ICR (pages 31-32), with some adaptation.

 Policy and structural reform programs should consider political economy risks and design
 mechanisms for governments to address these risks. In this series, vested interests protecting tax
 expenditures remained formidable while ability of the Ministry of Finance and Budget to cut tax expenditures
 was limited. The dynamic is reflected in the minimal rate of tax expenditure reduction that was achieved,
 under 2 percent of the target after two years of program implementation. With the electricity sector reforms,
 governance at JIRAMA was weak, with the utility company unable to compile basic information on PPA
 contracts or to publish data on electricity costs beyond the first report.


                                                                                                      Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)



Development policy operations benefit from having complementary Bank investment and technical
assistance projects and IMF programs that support the DPO objectives. In this series, seven concurrent
Bank investment and technical assistance projects and two IMF programs and technical assistance helped
sustain the policy dialogue with the authorities for this DPO series, delivered technical assistance to agencies
in implementing prior actions and related measures, and helped monitor progress towards the program
results targets. The complementary operations also served to compensate for some gaps in the DPO
performance --- when the new government dropped the public investment decision framework developed
under this Bank operation after the program closed in 2018, the IMF's technical assistance program
in Madagascar helped the government prepare a new public investment guide for capital projects.

Development policy operations need strong M&E arrangements when several implementing agencies
are involved. In this series, where no ISR was required, M&E implementation depended on ad-hoc
arrangements for review meetings, internal and informal ISRs, and individual data requests fielded with
implementing agencies. An M&E unit at possibly the Prime Minister's office would have centralized
responsibility at a higher bureaucratic level and drawn ready participation from implementing agencies.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presents a comprehensive record of the programmatic series. A list of the Bank, IMF and
government analytical work underpinning the reform objectives and measures is found in Annex 4 (ICR, pages
38-41). The objectives, policy areas, and prior actions are detailed in Sections 1.2, 1.3, 1.4 and 1.5 (ICR,
pages 4-9). The ICR lists the data sources for the 10 results indicators and indicates which are generated by
the series, as well as those which are reported on a systematic basis, in Table 6 (ICR, pages 14-15). The
document provides a comprehensive review of the achievement of the program objectives in Section 3.2 (ICR,
pages 19-24).

The ICR offers a candid assessment of the results of the programmatic series. The document does not only
report on whether the 10 results targets were achieved, but whether the 17 prior actions were maintained
following their completion at program effectiveness. "Table 7 - Evaluation of Progress Toward the PDOs"
(ICR, page 26) provides a useful summary of this assessment --- the public investment decision framework
was dropped after the program closing date, and the three reforms to JIRAMA contracting, electricity cost
reporting, and contract standardization were not maintained following the completion of the prior actions.

There are minor shortcomings. The ICR (pages 19-24) rates the efficacy of the objectives and sub-pillars as
either satisfactory, moderately satisfactory, moderately unsatisfactory, and unsatisfactory --- presumably using
the six-point scale used for rating outcome (highly satisfactory, moderately satisfactory, moderately


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MG- Public Finance Sustainability and in(P160866)



unsatisfactory, unsatisfactory, highly unsatisfactory). However, efficacy should be rated using a four-point
scale (high, substantial, modest, negligible). Moreover, the ICR is too lengthy at 33 pages, more than double
the maximum length of 15 pages.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 19 of 19
