     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0021953

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P100311                                     SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Solomon Islands                             Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53790,IDA-H4150,IDA-H9130               30-Dec-2012                                            11,709,584.21

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 08-Jul-2008                                 31-Mar-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              4,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                              12,736,114.44                                                 0.00

 Actual                                          11,709,584.21                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan          Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi                IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both the Financing Agreement (p.5) dated July 28, 2008 and the project appraisal document
   (PAD, p.6), the project objective was “to improve the operational efficiency, system reliability and financial
   sustainability of the Solomon Islands Electricity Authority through improved financial and operational
   management, reduction of losses, improved generator and distribution system reliability and increased
   revenue collection.”



                                                                                                      Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



   At the Additional Financing (AF) in 2014, the project objective was revised. According to the Financing
   Agreement for AF (p.5) dated April 1, 2014, the revised project objective was “to improve operational
   efficiency, system reliability and financial sustainability of the Project Implementing Entity [Solomon Islands
   Electricity Authority-SIEA].”

   Since there is no material difference between the original and the revised project objectives, the revision of
   the project objective does not necessitate a split rating. The changes in the targets of some indicators do not
   justify a split rating, either; those changes did not have a material impact on the assessment of the project
   outcomes.

   The project objective will be evaluated as consisting of three objectives:

        1. To improve the operational efficiency of the SIEA;
        2. To improve the system reliability of the SIEA; and
        3. To improve the financial sustainability of the SIEA.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of three components:

   A. Management of Solomon Islands Electricity Authority. (Appraisal cost: US$1.59 million; revised cost
   at Additional Financing:US$4.7 million; actual cost: US$3.69 million)

   (a) Strengthening the management and operations of SIEA through the appointment of key management
   staff to oversee the administrative, financial management and commercialization functions of SIEA.

   (b) Enhancing management capacity of SIEA through training of key management staff.

   B. Financial Operations of Solomon Islands Electricity Authority. (Appraisal cost: US$0.57 million;
   actual cost: US$0.64 million)

   Implementation of a commercialization program for the SIEA finance department, including: (i)
   establishment of a new financial management and billing system; (ii) preparation and implementation of a
   new finance accounting manual; and (iii) provision of training to staff on the new financial management and
   billing systems and the finance accounting manual.




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



  C. Technical Operations of Solomon Island Electricity Authority. (Appraisal cost: US$1.87 million of;
  revised cost at Additional Financing:US$14.7 million; actual cost: US$7.37 million)

  (a) Increasing the availability of existing electricity generation and improving system reliability through the
  implementation of a loss reduction program, a planned maintenance program for generation facilities in
  Honiara, and a distribution reinforcement program within SIEA.

  (b) Strengthening SIEA’s capacity to implement the project through the provision of project implementation
  support, technical and project management training to the staff of SIEA, and establishment of a partnership
  with the Fiji Electricity Authority for the sharing of knowledge and best practices.



  Revised Components

  At the time of the Additional Financing in February 2014, additional activities were added to the first and
  third components as outlined below (see d. Components above for estimated costs at Additional Financing).

  A. Management of Solomon Islands Electricity Authority. Following technical assistance activities were
  added to the project scope:

      1. Technical assistance and training on dispatch and control, system planning, and integration of
           renewable and independent power producers;
      2.   Support to owner’s engineer until mid-2017;
      3.   Appointment of a Capital Projects Manager for 2014–2017;
      4.   Finance and due diligence technical assistance;
      5.   Additional technical assistance support for project management; and
      6.   Preparation of feasibility engineering services and safeguard studies for renewable energy activities.

  C. Technical Operations of Solomon Island Electricity Authority. Four network investments, which were
  included in SIEA’s priority capital investment program for 2014-2017 to improve reliability in the Honiara
  grid, were added to the project scope:

      1. Upgrade of transformer capacity with an additional 5MVA 33 kV/11 kV transformer, addition of a
           second 33 kV switchboard, and a new system control room and dispatch at Ranadi;
      2. A 12.5 MVA transformer and upgrade of switching arrangements at Lungga Power Station;
      3. New Zone Substation for transforming 33 kV/11 kV, with a 7.5 MVA transformer at Kola’a Ridge; and
      4. Relocation of the second power circuit to supply the residential area to the south of Honiara Airport
           (Feeder 12 area) by building a new overhead power line and an underground circuit around the
           airport that links to the East Honiara Substation to the Feeder 12 area.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$4.50 million. In the first restructuring,
  due to the availability of co-financing from the Australian Aid (AusAID) and the Global Environment Facility
  (GEF), new project activities were added and the project cost increased to US46.90 million; however, the
  co-financing from AusAID and GEF did not materialize (see First Restructuring below). An Additional

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



Financing was approved in February 2014 to finance distribution system investments in Honiara, and the
project cost increased to US$23.40 million. In the last restructuring in April 2018, the project cost was
revised down to US$20.94 million because of the cancellation of some project activities. In March 2019, the
project closed with a total actual cost of US$19.91 million.

Financing: At appraisal, the International Development Association (IDA) grant was estimated at US$4.00
million. In February 2014, an additional US$2.00 million IDA grant and US$11.00 million IDA credit were
approved for additional investment activities to improve the reliability of power in Honiara. At the last
restructuring, due to the cancellation of some project activities and cost savings, US$3.30 million was
cancelled from the IDA credit, decreasing the credit amount to US$6.74 million. At project closing in March
2019, the original and additional IDA grants were fully disbursed. The project disbursed US$5.93 million IDA
credit.

At the first restructuring, it was estimated that US$1.00 million from AusAID and US$0.9 million from the
GEF would be available as co-financing, which did not materialize (see First Restructuring below).

Borrower contribution: At appraisal, the Borrower’s contribution was estimated at US$0.50 million. At the
Additional Financing, this increased to US$6.90 million and at the time of the third restructuring to US$8.20
million. The ICR (p.2) states that the Borrower’s contribution at project closing was US$8.20 million.

Restructurings: There were four project restructurings, one of which with additional financing.

      First Restructuring (Level 2 - March 22, 2012): The project became effective one year after
       approval because of the lengthy recruitment process of a commercialization manager—a condition
       for project effectiveness. The project implementation was slow, especially in the commercialization
       program. Due to these reasons, the project closing date was extended by 18 months from
       December 30, 2012 to June 30, 2014. This time-extension was also a precondition for co-financing
       from AusAID in the amount of US$1.00 million, along with US$0.90 million from the Global
       Environment Facility (GEF), which became available from the Sustainable Energy Financing Project.
       This co-financing would be used to finance new project activities, such as technical assistance for
       improved financial management and procurement, installation of 40 pole mounted meters for large
       customers, asset revaluation, and improving rural electricity supply in two selected provinces.
       However, the processing of the co-financing from AusAID was delayed by (i) an amendment of the
       Parent Administrative Agreement (PAA) with Australia to extend the closing date; (ii) the necessity of
       another amendment of the PAA, which was revealed after a further legal due diligence in 2013, to
       allow the funds to be used for activities in the second and third components of the project; and (iii)
       the moratorium on Australia signing such an amendment during the federal government’s caretaker
       period leading up to the federal election in September 2013. The GEF co-financing, too, was
       delayed due to GEF’s requests to significantly change the Grant Funding Application on several
       occasions (Implementation Status and Results Report (ISR) No.6, p.2). In the meantime, as a result
       of its improved financial viability, SIEA used its own funds to finance the project activities planned for
       the co-financing. Therefore, in December 2014, it was decided not to proceed with the AusAID co-
       financing (ISR No.8, p.3) and in June 2015 with the GEF co-financing (ISR No.9, p.4). In this
       restructuring, the target for the reduction in system losses was revised from 14 percent to 12
       percent, which was further revised in other restructurings, too, due to inconsistencies in baseline
       estimation. Improved availability of reliable technical data during project implementation allowed the




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



       project team to set more realistic targets, as well, but, overall, these changes did not have any
       material impact on assessing the achievement of project objectives.

      Second Restructuring and Additional Financing (Level 1 - February 13,2014): The project’s
       intervention resulted in an improvement in the financial viability of SIEA, but the reliability of power
       supply in Honiara, the capital, worsened as a result of increased demand and insufficient investment
       in the power system. To improve the reliability of power in the largest and the commercial center of
       the country, an additional US$13.00 million—US$2.00 million IDA grant and US$11.00 million IDA
       credit—was approved in February 2014. The additional IDA credit was to finance capital investments
       to strengthen the Honiara grid by addressing the most severe bottlenecks in the power system; the
       additional grant was to be used for technical assistance activities (see Revised Components above).
       At this restructuring, the project objective was also revised and the part of the original objective that
       described the project activities was deleted. Because of the inclusion of new investment activities in
       the project scope, the environmental category of the project changed from C to B. New intermediate
       result indicators were added to the results framework to monitor the implementation of new project
       activities. The baseline and end target of the indicator for network losses was revised from 21
       percent to 27 percent and from 12 percent to 14 percent, respectively. Two indicators, i.e., revenue
       per kWh generated and net profit before tax, were deleted. Lastly, the project closing date was
       extended by 36 months from June 30, 2014 to June 30, 2017, to allow time for the completion of the
       new project activities.

      Third Restructuring (Level 2 - May 1, 2017): The contract for a new system control room and
       dispatch center was cancelled due to insufficient time to complete the construction. To utilize a part
       of the savings from this cancellation, new project activities were added: (i) technical assistance for
       project management and preparation of feasibility engineering services; and (ii) safeguard studies
       for renewable energy activities. In this restructuring, duplicate indicators monitoring power outages
       were deleted. The end target of the system losses indicator was adjusted from 14 percent to 18
       percent “to reflect a more realistic end target” (Structuring Paper, p.15). The closing date of the grant
       and credit agreements signed at additional financing was extended by 21 months from June 30,
       2017 to March 31, 2019, to allow time for the completion of the ongoing activities which were
       delayed due to slow procurement.

      Fourth Restructuring (Level 2 - April 10, 2018): US$3.30 million was saved, due to lower than
       originally estimated costs of some activities and SIEA’s using of its own funds for the Lungga
       transformer. This amount was cancelled at this restructuring. The indicators, i.e., revenue per kWh
       generated and net profit before tax, which were deleted in the 2014 restructuring, were added back
       to the results framework to measure the achievement of the project objective to improve the financial
       sustainability of SIEA. The end target of the average number of debtor days to collect billed amount
       was adjusted from 30 days to 35 days to allow customers a five-day late payment margin.
       Furthermore, the end target of the collection ratio indicator was decreased from 90 percent to 70
       percent based on the collection rate of 65 percent at the time of restructuring.

Dates: The project was approved on July 8, 2008 and became effective about one year later on June 25,
2009. The project closing date was extended by a total of 75 months (i.e. 6 years and 3 months) from the
original closing date of December 30, 2012 to March 31, 2019. The original IDA grant agreement was
closed on June 30, 2017, which was 54 months (i.e. 4 years and 6 months) after the original closing date.
The IDA grant and credit agreements for additional financing closed on March 31,2019, which was 21
months (i.e. 1 year and 9 months) after their original closing date of June 30, 2017. The reasons for these

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 22
                                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                        SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



                                      extensions have been outlined above (see references to the restructurings and the Additional Financing
                                      above).




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               The project objectives are highly relevant to the country context in the Solomon Islands. Less than 20
               percent of the population has access to electricity with a significant difference between the urban centers
               and rural areas: in Honoria 64 percent of the population has access to electricity but in the rest of the
               country only 6 percent, which is mostly through small solar panels. Only 12 percent of households have
               access to electricity through a grid. The SIEA, a state-owned vertically integrated power utility, has a target
               of expanding the power generation capacity by an additional 54 MW and its grid coverage to improve the
               reliability, affordability and sustainability of electricity services. Therefore, despite a marked improvement in
               SIEA’s financial and operational performance as a result of the project’s intervention, the sustainability of
               these outcomes is critical for the development of electricity sector in the country; therefore, the project
               objectives are still highly relevant to the country context.

               The project objectives are substantially aligned with the World Bank (the Bank) strategy defined in the
               Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY2018-FY2023 for Solomon Islands. Under the first focus area of
               "Strengthening the foundations of well-being", Objective 1.1 is defined as "to improve renewable power
               generation and access to electricity" (CPF, pp.21-22). The CPF does not directly refer to the project’s
               objectives, but this does not make them irrelevant: Having achieved a substantial improvement in the
               financial and operation performance of the SIEA through the project’s intervention, which was the highest
               priority before any major investments in the power sector, the Bank strategy now focuses on addressing
               higher level issues in the sector—diversification of generation sources and increasing access to electricity.
               Therefore, the relevance of the project objectives to the Bank strategy is assessed as substantial.

               Following the end of the ethnic tensions in 2003, the Bank was engaged with the Solomon Island authorities
               on energy sector issues. The weak institutional capacity and the poor financial and operational performance
               of the SIEA was a major obstacle to address other major power sector related issues in the Solomon
               Islands. Therefore, as a first intervention to support the power sector and to lay the foundation for a
               sustainable sectoral development path, the project objectives were sufficiently challenging and relevant to
               the institutional capacity in the country.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To improve the operational efficiency of SIEA.

Rationale
Theory of Change

The project design was simple; it was primarily structured around the appointment of experienced
professionals to key management and board positions, who would bring in their experience and expertise to
reorganize and commercialize SIEA and implement a limited number of project-financed investment activities.
The outputs expected from these professionals were listed in the Terms of Reference for each position, but
their performance evaluation was linked to the improvements in system reliability and financial sustainability
of the utility. There was no outcome defined for the improvement in “operational efficiency,” which was not
clearly defined. There was no indicator in the results framework capturing the achievement of this objective.

The project was also to finance a limited number of investment projects, such as rehabilitation of generators,
replacement of a switchboard at Honiara Power Station and installation of a new transmission cable from
Lungga Power Station to Ranadi Substation. These activities would be expected to improve system reliability,
but the achievement of the ambitious targets set for the reduction in the duration and frequency of outages
could only be achieved through SIEA’s investments in generation; insufficient generation capacity had been
the main reason for outages. Therefore, although a direct causal link could be established from the project
inputs and outputs, to the achievement of the project objective “to improve system reliability,” the attribution
was weak due to separate investments to be funded by SIEA.

To improve the financial sustainability of SIEA, the project was to support the implementation of the
commercialization program, through the appointment of a Commercialization Manager, staff training in
finance, establishment of a new financial management and billing system, preparation of a new accounting
manual and preparation of a loss reduction study. The expected intermediate outcomes were a decrease in
the non-technical loss and an increase in the collection rate, which would consequently lead to higher
revenue per kWh generated and net profit before tax. The achievement of this objective could be attributable
to the project activities.

There was no change to the theory of change at Additional Financing. The new investments in distribution to
be supported by the project would be expected to improve the system reliability, but the achievement of this
objective still depended on SIEA’s investment in generation using its own funds. This would be indirectly
supported by the project by improving the operational efficiency and financial sustainable of SIEA, which
would allow the utility to implement capital investments using its funds.

Outputs

Technical Assistance. The project activities resulted in the following outputs as originally planned: (i) two
professional utility line managers on expatriate benefits—General Manager and Commercialization
Manager—and a professional external Director of the Board were appointed to strengthen SIEA’s corporate
governance; (ii) under the commercialization program, a financial management and billing system was
established, and a new accounting manual was prepared; (iii) trainings were provided to the key management
staff and operational staff on finance and engineering; and (iv) a loss reduction program, a maintenance
program for generation facilities in Honiara, and a distribution reinforcement program were prepared and

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



implemented. After the Additional Financing, a cost of service and tariff review was conducted, as planned,
but a supervisory control and data acquisition system (SCADA) could not be installed; instead, the project
contributed to its design.

Outcomes

The State-Owned Enterprise (SOE) Act 2007 and the State-Owned Enterprise Regulations 2010 established
the legal framework for commercially managing the SOEs, which “requires the SOEs to operate profitably;
imposes a rigorous director selection and appointment process; defines corporate planning and reporting
requirements; and establishes a process for the transparent identification, costing, and financing of
community service obligations” (Finding Balance 2014, Benchmarking the Performance of State-Owned
Enterprises in Island Countries, Asian Development Bank, p.23). The project supported the implementation of
the SOE Act through the appointment of experienced professionals to key management positions and a
professional external Director of the Board, which was pivotal in the transformation of the SIEA. These
professionals, especially the external Board Member, brought in their experience and expertise, such as
strategy setting, finance, and corporate governance. The intermediate outcomes achieved as a result of the
appointment of these professionals, as reported by the project team, were as follows:

      Improved governance: Establishment of three board sub-committees for audit and finance, human
       resources, and technical; regular board and sub-committee meetings; board resolutions tracked and
       reported by the management.
      Improved corporate planning: Preparation of a five-year strategic plan setting out key corporate
       commitments and outlining a timeline of key dates and milestones for planned major works
       procurement and project, and development of key performance indicators.
      Improved management functions: Major organizational restructuring based on a human resources
       review; adoption of new procurement policy; more effective internal audit procedures; development of
       basic reports to the Board on financial and operational performance as a result of the establishment of
       an integrated business management system funded by SIEA; development of a business financial
       model; and introduction of budgetary control systems.
      Increased transparency: Regular issuance of annual reports starting from 2010, which was the first
       annual report since 1997.

Although the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) did not provide a definition of “operational efficiency”, its
meaning could be inferred from the following sentence (PAD, p.7): “The proposed IDA grant will finance
specific measures to help SIEA to improve management and operational efficiency, to help it best play the
central role in electricity sector development needed in the coming months and years.” Then the question
regarding the achievement of this objective would be “At project closing, was SIEA in a position to play a
central role in electricity development in the Solomon Islands?” The answer to this question is affirmative.
Before the project started, the SIEA was a dysfunctional, bankrupt utility. As a result of the project’s
intervention, the utility has now the capacity to plan, raise financing, including its own funds, and implement
capital investment programs to diversify its generation mix and increase access to electricity in the country.
As a result of the outcomes achieved through the appointment of professionals to key management and the
Board positions, the project was successful in improving the management functions of the utility. This was a
key element of operational efficiency, and its achievement could be directly attributed to the project’s
intervention.




                                                                                                   Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



One of the expected outcomes for operational efficiency was to transition away from the expatriate manager
to local manager at the end of the project and the commercialization manager position would be abolished at
the end of the project. At project closing, the transitioning from expatriate general manager to local general
manager did not materialize, and the commercialization manager was renamed as Chief Financial Officer and
it was filled by an expatriate professional.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the system reliability of SIEA.

Rationale
Outputs

Technical Assistance. In addition to the technical assistance activities listed under Objective 1 above, a
maintenance program for generation facilities in Honiara and a distribution reinforcement program were
prepared, and technical training was provided to the engineering staff, as planned. Under Additional
Financing, a general manager for capital works was appointed to oversee the investment works.

Investments. Under the original IDA grant, the project supported, as planned, the replacement of a 11kV
switchboard at Honiara Power Station, the installation of a 33kV cable from Lungga Power Station to Ranadi
Substation and the rehabilitation of cooling systems of the generators at the Lungga Power Station. Major
investment activities were implemented, and completed, as planned, under the Additional Financing: (i)
construction of a line and an underground circuit around the airport to link the East Honiara Substation to the
Feeder 12 residential area—commissioned in November 2018; (ii) upgrading of switching arrangements at
Lungga Power Station—not commissioned at project closing; (iii) construction of an additional 5 MVA
transformer and an additional switchboard at Ranadi Substation—partially commissioned in December 2018;
and (iv) construction of a new zone substation at Kola’ Ridge with one 12.5 MVA transformer—commissioned
in March 2019. The project would finance a new 12.5 MVA transformer at Lungga Power Station, but SIEA
financed this activity from its own funds.

Outcomes

System reliability, or reliability of electricity supply, is directly related to the number and duration of outages in
the system. Two indicators in the results framework measured the duration and frequency of outages to
capture the improvement in the system reliability:

(a) System Average Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI): This index measures the average duration of
customer-minutes of interruption per customer in a year. At appraisal, the duration of outages was 51,840
minutes per year (864 hours), which is a SAIDI 6.48 minutes per customer assuming 8,000 connections in
Honiara. The original target was to decrease the total yearly duration of interruptions to 25,920 minutes (432
hours), which is a SAIDI of 3.24 minutes per customer. At the Additional Financing, the actual duration of
interruptions per year had already dropped to 7,430 minutes (124 hours); therefore, the target was revised to

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



a total yearly interruption duration of 2,000 minutes. At project closing the total yearly duration of interruptions
was estimated at 1,757 minutes, which is a big drop from the baseline of 51,840 minutes.

(b) System Average Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI): It is the ratio of total number of customer
interruptions in a year to the total number of customers. At appraisal, the baseline was 816 interruptions in a
year. The original target was to decrease the total number of interruptions to 360. At the Additional Financing,
the achievement was already 155 interruptions per year; therefore, the target was revised to 85. At project
closing, the average number of interruptions a customer experienced in a year was a substantially low 17.5.

Both indicators show that there was a significant improvement in the reliability of electricity supply in the SIEA
network, which covers Honiara. However, this achievement could not be fully attributed to the project’s
intervention. Firstly, one of the main reasons for very high SAIDI and SAIFI baselines was the Project for the
Improvement of the Honiara Power Supply funded by Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), which
required frequent and long outages in the system (PAD, p.43). As a result of the investments in the
distribution and transmission network financed by the JICA project, the duration and frequency of outages
decreased; however, the reliability of the power supply worsened due to the breakdown in generators in
Lungga and Honiara power stations (Ex-Post Evaluation of Japanese Grant Aid Project, The Project for
Improvement of Honiara Power Supply in Solomon Islands,
https://www2.jica.go.jp/en/evaluation/pdf/2011_0607600_4.pdf, p.1). Secondly, to address the generation
bottleneck, the SIEA purchased new generators using its own funds (ICR, p.15). Furthermore, it was noted in
the PAD (p.43) that the replacement of the peaking plant would be funded by SIEA (PAD, p.43), which was
not included in the project scope. As a result of these generation investments, the installed generation
capacity in Honiara system increased from 14.9 MW in 2011 to 33.6 MW in 2018, against the peak demands
of 13.9 MW and 15.5 MW, respectively. Fourthly, the project’s main investment activities funded under
Additional Financing to improve system reliability were commissioned only starting from the last quarter of
2018; however, the duration and frequency of outages had already significantly dropped in 2017 when it was
recorded at 1,920 minutes (target was 2,000 minutes) and the interruption frequency at 21 (target was 85).
Lastly, although the project activities financed under the original grant, such as the replacement of a
switchboard at Honiara Power Station, the installation of a transmission cable from Lungga Power Station to
Ranadi Substation and the rehabilitation of the cooling systems of the generators at the Lungga Power
Station must have had an impact on the improvement of system reliability, as the ICR (p.58) notes, “it’s hardly
possible to distinguish what percentage of reduced outage results from our project or generator addition” by
SIEA using its own capital and funds from other development banks and donors.

On the other hand, SIEA’s improved financial position must have played an important role in supporting its
capital investments and raising funds from other development banks and donors; but, since the improvement
in the financial situation of the SIEA is assessed under Objective 3, the achievement of Objective 2 is
assessed within the framework of the relevant investment activities and technical assistance support financed
by the project. Therefore, due to weak attribution, the efficacy of the achievement of the second objective to
improve the system reliability of SIEA is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)




Objective
To improve financial sustainability of the SIEA.

Rationale
Outputs

Technical Assistance. The Commercialization Manager hired by the project funds developed and delivered
a commercialization program as planned. Under the original grant, the project supported the
commercialization program through finance training to the staff of the Finance Department of SIEA, the
procurement of a new financial management and billing system, the preparation of a new accounting manual,
and the implementation of a loss reduction program. A cost of service and tariff review was completed after
Additional Financing.

Outcomes

Three indicators were selected by the ICR (pp.11-12) to measure the achievement of the project objective “to
improve the financial sustainability of SIEA”:

(a) Net profit before tax: At appraisal, SIEA had a loss of SB$44 million (SBD-Solomon Island dollar), which
was about US$6.2 million. The target was to increase SIEA’s net profit before tax to SB$25.0 million (about
US$3.5 million). This indicator was deleted at the Additional Financing but was added back to the results
framework at the fourth restructuring with a target of SB$98.0 million (about US$12.0 million). In 2017, SIEA
recorded a net profit before tax of SB$120.0 million (about US$15.0 million) and SB$80.1 million (about
US$10.0 million) in 2018.

(b) Revenue per kWh generated: The baseline was SB$1.39 per kWh generated and the target set at
appraisal was SB$3.0. Like the previous indicator, this one, too, was deleted at the Additional Financing and
added back to the results framework at the fourth restructuring with a target of SB$4.5 per kWh generated.
The achievement was SB$4.64.

(c) Collection ratio: At appraisal, the collection ratio was 72 percent. The target was set at 90 percent.
However, at the fourth restructuring the target was lowered to 70 percent. According to the project paper
(Report No.: RES31408, p.5), despite SIEA’s implementation of various measures to improve the collection
ratio, such as transitioning a significant number of consumers to cash power—a prepayment system—the
collection rate at the time of fourth restructuring was only 65 percent. At project closing, the collection rate
stood at 60 percent. The ICR (p.37) notes that there were inconsistencies in the methodology of this indicator:
the project team “could not verify that the collection ratio at the start of the project and at the end of the
project was measuring what it purported to measure.” The ICR further states that the installation of a newer
billing system might be a possible explanation for the difference between the baseline and the actual values
for collection rate (ICR, p.37).

The appointment of an experienced professional to the Commercialization Manager position, along with the
appointments to the General Manager and external Director positions, was critical in transforming SIEA and
improving its financial sustainability. The Financial Manager successfully implemented the commercialization
program defined as tasks in the terms of reference for this position (PAD, pp.40-41).

As reported by the project team the introduction of a new financial management and billing system helped
SIEA become a more service-oriented and customer-responsive utility while increasing its accountability to

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



                            the Board and the government. The improvement in the financial management and billing system would be
                            expected to lead to an increase in the collection ratio, but as discussed above, the collection ratio did not
                            capture this progress. On the other hand, the impact of this improved systems on the financial situation of
                            SIEA is captured by the increase in the revenue per kWh generated.

                            The project-financed loss reduction program was also critical in improving the financial situation of SIEA. The
                            studies conducted under the loss reduction program determined a very high non-technical loss at 16 percent
                            and recommended mitigation measures, including improved internal auditing. The project team reported that,
                            as a result of these audits, a range of fraudulent activities by some major customers were identified, such as
                            meter bypassing, bribes paid to some SIEA employees responsible for meter reading and disconnections,
                            and collusion of a small number of SIEA back-office staff in fraud. This led to the implementation of smart
                            metering program. Together with transitioning of a majority of the household customers to pre-payment
                            meters, the implementation of the smart metering program for larger customers resulted in a decrease in the
                            non-technical loss contributed to the reduction in the total loss ratio from a baseline of 27 percent to about 17
                            percent at project closing (for system losses indicator, see Objective 1 above). The decrease in non-technical
                            loss, coupled with an increase in tariff, increased revenue per kWh generated; hence, increased net profit
                            before tax.

                            Overall, the efficacy of the achievement of the project objective to improve the financial sustainability of SIEA
                            is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The appointment of experienced professionals to key management positions and to the Board as external
                            director was critical in improving the operational efficiency and the financial sustainability of SIEA. These
                            professionals brought in their experience to transform the utility from a dysfunctional, bankrupt situation to a
                            position where SIEA could play a central role in electricity development in the Solomon Islands through
                            improved financial situation, credit worthiness, and institutional capacity in both financial and technical
                            matters. However, at project closing the key management positions were still filled by expatriate managers
                            rather than local members of staff, which was one of the main goals of the project. Although there was weak
                            attribution between the distribution investments financed by the project and the decrease in the duration and
                            frequency of outages, it is evident that the improved financial situation of SIEA allowed the utility to finance
                            capital investments in generation and distribution using its own funds or raising funds from other development
                            banks or donors. Overall, the efficacy of the achievement of the project objective to improve the operational
                            efficiency, system reliability and the financial sustainability of SIEA is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating

                                                                                                                               Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

At appraisal, a “with and without project” economic analysis was conducted. The primary benefit of the project
was assumed to be fuel cost savings due to reduction in technical loss. It was assumed that there would be a 5
percent reduction in technical loss in the Honiara network as a result of project investments in metering and
distribution rehabilitation between 2009 and 2011 (PAD, p.75). This assumption was problematic because
meters, such as pre-payment meters, are useful in decreasing non-technical losses, not technical losses. The
economic analysis assumed that the total loss at the Honiara system was 21 percent (13 percent technical and
8 percent non-technical). This assumption was disputed (see next paragraph). Furthermore, the customer
savings through reduced requirements for auto-generation back-up systems due to a reduction in outages could
not be properly quantified; hence, they were not included in the economic analysis as economic benefits (PAD,
p.78). Total project cost excluding price contingencies, operation and maintenance cost, and the cost of diesel
fuel were included in the analysis as costs. Assumptions on demand increase and diesel fuel price changes
were realistic. The calculations resulted in an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 34.8 percent and a
Net Present Value (NPV) of US$5.6million at a discount rate of 10 percent for a 15-year period. According to
these result the entire project was economically justified.

At the Additional Financing, an economic analysis was conducted for the additional four investment activities
only. Reduced cost of customer outages was assumed to be the main economic benefit of these investments.
The EIRR was estimated at 17.6 percent and the NPV at US$20.06 at a discount rate of 10 for a 25-year
period.

The economic analysis conducted at project closing was more detailed, and the methodology was more robust
than the methodologies used at appraisal and additional financing. The economic benefit from avoided fuel cost
was estimated at US$0.3 million at project closing compared to US$9.0 million at appraisal. The first reason for
this difference was the sharp decline in crude oil prices after the 2008 financial crisis. Second reason was the
inconsistencies in the estimation of total loss, non-technical loss and technical loss. Based on the data in SIEA’s
annual reports, the baseline for technical loss when project implementation started in 2010, was estimated
between 10 and 12 percent. Since the average technical loss during project implementation (2010-2018) was
10.42 percent, there was negligible decline in technical loss due to project activities. Therefore, the economic
benefit from avoided fuel cost was negligible. On the other hand, the economic analysis also included the
economic benefit from reduced outages. In other words, it combined the benefits used separately at appraisal
and the Additional Financing. The calculations resulted in an EIRR of 24.3 percent and an NPV of US$7.12 at a
discount rate of 10 percent for a 15-year period. Since these calculations are not comparable to the calculations
at appraisal and the Additional Financing, a harmonized NPV for appraisal and Additional Financing analyses
was estimated to be US$18.07 million. A harmonized EIRR could not be estimated due to methodological
constraints and lack of sufficient data (ICR, p.62).

Although these calculations show that the project’s achievement of economic benefits was lower than what was
estimated at appraisal and the Additional Financing, in light of the all methodological shortcomings and absence
of data, the economic analysis at project completion using a more robust methodology and more realistic



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



baseline assumptions showed that the project’s economic viability was consistent with the expectations at
appraisal.

Financial Analysis

The PAD gives a brief summary of the findings of the financial analysis conducted at appraisal (PAD, p.79). In
that analysis the financial benefits of fuel savings due to reduction in technical losses were assumed to be
higher than the economic benefits. Furthermore, it was assumed that there would be no non-technical loss
reduction. This analysis resulted in a Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 25.5 percent. The weighted
average cost of capital (WACC) was assumed to be 10 percent for financial evaluation.

At the Additional Financing, a detailed financial analysis was conducted for the investment activities. It was
assumed that the revenues would be generated from a 6 percent reduction in total system losses. It was also
assumed that fuel price would increase by 3 percent per year in real terms and the SIEA’s electricity by 4
percent in each of 2014 and 2015, and 6 percent thereafter. The FIRR was estimated to be a very high 101.4
percent against a WACC of 1.9 percent. The sensitivity analysis showed that even with a ten percent increase in
costs and a 10 percent reduction in revenues, the FIRR would be 59.4 percent. (Project Paper, report No.:
84643-SB, p.32).

Like in the economic analysis, a more detailed and methodologically more robust financial analysis was
conducted at project closing. The main financial benefits of the project activities were assumed to be the tariff
revenue from incremental power consumption due to reduction of energy losses (both technical and non-
technical) and outages. Total project capital investment, fuel and oil cost for the incremental power consumption
and the extra operation and maintenance (O&M) costs were taken as the financial costs. The calculations
showed an FIRR at 21.8 percent well above the WACC of 3.6 percent estimated at project closing.

Due to the differences in the assumptions of financial analyses at appraisal, the Additional Financing and project
closing, an ex-ante/ex-post comparison is not possible. However, the financial analysis conducted at project
closing, which had a robust methodology, shows that the project was financially viable.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

The project’s effectiveness was delayed by almost one year due to time required for the search for a
Commercialization Manager who could satisfy the qualifications listed in the terms of reference. Because of this
delay and the slow start to the implementation of the Commercialization Program, the original IDA grant closing
date was extended by 18 months. At time of the second restructuring and the Additional Financing, the project
had already disbursed 92 percent of the original IDA loan. On the other hand, there were some moderate
shortcomings in the operational and administrative efficiency of the project after the Additional Financing, mostly
because of the procurement issues, such as lack of institutional capacity to conduct procurement according the
Bank’s guidelines and delayed recruitment of procurement specialist and owner’s engineer. Prolonged
processing of work permits, visas, and resident permits contributed to the delay in recruitments. This resulted in
a project closing date extension of 21 months for Additional Financing, which is captured in the economic and
financial analysis.




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



Overall, despite some moderate shortcomings in operational and administrative efficiency due to the increase in
the scope of the project after the Additional Financing, the costs involved in achieving project objectives were
reasonable in comparison with the benefits. Therefore, the project’s efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                 34.80
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      80.74
 ICR Estimate                                              24.30
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

A financially sustainable and operationally efficient SIEA is pivotal in developing generation capacity through
renewable energy sources and increasing access to electricity in the country. The project objectives, therefore,
were substantially relevant, although the project achieved its objectives and the Bank strategy had moved
towards investment projects. Through the appointment of experienced professionals to key management and
board positions, the project was highly successful in improving the management and operational efficiency of
SIEA, but the transition of these positions to locals did not materialize. The project was substantially successful
in improving the financial sustainability of the utility through its support of the Commercialization Program.
These achievements must have indirectly had a positive impact on the system reliability, but the system
reliability had already significantly improved due to the SIEA’s generation investments, before the project-
financed distribution investments were completed; hence, due to weak attribution, the achievement of the
project objective to improve system reliability was rated Modest. The overall efficacy of the achievement of the
three project objectives is rated Substantial. Lastly, despite some moderate shortcomings in operational and
administrative efficiency, the project’s efficiency is rated Satisfactory due to high economic and financial
benefits.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



A weakening in government’s commitment to the implementation of the State-Owned Enterprises
(SOE) Act of 2007 stands out as the major risk to the development outcomes. The Act and its
regulations established the legal framework for the commercialization of the SOEs in the country. The project
supported the implementation of the activities, within this legal framework, for the improvement of the
management and operational efficiency of SIEA. This legal framework requires SIEA, and other SOEs to
operate profitably, and also gives the authority to SIEA to disconnect non-paying customers, including
government agencies. Without the government’s continuous commitment to the enforcement of the
provisions of the SOE Act and its regulations, SIEA might become insolvent again.

Sustained high electricity tariffs can encourage commercial and industrial customers, whose loads
account for around 70 percent of the SIEA’s electricity sales, to self-generate which would result in a
sharp drop in SIEA’s revenues. Following the tariff review, the average retail electricity tariff in Solomon
Islands decreased from US$0.93 per kWh in 2014 to US$0.65 in 2018, but it was still the highest tariff in the
Pacific region. It is likely that the tariff will remain high for some foreseeable future due to the country’s
dependence on diesel for electricity generation until the amount of electricity generated from renewable
energy sources increases to a substantial level. In addition to high tariffs, if the reliability of electricity supply,
too, worsens, then large commercial and industrial customers, including state-owned enterprises, such as
Solomon Islands Water Authority, might look for self-generation solutions. This is a risk for the financial
sustainability of SIEA.

Insufficient knowledge transferal to local employees can result in continuous reliance on
internationally recruited professionals to key management positions, which poses as a risk for the
sustainability of the project outcomes in the medium term. The project financed training activities to
SIEA staff on finance and engineering, which improved the institutional capacity of the utility. However, one
of the main goals of the project was to transition from internationally recruited general manager to local
manager, i.e., localization. This did not materialize. Localization is an important aspect of institutional
capacity building, which can be achieved through adequate and sustained knowledge transferal. Lack of
such capacity can result in a deterioration in the operational efficiency of the utility should it be not possible
to fill the positions with international recruits.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
   The project had a low budget, but its strategic relevance was high; it was designed to support SIEA,
   which was a dysfunctional utility at the brink of insolvency, in improving its management and operational
   efficiency. The project had a sound approach; it was to be implemented as the first engagement with
   SIEA to revive the utility so that, if it could achieve sufficient financial and operational capacity, it would
   be able to implement more complex investments in electricity generation and distribution. However, the
   project’s objective to improve the system reliability was rather ambitious. The investment activities to be
   financed by the project, such as improvement of cooling systems of generators, replacement of a
   switchboard and the installation of a 33 kV cable, would not be sufficient to achieve the ambitious targets
   set for system reliability at appraisal. Implementation arrangements were simple and straightforward. The
   experienced professionals to be hired by project funds to key management and board positions would
   also be responsible for the implementation of the project. The methodology used for economic and
   financial analysis had weaknesses (see section 5. Efficiency). Regarding safeguard policies, the project

                                                                                                           Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



  was appraised adequately and found to have no environmental impact. Fiduciary aspects were broadly
  sound and supported by the appointment of a Commercialization Manager with experience in Bank
  procurement. However, the implementation arrangements did not include the establishment of a
  dedicated project implementation team. This hampered procurement activities causing delays in project
  implementation. The project benefited from the experience gained and lessons learned in the successful
  reorganization of the Fiji Electricity Authority in 2002 through the appointment of five expatriate
  managers, adoption of a strong financial management system, with a focus on increasing collection rates,
  introduction of prepaid meters, and long-term human resource planning (PAD, p.8). Bank inputs and
  processes at appraisal were critical for the success of the project; the Solomon Islands Government
  approval of the debt restructuring for SIEA was a condition of negotiation. The risks were adequately
  assessed, and mitigation measures were identified. However, the M&E framework had significant
  shortcomings that made it somewhat difficult to assess the achievement of the stated objectives and test
  the links in the results chain.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision inputs and processes were adequate; there were supervision missions on average every four
 months. The project’s task team leaders were stationed in Sydney, which facilitated a close supervision of
 the project implementation with the help of the Bank’s Honiara office. The project team’s supervision of
 financial management and the safeguard aspects of the project, the latter after the Additional Financing,
 was adequate. However, despite the project team’s close supervision and support, procurement related
 issues led to project implementation delays. There were frequent changes to the M&E framework without
 any material effect on measuring the project’s outcomes. Although the project team was proactive in
 restructuring the project and processing Additional Financing to increase the impact of the project on
 system reliability, this impact was not fully captured at project closing. The Borrower’s ICR acknowledges
 the contribution of the Bank missions to the project as “a monitoring, scrutiny and reporting role on the
 efficacy of the project” that “further improved the focus of the Management and Board of SIEA” (ICR, p.75).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 There were shortcomings in the theory of change in showing how the project-financed activities would lead
 to some of the expected outcomes. In the project appraisal document (PAD), there were inconsistencies in

                                                                                                 Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



 the classification of the indicators as key-indicators/project outcome indicators or intermediate outcome
 indicators (PAD, p.7 and 26-28). The results framework did not include any indicator to measure the
 project outputs, which would lead to the expected outcomes; hence, it was difficult to establish clear causal
 pathways from project activities to outputs and outcomes. Due to lack of clarity in the project objective “to
 improve operational efficiency,” the achievement of this objective was not captured by any indicator. Other
 project objectives, i.e., to improve the system reliability and financial situation were better encompassed by
 the indicators. The indicators were mostly specific, measurable, relevant and timebound, but there was lack
 of clarity in how some baselines were estimated, such as the collection rate and system losses, or what
 methodology was used, such as the methodology used in SAIDI and SAIFI. Some of the indicators were
 included in the contracts of the General Manager and the Commercial Manager as performance indicators,
 which were to be reported to the Board and the Bank on a monthly basis.



b. M&E Implementation
  There were frequent changes to the M&E framework during project implementation. At the Additional
  Financing, some key indicators, such as net profit before tax and revenue per kWh generated, were
  deleted, and targets of some other indicators, such as system losses, SAIFI and SAIFI, were revised to
  be more ambitious without sufficient explanation why these changes were needed or what methodology
  was used in determining new targets. Frequent changes in targets did not have any material impact on
  measuring the achievement of the project objectives; as the ICR (p.37) notes, such changes were
  “inefficient”. Deleted indicators were added back to the M&E framework at the last restructuring. As noted
  in the previous section, there were issues with how the baseline data were collected for some indicators.
  There was lack of clarity about the methodology for the collection ratio, which was, therefore, not included
  in the ICR’s assessment of the project outcome (ICR, p.36). The weaknesses in the M&E design, such as
  the lack of output indicators establishing a clear causal pathway from project activities to outputs and
  outcomes, were not corrected during implementation. Despite shortcomings in the M&E design and early
  concerns about the quality and detail in reporting (ICR, p.36), the indicators included in the Results
  Framework were adequately measured and regularly reported. With the introduction of improved
  information technologies, including SCADA, M&E functions are likely to be sustained.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were monthly reported to the SIEA Board and the Bank’s project team. The M&E findings
  led to a positive shift in the implementation direction of the project and an Additional Financing in the
  amount of US$13.0 million, more than three times of the original IDA grant of US$4.0 million, was
  approved in February 2014, to finance major investments in distribution network and some technical
  assistance activities. Although the M&E data was adequately used to provide evidence for the
  improvement in the system reliability and financial sustainability of SIEA, insufficient data on project
  outputs made it difficult to establish attribution between project activities and expected outcomes. On the
  other hand, since the M&E framework was designed to monitor the overall improvements in the system
  reliability and financial sustainability of SIEA—regardless of establishing causality with the project
  activities—the M&E findings showing a substantial improvement in these two aspects of the utility
  resulted in the development of subsequent interventions, i.e., the Electricity Access Expansion Project-
  P151618 in 2016 and the Electricity Access and Renewable Energy Expansion Project-P162902, in
  2018.


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)




  In conclusion, there were significant shortcomings in the design and implementation of the M&E system,
  making it somewhat difficult to assess the achievement of the stated objectives and test the links in the
  results chain. This review could assess the achievement of the objectives because of the additional
  information provided by the project team based on their own observation and the information presented
  in the annual reports of the SIEA, which were not fully captured by the M&E framework, and the
  information provided in the Borrower’s Implementation Completion Report (ICR, Annex 5). On the other
  hand, M&E findings were successfully used to inform strategy change, i.e., Additional Financing, and
  future projects. Despite this achievement in M&E utilization, the overall M&E quality is rated Modest due
  to significant shortcomings in M&E design and implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category C under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   no safeguard policy was triggered. At the Additional Financing, the environmental category of the project
   was raised to B.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): At appraisal, the proposed activities, such as the replacement
   of distribution feeders, upgrading of transformers, provision of spare parts to generation facilities were not
   expected to have any environmental impact; therefore, the project was classified Category C under this
   policy. However, the environmental category of the project was raised to B due to the potential minor
   environmental impacts of the proposed investment activities under the Additional Financing, such as the
   construction of new transformers. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was
   prepared by SIEA and disclosed in the country for public consultation in October 2013. The updated EMSF
   was disclosed in the country and the Bank’s Infoshop in December 2013. The ICR did not provide any
   issues with the implementation of this policy. There were no major issues reported in the project documents,
   either.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management

   SIEA did not have prior World Bank project experience. Financial management support was provided
   through technical assistance. The Auditor General of Solomon Islands was responsible for auditing SIEA
   financial reports which were unqualified since 2012. The project financial statements were audited annually
   by an accounting firm under the supervision of the Auditor General. There were delays in the submission of
   project quarterly reports due to lack of experienced personnel at SIEA (ICR, p.86). Internal control
   procedures were adequate. There was no misuse of funds associated with the project. Other than the

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



   undisbursed amount of US$0.9 million, which was reimbursed to the Bank on September 26, 2019, there
   was no outstanding financial management issue at project closing.

   Procurement

   SIEA did not have sufficient capacity to efficiently implement procurement according to the Bank
   guidelines. Despite the appointment of a Commercialization Manager with experience in procurement
   guidelines, which was a condition for effectiveness, project implementation was delayed due to lack of
   procurement capacity at SIEA. The project lacked a dedicated project management team. A procurement
   specialist was required for the contracts under the Additional financing, but the appointment of the
   procurement specialist was delayed. The evaluation of contracts took longer than expected and the no-
   objection submissions to the Bank were not timely. The procurement was adversely affected by the lack of
   local market capacity and low participation by bidders. Despite these issues, the project was in compliance
   with the Bank procurement guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                     IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory            Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                  Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                     Modest


12. Lessons

This review has drawn three lessons based on the ICR incorporating material on lessons listed on
page 42 of the ICR.

A robust legal framework and strong political commitment can significantly affect the
transformation of state-owned enterprises. The State-Owned Enterprise (SOE) Act of 2007 and
its regulations provided a robust legal framework for the improvement of the management and

                                                                                                   Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



operational efficiency of the six SOEs in the country, including SIEA. Profitable operation, rigorous
director selection and appointment process, corporate planning and reporting requirements, and
transparent identification, costing, and financing of community service obligations are regulated by
the law. The government’s commitment to the implementation and enforcement of the legal
framework was strong, which manifested itself through the restructuring of SOE debts and enforcing
disconnection of delinquent customers, including government institutions. The legal framework
provided a strong foundation for the project to support SIEA in its transformation from an insolvent
utility into a financially strong one through management strengthening, and the strong political
commitment was an indispensable part of this process.

A simple and focused initial intervention can increase the possibility of achieving the
intended outcomes, while laying the groundwork for subsequent more complex
interventions. The project originally had a low budget and focused on the improvement of the
management and operation efficiency of SIEA, while supporting some limited investment activities to
improve system reliability in a short period of time. The intention of the project was clearly defined in
the PAD (p.6): “A follow-up Bank operation in the sector may be considered if this program is
successful.” The project was successful in improving the management and operational efficiency of
SIEA; therefore, even during project implementation an Additional Financing was processed to
support additional investments in distribution to improve system reliability, and two new projects
were approved, i.e., the Electricity Access Expansion Project to increase access to electricity
through the distribution and installation of pre-payment meters and the Electricity Access and
Renewable Energy Expansion Project.

Appointment of experienced professionals to key management and board positions on a
long-term basis rather than hiring short-term consultants can substantially increase the
prospect of improving the management and operational efficiency of state-owned economic
enterprises in remote island nations. Capital Honiara is more than a three-hour flight away from
Brisbane, the closest major city in the region. The island country is not easily accessible to deliver
technical assistance support by short-term consultants. In this project, the General Manager, whose
expatriate package cost was covered by the project funds for the first three years, stayed with the
utility for four years; the first Commercial Manager and his successor as Chief Financial Officer,
served for about two years each; and the external Director, whose contribution to the transformation
of the utility was critical, served on the Board of SIEA for more than six years The project design had
benefited from the successful reorganization of Fiji Electricity Authority in 2002 through the
appointment of five expatriate managers.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                     Page 21 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SB-Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy (P100311)



The ICR provided a comprehensive overview of the project. The narrative was relatively candid, predominantly
accurate and generally aligned to the project development outcome. It was broadly consistent with the
guidelines. Economic and financial analysis was sound, and the methodology was robust.

However, the ICR did not sufficiently explain the causality between project inputs and outputs, and the
expected outcomes. The focus was too much on the achievement of the indicators’ targets, without providing
sufficient evidence to support how the project objectives were achieved through the project’s intervention.
(Detailed additional information was requested from the project team to fill this gap.) This also adversely
affected the quality of analysis; the interrogation of evidence was insufficient to clearly link them to findings. The
ICR did not sufficiently explain the changes made at restructurings, such as the US$1.9 million co-financing
from AusAID and GEF and the related project activities proposed at the first restructuring, although key
revisions of this restructuring were listed on page 3 of the ICR. The sections on Key Factors Affected
Implementation and Outcome, Quality of Supervision and Safeguards were weak; these sections were mostly
descriptive and did not follow the requirements of the guidelines. The lessons learned were useful, but there
could have been additional lessons specific to project implementation in remote small island nations. The ICR
was substantially longer (approximately double the length) than recommended in the guidelines.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                       Page 22 of 22
