     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Road Rehabilitation (P148023)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022099

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P148023                                    Road Rehabilitation

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 North Macedonia                            Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84200                                 30-Sep-2019                                           56,641,457.13

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Sep-2014                                30-Sep-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            70,980,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             70,980,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         56,641,457.13                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Chikako Miwa                Ebru Karamete                Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the Project were: (i) to enhance the connectivity of selected national and regional roads,
   primarily to Corridors X and VIII; and (ii) to improve the Borrower's capacity for road safety and climate
   resilience (Loan Agreement dated October 21, 2014, Schedule 1, page 5).
   The PDOs in the PAD were the same as that in the Loan Agreement.




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Road Rehabilitation (P148023)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had two components:

   1: Road Civil Works (Appraisal cost: EUR57.76 million. Actual cost: EUR46.67 million, which was 80
   percent of the approved cost.)

   Component 1 intended to support road rehabilitation, technical audits, and land slide remediation.

   2: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management (Appraisal cost: EUR3.44 million. Actual cost:
   EUR3.63 million, which was 105 percent of the approved cost.)

   Component 2 intended to support project management, road safety technical assistance, road asset
   management, a five-year strategic program preparation, and impact analysis.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: At appraisal, the original cost estimate was EUR61.33 million (US$83.72 million) (PAD, para
   24, PAD Datasheet). At ICR submission, the actual cost was EUR51.69 million (US$56.64 million) (ICR,
   page 51, page 2) (84.3 percent of the appraised amount in EUR). The cost reduction was due to the
   exchange rate fluctuation in US dollars against Euros (ICR, para 41), as well as the exemption from the
   value added tax (VAT) of 18 percent based on the amendment to the Law on Loan Guarantee that was
   official on January 22, 2015 (ICR, page 10).

   Financing: At appraisal, expected financing sources were: EUR52 million (US$70.98 million) from the IBRD
   and EUR9.33 million (US$12.74 million) for VAT from the Borrower (PAD, Table 2, page 8; PAD
   Datasheet). At ICR submission, the project was financed with around EUR51.69 million (US$56.64 million)
   from the IBRD (99.4 percent of the planned amount from the IBRD) with no contribution from the
   Borrower due to the above reasons (ICR, page 51; page 2).

   Dates: The project was approved on September 23, 2014, and became effective on December 22, 2014.
   The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was completed on October 31, 2016. The project was closed on September
   30, 2019, on the original closing date.

   Restructuring: There was no restructuring.




                                                                                                  Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Road Rehabilitation (P148023)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. The Republic of North Macedonia is a small landlocked country with the GDP
of US$10.2 billion in 2013, of which exports accounted for 54 percent (ICR, para 1). The country relied upon
the Trans-European transport network, such as Corridor X from Austria to Turkey and Corridor VIII from
Albania to the Black Sea ports in Bulgaria. The main challenges were the economic distance to markets
and the high costs of transportation caused by the degraded Corridor X and the delays for crossing borders.
The country’s exports were dependent on roads, as 93 percent of freight in the first two quarters of 2013
was transported via roads (ICR, para 2). The lack of market access was one of the drivers of poverty.
Around 40 percent of the population lived in rural areas, of which two thirds were poor (ICR, para 1). An
enhanced transport network was expected to improve market access of the rural population, contributing to
the country’s poverty alleviation.

Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies. At appraisal, the project was aligned with the draft Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY15-18, supporting Pillar 1: Growth and Competitiveness by rehabilitating
roads, as well as the overarching country goal of increasing economic growth and creating employment by
investing in transport infrastructure for the two trade corridors. In line with the CPS, the project also
intended to improve the road asset management system in Public Enterprise for State Roads (PESR).
Moreover, the project adjusted road engineering to better withstand heavier snow and rainfall, contributing
to climate change adaptation as recommended by the CPS. At project closing, the project was highly
relevant to the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 19-23, as the PDOs were integrated as the two
sub-objectives of Objective 1: Improve Connectivity and Access to Markets.

Relevance to Government Strategies. The project aligned with the National Transport Strategy (2007-17),
which prioritized the improvement of regional and national road connectivity to enhance the efficient use of
Corridors X and VIII. The project also contributed to the promotion of road safety outlined in the National
Strategy for Improvement of the Road Traffic Safety (2009-14).

Previous Sector Experience. The Bank had a long-term engagement in the country’s road sector and
PESR, including the construction of a new motorway section under the Second Trade and Transport
Facilitation Project and the investment in the regional and local road infrastructure and the introduction of a
foundation of a road asset management system (RAMS) under the Regional and Local Roads Program
Support Project (RLRPSP). Building on the achievements of the RLRPSP, the project aimed to expand the
cooperation with PESR by strengthening its investment planning and financial management capacity.
During implementation, the RAMS was expected to establish a comprehensive database for the country’s
road network and support PESR to manage its capital investment budgets sustainably.

Institutional Capacity and Realism. The Borrower, PESR, had an abundant prior experience and a
cooperative relationship with the Bank in implementing projects funded by the Bank. The capacity of PESR
to prepare, implement, and supervise road contracts had been strengthened throughout the preceding
projects described above. Financial sustainability of PESR’s operations was regularly monitored by the
Bank as an integral element of the RLRPSP project. The Bank team had a realistic understanding on
PESR’s capabilities through the long-term engagement, accurately measuring the readiness of PESR to



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Road Rehabilitation (P148023)



               adopt the transformative concepts such as introducing the concept of climate resilience and road safety
               through the use of RAMS and output-based contracting.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enhance the connectivity of selected national and regional roads, primarily to Corridors X and VIII

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change of Objective 1: Rehabilitating roads, improving black spots, conducting technical audits,
                             and installing land slide remediations were intended to improve the roads. The roads would be improved both
                             in terms of quantity (kilometers of the rehabilitated roads) and the quality (condition of the rehabilitated roads).
                             These outputs would lead to reductions in travel time and vehicle operating costs, enhancing connectivity of
                             selected national and regional roads to the corridors.

                             Outputs:

                             Key outputs of Objective 1 were as follows:

                                        280 kilometers of national and regional roads linking to Corridors X and VIII were rehabilitated,
                                          exceeding the target of 112 kilometers (250 percent of the original target; ICR, para 27).
                                        87 percent of the roads were in good or fair condition, compared to the baseline of 64 percent and the
                                         target of 74 percent (118 percent of the original target; ICR, para 27). The condition of road network
                                         was assessed by PESR by using standard road asset management practices and the road roughness
                                         index (IRI). The breakdown of the result was: 22 percent in very good, 40 percent in good, and 25
                                         percent in fair condition (The TTL/ICR team’s response to IEG’s questionnaire).
                                        Based on the road safety audit recommendations, the rehabilitation of eight black spots and the road
                                         safety enhancement interventions in 12 roads were conducted (ICR, para 31). Following the World
                                         Road Association (PIARC)’s methodology, the road safety audit assessed aspects including road
                                         function; cross section; alignment; intersections; public and private services, rest areas and public
                                         transport; vulnerable road users; traffic signs, markings and lighting; roadside features, and passive
                                         safety installations (The TTL/ICR team’s response to IEG’s questionnaire). Implemented measures
                                         included vertical and horizontal signaling; traffic calming measures; guardrails; slope protection
                                         against rock fall; introduction of elevated pedestrian crossings and segregation of pedestrians (Ibid).
                                        The design and reconstruction of 11 critical land-slide prone locations along the network were
                                         completed.


                                                                                                                                       Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Road Rehabilitation (P148023)




      Direct project beneficiaries were 123,461, compared to the baseline of 118,410 and the target of
       125,000 (99 percent of the original target; ICR, para 36). Of the direct project beneficiaries, 49 percent
       was female, meeting the target of 49 percent (ICR, page 32).

Outcomes:

The achievements of relevant PDO outcome indicators were as follows:

      As measured by the RAMS, travel time for passenger cars on the rehabilitated roads was reduced by
       12.5 percent, exceeding the target of 10 percent (ICR, para 28).
      As measured by the RAMS, Vehicle Operating Costs (VOC) for heavy trucks on the rehabilitated
       roads were reduced from the baseline of EUR0.79 to EUR0.69 per vehicle-kilometer, fully meeting the
       target of EUR0.69 per vehicle-kilometer (ICR, Table 3, page 12). The reduction of VOC was achieved
       even though there was an increase in the cost of fuel from EUR0.5 in 2016 to EUR0.65 in 2018 (ICR,
       para 28).
      According to the ex-post beneficiary survey, 84.5 percent of beneficiaries expressed satisfaction with
       condition of the project roads, compared to the baseline of 50 percent and the target of 70 percent
       (121 percent of the original target). The beneficiary survey observed that the comfort and duration of
       travel were greatly improved, especially among daily commuters, workers, students, and youth (ICR,
       para 30; Final report of beneficiary survey and impact evaluation, Figure 6, page 30). The beneficiary
       survey was aimed to assess beneficiary perceptions and expectations, as well as the livelihood
       outcomes, covering all road sections in 11 municipalities that were rehabilitated and collecting
       responses from 25 experts and 281 project beneficiaries who were frequent users of the rehabilitated
       roads and people living in its vicinity (The TTL/ICR team’s response to IEG’s questionnaire; Final
       report of beneficiary survey and impact evaluation by BAR E.C.E. provided by the TTL/ICR team).
      68 percent of women perceived the rehabilitation of roads as having a positive impact on local
       economic development, according to the ex-post beneficiary survey (ICR, para 46). The same survey
       showed that female respondents were more satisfied with the increased access to public transport
       services followed by the improvements in road conditions.

      However, the beneficiary survey showed notable differences regarding the level of satisfaction with
       the local road infrastructure among respondent groups in different gender, age groups, and education
       levels. Women, elders, and people not completed primary education tended to have lower satisfaction
       levels (Final report of beneficiary survey and impact evaluation).

The rehabilitated roads reduced the travel time and the VOC, which enhanced the connectivity of the roads to
the corridors in terms of the quantity as described in the TOC above. In terms of the quality of the
enhancement, the beneficiaries in general expressed satisfaction with condition of the project roads,
while there were noticeable differences in satisfaction levels among respondents grouped by gender, ages,
and education levels. Overall, the achievement of Objective 1 is rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Road Rehabilitation (P148023)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the Borrower's capacity for road safety and climate resilience

Rationale
Theory of Change of Objective 2: Providing technical assistance on road safety was intended to support
preparing road safety design audit guidelines and conducting a road safety survey for the road network.
Advancing the Road Asset Management System (RAMS) with the availability of all relevant data and staff
skilled to apply the system to define quality criteria for the roads and preparing a 5-year strategic program
were intended to support preparing climate resilience design guidelines and a 5-year rolling program for
national and regional roads preservation works. The outputs would lead to the incorporation of guidelines and
recommendations into road projects and internal designs, contributing to the improved capacity of PESR for
road safety and climate resilience.

Critical assumptions included: (1) PESR’s previous and ongoing experiences with the Bank-financed projects
would prepare it to include road safety and climate resilience into their operations; (2) Potential leadership
change in PESR would not affect the progress of project activities and the political commitment to the project;
and (3) Capacity and resources were adequate for maintaining the roads and the RAMS after project closing.
The critical assumption (3) was unrealistic as there were gaps with the capacity and performance of the
maintenance company in charge of road maintenance.

Outputs:

Key outputs of Objective 2 were as follows:

      Guidelines for road safety design audit and climate resilience design were prepared.
      4,000 kilometers of road network were surveyed for road safety through the International Road
       Assessment Programme (iRAP) survey, compared to the baseline of 500 kilometers and meeting the
       target of 4,000 kilometers (100 percent of the original target). The data about the road safety provided
       by the iRAP survey was additional input in the RAMS enabling PESR to consider road safety needs in
       prioritizing maintenance works.
      A five-year rolling program for national and regional roads preservation works was prepared based on
       the RAMS, which incorporated road safety and climate resilience aspects. The RAMS was expanded
       by combining the network safety data from the iRAP survey and the climate risks data, which enabled
       PESR to analyze flooding and landslide risks in the system.
      70 traffic counters were installed for all national roads on the network and 10 mobile traffic counters
       were made available, to benefit the five-year strategic program in the future.
      Annual performance report was prepared and published by PESR.

Outcomes:

The achievements of relevant PDO outcome indicators were as follows:

      100 percent of PESR’s road projects incorporated road safety audit recommendations, meeting the
       target. The road safety audit was preformed after the first round of 11 roads with a length of 166
       kilometers were rehabilitated, thus the recommended measures were implemented as a separate
       activity under the project. For the second round of roads, the audit recommendations were

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Road Rehabilitation (P148023)



       incorporated into the designs of the rehabilitation works. Based on the audit recommendations,
       vertical and horizontal signaling; traffic calming measures; guardrails; slope protection against rock
       fall; introduction of elevated pedestrian crossings and segregation of pedestrians were implemented,
       as described for the achievement of Objective 1. These contributed to adopting new speed
       management techniques on roads following the best practices in the European Union.
      According to the ex-post beneficiary survey, 70 percent of beneficiaries expressed that rehabilitation
       of project roads increased road safety (ICR, para 31). Beneficiaries who perceived safety as below
       average decreased from 57.6 percent to 29 percent before and after the rehabilitation (Ibid).
      According to the Ministry of Interior, the numbers of human damages from road crushes in eight major
       cities (i.e. Skopje, Bitola, Veles, Kumanovo, Ohrid, Strumica, Tetovo, and Stip) decreased from 150
       for fatalities and 3752 for injuries in 2016 to109 and 3124 in 2019, respectively (The TTL/ICR team’s
       response to IEG’s questionnaire). While the data for 2020 was not available due to the country’s state
       of emergency to address the COVID-19 crisis, the black spots in Robovo and Vranista villages had no
       fatalities since the rehabilitations under the project until April 6, 2020, according to the Ministry of
       Interior (Ibid). These data on the incidence of human damages supplemented and supported the
       beneficiaries’ perceptions on the increase in road safety measured by the beneficiary survey;
       however, to what extent the project activities contributed to the decrease in the numbers of human
       damages was not fully measurable with the available data.
      The Climate Resilience Design Guidelines was prepared and integrated by PESR in their internal
       design process for construction and rehabilitation of roads in the future, meeting the target.

PESR’s Capacity for Road Safety:

PESR’s capacity for road safety was improved by the advancement of RAMS and the installation of road
asset management equipment such as the traffic counters. The RAMS also monitored the overweight trucks
on the network, helping PESR to record the axle weights and gross vehicle weights in order to develop and
implement a weigh-in-motion (WIM) system in key transit points of the road network.

PESR’s Capacity for Climate Resilience:

PESR improved the capacity for climate resilience by developing the Climate Resilience Design Guidelines
with the data collected by the RAMS and adopting it to their internal design process for the future road works.
The climate risks data inputted in the RAMS enabled PESR to analyze flooding and landslide risks in the
system. However, to adequately analyze to what extent PESR actually used the system and equipment
introduced by the project and to what extent the climate resilience of the road networks was strengthened,
more evidence would be needed, when data is available in the future.

In sum, PESR’s capacity for road safety and climate resilience was improved in line of the stated objective,
while direct outcome-level evidence on climate resilience capacity was not yet available. On balance, the
achievement of Objective 2 is rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Road Rehabilitation (P148023)


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of Objective 1 was substantial, as the reduction in the travel time and the VOC improved
                            connectivity of the roads to the corridors. The achievement of Objective 2 was substantial on balance, as the
                            incorporation of guidelines and recommendations based on data collected by the RAMS into road projects
                            and internal designs improved capacity of PESR for road safety, but with limited direct evidence on its
                            capacity on climate resilience. Overall, the Efficacy is rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis: At appraisal, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was 30.9 percent with the Net
   Present Value (NPV) of 9.7 million Euros, for the three roads included in the first-year program under
   Component 1: Civil Works with the estimated length of 36.7 kilometers out of the 112 kilometers of the all
   planned program (ICR, Table 1, page 40 and page 43; The TTL/ICR team’s response to IEG’s questionnaire).
   The EIRR at appraisal was calculated for the estimated construction cost of 10.12 million Euros, which covered
   16.5 percent of the total project cost of 61.33 million Euros (ICR, Table 1, page 40; PAD, Table 6, page 28). At
   project closing, the EIRR of the three roads with the actual length of 36.1 kilometers was 30.2 percent with the
   NPV of 12.8 million Euros (ICR, Table 2, page 40 and page 43). The EIRR at project closing was calculated
   for the actual construction cost of 9.91 million Euros, which covered 19.2 percent of the total project cost of
   51.69 million Euros (ICR, Table 1, page 40 and page 51).

   Both economic analysis at appraisal and at project closing used the same methodology and assumptions,
   considering a period of 20 years at a discount rate of 10 percent. Using three selected roads, the economic
   benefits were calculated based on savings in road maintenance costs, savings in travel time and savings in
   vehicle operating cost (VOC) due to the improved road conditions as well as growth in traffic volume.

   The EIRR and the NPV at project closing for the main three roads of around 36 kilometers were in line with the
   appraisal estimates, which were higher than the sector average. On the other hand, when the calculation of the
   EIRR was expanded to consider the regional roads and to cover the twenty roads of 243.9 kilometers out of the
   actually rehabilitated roads of 280 kilometers, the EIRR decreased by 7.6 percentage points from 30.2 percent
   to 22.6 percent.

   Aspects of Design and Implementation that Influenced Efficiency: The project had no restructurings and
   closed on the original closing date. It lowered the administrative costs by using only 119 staff weeks (ICR, para
   42) with adequate mix of skills, compared to the original estimate of 185 staff weeks (PAD, page 46). Moreover,
   the project became effective in just 2 months after signing of the loan agreement, contributing to accelerate the
   project implementation in early years. Implementation of civil works advanced quickly during the first half of
   project due to PESR’s strong implementation readiness at entry with designs and bidding documents prepared
   ahead of time. On the other hand, rehabilitation of Phase 2 roads and retrofits of black spots were delayed due
   to the political turmoil and prolonged elections, the initiation of the output-based contracting, and the late

                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Road Rehabilitation (P148023)



submission of the environmental compliance documents. These delays did not affect the overall implementation
of project activities.

The EIRR and the NPV of the main three roads at project closing were comparable with these at appraisal;
however, the notable decrease in the EIRR at project closing with the twenty roads, including regional ones,
weakened the economic justification of the project. All the project activities were completed within the original
timeframe and budget. Cost control of the civil works was good despite the delay in the procurement of the
second round of roads and did not delay the achievement of the PDOs. The project rehabilitated longer roads
than they planned for. In sum, overall, the Efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      16.50
 Appraisal                                                  30.90
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      19.20
 ICR Estimate                                               30.20
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s objective is highly relevant to the strategies of the World Bank and the Government both at
appraisal and at closing. The Efficacy in achieving the development objectives is rated as substantial based on
the evidence on improved connectivity as well as improved institutional capacity on road safety albeit the
evidence regarding institutional capacity on climate resilience was indirect. Efficiency is rated substantial based
on the project’s EIRRs and NPVs with no administrative or operational bottlenecks. Based on these three sub-
ratings, the project’s overall outcome is rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There were following risks to the sustainability of the achieved results:



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Road Rehabilitation (P148023)



1. Fiduciary risks for maintenance of the roads: The contracts with the road maintenance company,
Makedonija Pat, did not include periodic maintenance of the rehabilitated segments. Combined with this, the
weak capacity of Makedonija Pat would pose a risk for the sustainability of the outcomes. During project
implementation, routine maintenance was not adequately conducted due to the insufficient cooperation
between PESR and the maintenance supervision teams on quality assurance. To mitigate the risk, PESR
increased the financing for maintenance of the rehabilitated roads in annual programs. Moreover, the RAMS
established under the Project was expected to support PESR to develop realistic maintenance plans, check
the status of paved roads, and supervise the performance of Makedonija Pat.

2. Financial and technical risks for maintenance of the RAMS: The regular data collection for the RAMS
would not be sustained if adequate resources in terms of technical staff and financing would not be secured.
To mitigate the risk, PESR made efforts to retain the full-time specialized staff to work on the RAMS.
Moreover, PESR continued implementing the program for network data collection, which presented detailed
timelines and resource requirements to periodically collect data on roughness, deflections and surface
distress. PESR also made investments in the RAMS to include data on all bridges in the country, showing
their commitment to the system.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Project was designed to link regional and national roads to the main trade corridors and expand the
  use of the RAMS to adopt climate resilience and road safety considerations, aligning with the
  Government’s priorities and building upon the achievements of the preceding project. Regarding the
  technical aspects, PESR prepared detailed designs and bidding documents for the first-year program of
  roads beforehand, aiming to accelerate implementation. The technical analysis at entry was proved to be
  accurate as all the project components were completed within the original budget and timeframe. The
  project secured political commitment to introduce a transformative change to PESR, installing evidence-
  based tools such as the RAMS to improve its approach on road maintenance and investment. On the
  other hand, the design could have better incorporated: (1) maintenance arrangements with road
  maintenance company Public Enterprise, Makedonija Pat, to mitigate the risk to sustainability of the
  project; and (2) an analysis on establishing a permanent system to enforce axle load limits to improve
  road safety.

  On balance, strategic and technical aspects were well considered, while the sustainability risks would
  have been mitigated by more comprehensive and detailed arrangements at project entry. On this basis,
  the Quality of Entry is rated satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Road Rehabilitation (P148023)



 According to the ICR (para 82), the continuity in supervision was ensured throughout the project, as the
 same Task Team Leader (TTL) provided oversight throughout the project duration. The majority of the
 team members was based in the region, enabling the Bank team to provide support swiftly and frequently.
 A full-fledged supervision mission was conducted biannually, supplemented by shorter missions in between
 to address specific issues. During implementation, the Bank team provided guidance to PESR to improve
 compliance to the safeguard policies, the speed of procurement preparation, and the reporting of
 performance monitoring. Moreover, the Bank team proactively supported the country to improve road
 safety. For example, the Bank team provided support for strengthening capacity of PESR staff on road
 safety, conducting a road safety capacity review, and improving the road safety management. There were
 factors outside the control of the Bank or PESR, such as a prolonged political turmoil and long election
 cycles that brought changes in the management of PESR. Notwithstanding the challenges, PESR team
 implemented the project activities on time with the help of the Bank’s guidance and supervision.

 The Bank team’s supervision enabled the project to complete its activities with no extensions or additional
 financing even during the political disturbance. On this basis, the Quality of Supervision is rated
 satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were clearly specified, which enabled the results framework to be well structured. The PDO
 and intermediate results (IR) indicators, as well as their data collection methods, were appropriately and
 realistically designed. No indicator was revised during implementation. The Theory of Change in the ICR
 illustrated causal relationships of the project activities and the outcomes. On the other hand, the key
 indicators were not measurable prior to the completion of civil works.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E data was collected through the beneficiary surveys, the RAMS, and the semi-annual reporting from
  PESR staff. No M&E specialist was placed in the PMU due to the lack of local specialists. This had a
  negligible impact on M&E implementation, as none of the indicators needed periodic monitoring and
  could not be fully measured before completion of civil works and road safety improvements. The delays in
  reporting and its insufficient quality negatively, specifically, the delay in implementing the RAMS, which
  was the main source of data, had affected M&E implementation. In addition, monitoring of the beneficiary
  related indicators was hindered by the delay in the beneficiary surveys due to the lack of market interest.
  Despite of these challenges, the status against indicators were routinely reported in the ISRs throughout


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Road Rehabilitation (P148023)



  the project duration. M&E tools such as the RAMS and the International Road Assessment Programme
  (iRAP) survey were used effectively in the absence of M&E specialist.



c. M&E Utilization
  PESR used the RAMS to collect data on the overweight trucks on the road network, which were causing
  premature road damages and road safety risks. The data on the axle weights and gross vehicle weights
  informed the development of a weigh-in-motion (WIM) system, which was implemented by PESR
  together with the Ministry of Interior and the State Transport Inspectorate. Furthermore,
  the implementation of the WIM would be enhanced by the ITS component under the ongoing Regional
  Trade and Transport Facilitation project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was in Environmental Category B, triggering the safeguard on Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). PESR prepared the Environmental and Social Assessment and Management
   Framework (ESAMF), which focused on the road rehabilitation to identify the relevant environmental risks
   and present a roadmap for developing the Environmental Assessments and Management Plans (EAMPs).

   The Unit for Environmental Protection and Social Aspects in PESR lacked sufficient staffing at the initial
   stage of the project, especially because the unit staff had to make up for the insufficient oversight of
   environmental safeguards by the supervision engineers. Following the Bank team’s recommendations,
   PESR increased the number of environmental specialists in the Unit from one to three. Overall safeguards
   rating in the latest ISR was moderately satisfactory, according to Operations Portal. Citizen engagement
   practices and the grievance redress mechanism were appropriately conducted throughout the project
   duration.

   No social safeguard was triggered as the Project’s interventions focused on the rehabilitation. PESR
   modified the technical designs or the geographical coverage to avoid dealing with the land access and the
   land acquisition as much as possible, such as the cases of the Debar-Boshkov section and the Tetovo-
   Popova Shapka section.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: The arrangements for financial management were appropriate throughout the
   project duration, including the staffing arrangements at PESR and the internal control system.
   Disbursement was handled with accuracy and timeliness. The Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) provided
   reliable information to the Bank quarterly. The financial audit of the project was replaced by the audit for

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Road Rehabilitation (P148023)



   the entity’s financial statements, as it was considered to have provided sufficient details about the project
   transactions (ICR, para 77).

   Procurement: The procurement of the first round of civil works was not sufficiently participated by the
   bidders. To resolve the procurement difficulty, the Bank team provided guidance on the mitigation
   measures. The procurement team in PESR improved their capacities through gaining knowledge and
   experience on the Bank’s procurement procedures and guidelines. Their strengthened capacities were
   reflected in the improved quality of procurement and technical documents overtime. The Project introduced
   output-based contracting in the second-half of the project duration only after the RAMS was
   fully implemented by PESR, in order to avoid any potential delays that might have caused by the additional
   workload.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The activities to strengthen the capacity of PESR had a spillover effect to expand the capacity of the
   private sector and engineering school of the University, as their services for design and construction of civil
   works were essential for PESR. For instance, the private sector and academia participated in the training
   to integrate climate resilience and road safety into design and construction process. Their accumulated
   knowledge and capacity would be useful to conduct the maintenance of the roads in the future. Moreover,
   the improved network supported the emerging sectors such as agribusiness and tourism.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The following two lessons in the ICR stood out as important and relevant to other projects in the
road sector and are presented here with some editing.

1. Output and performance-based contracting could be introduced successfully after
adequate implementation and internalization of the Road Asset Management System (RAMS);
this would provide the road agencies with the means to collect data needed to carry out such

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Road Rehabilitation (P148023)



contracts. Under the project, the decision to introduce output-based contracting only after adequate
implementation and internalization of RAMS by PESR allowed it to use a fully functional RAMS to
obtain accurate data on the road network to avoid any serious delays in procurement and the project
failing to achieve its objectives due to a premature introduction of output-based contracting.

2. The RAMS can help a road agency make strategic decisions to improve financial
sustainability of the road sector and fiscal management, under close collaboration among
key government agencies. The adoption of the RAMS concurrently happened with the time when
the government sought for innovative financing measures which might not be fully financially
feasible. PESR used the RAMS to rationalize the investments in road safety and climate resilience
with close collaboration and exchange of data among key government agencies. Strategic decision
making in a sector level supported by the RAMS further benefits the whole economy, by contributing
to an improved fiscal management.
.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a good overview of the project with concise texts structured around the project development
objective that support the ratings. The ICR includes a clear figure describing the project’s results chain and
critical assumptions. Moreover, the ICR is candid to present the key factors that affected implementation and
outcome as well as the risks to development outcomes. The lessons are useful, which are based on the specific
experiences and findings for the project. Regarding the quality of the evidence and of the analysis, the ICR
could have been more comprehensive to provide an analysis on disaggregated data of evidence and detailed
explanations on methodologies of surveys, and outcome level data on capacity building outcomes in order to
strengthen their arguments on achievements of objectives. In sum, overall, the quality of the ICR is rated
substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Road Rehabilitation (P148023)




                                                                  Page 15 of 15
